Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
The book shall be known as "The Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Neptune, 1993," and may be cited as "The Code" or "The Code
of the Township of Neptune."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the following definitions shall be used in the Code:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Monmouth.
DAYS — Shall mean the calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or otherwise, together with any
agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Township Committee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — See tenant.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words of the Township of Neptune followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a pan of such building or
land.
1:1
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
of any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with the
apparent intent.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune in the County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — Shall mean the governing body of the
Township, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
WEEK — Shall mean seven (7) days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
§ 1-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 1-3
1:2
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
And may be construed as meaning or, and or as and, if the sense requires
and indicates such meaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of this Code identified by an
Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the Township, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section
violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00)
dollars or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or to a
period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days at the discretion
of the Judge of the Municipal Court. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.2
1:3
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty.
The Township Committee may prescribe that for the violation of any
particular provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a
minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may
be fixed at an amount not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars. The
Court before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance or
Code provision shall have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or
period of community service not less than the minimum and not exceeding
the maximum fixed in the Code or such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders.
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one (1) year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the Township Committee chooses not to impose an additional fine upon
a person for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Township
Committee may waive the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine.
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned
in the County jail or place of detention provided by the Township for any
term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be required to perform community
service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated, in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
Chapter 2
§ 1-5.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 1-5.6
1:4
ADMINISTRATION
[The form of government in the Township of Neptune is the Township
Form which comprises Chapter 63 in Title 40A of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes. The Administrative chapter has been drafted in
conformity with the township law and in many instances, provisions
of the township law have been restated in the code. Other enabling
laws pertaining to the Administrative Chapter are N.J.S.A. 40A:14-1,
et seq., Police and Fire Departments; N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.,
Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., Board
of Health. Environmental Advisory Committee, N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 and
40:55D-27. Other authority to regulate the internal affairs of the
township is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2. Salaries and compensation
of officers and employees of Township of Neptune are not included
in this Code. The Salary Ordinance is on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk and copies are available for examination by the
public]
§ 1-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.6
1:5

ARTICLE I
THE MAYOR AND TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE
§ 2-1. TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-1.1. Legislative Power. [Ord. No. 450 § 1; New]
§ 2-1.2. Organization of Township Committee.
The Township Committee shall organize annually during the first week
in January, at which time it shall elect a Mayor and Deputy Mayor from
among its members. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township
Committee and perform such other duties as the Township Committee or
State law may prescribe. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the
Deputy Mayor shall perform all of the duties and functions of the Mayor.
§ 2-1.3. Powers of the Mayor.
The Mayor shall have those powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:63-5. The Mayor
shall be the chairman of the Township Committee and head of the municipal
government. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Committee and
shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions. The Mayor shall
have all powers placed in the Mayor by general law including but not limited
to the following:
§ 2-1.4. Meetings of the Township Committee.
a. All legislative power of the Township, except in matters of health, shall
be exercised by the Township Committee pursuant to law, and in
matters of health by the Board of Health.
b. The Township Committee shall have power, and is hereby directed to
fix, by resolution, the time and manner of the payment of the salaries
and wages of all officers and employees of the Township as authorized
by duly adopted salary ordinances.
a. The power to sign and execute documents and agreements on behalf of
the Township;
b. The power to make proclamations concerning holidays and events of
interest to the Township;
c. The authority to exercise the ceremonial power of the Township;
d. Every other power usually exercised by Mayors under the Township
Committee form of government.
a. Regular Meetings. The Township Committee shall hold its annual
organizational meeting during the first week in January. The Committee
shall hold regular meetings at least once a month in accordance with a
schedule to be set forth in a resolution adopted by the Committee at its
annual organizational meeting.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1.4
1:7
§ 2-1.5. Meetings Open to the Public; Agenda.
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public, except for those portions of such meetings which the
Committee determines to hold in private session pursuant to the provisions
of "The Open Public Meetings Act." The rules of procedure to be followed
and rules for the consideration of nominations submitted by the Mayor and
for the conduct of other business of the Committee shall be provided by
resolution.
§ 2-1.6. Township Committee Executive Sessions.
Subject to the provisions of "The Open Public Meeting Act," the Committee
may meet at any time in executive session for the consideration of any
Township business or to meet with any officer or employee of the Township
or any other person on Township business. No persons other than those
specifically invited by the Committee shall be authorized to participate in
any such executive session.
§ 2-1.7. Quorum.
A majority of the full membership of the Township Committee shall
constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present at the appointed time for
any meeting, the presiding officer or the Clerk may declare the meeting
adjourned.
§ 2-1.8. Roll Call Votes; Minutes.
The vote upon every ordinance, and upon resolutions shall be taken by roll
call and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of
each meeting shall be maintained and signed by the Township Clerk.
b. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Township Committee shall be
held as the need therefor arises and shall be held in compliance with
"The Open Public Meetings Act."
a. Items of business, excluding ordinances and as otherwise provided by
law, which the Township Committee has determined to be routine and
which do not require discussions shall be included under a single
section of the agenda known as the "consent agenda." Such items may
be adopted or approved as the case may be collectively, upon a single
motion and roll call vote of a majority of the Township Committee voting
affirmatively.
b. The consent agenda shall be adopted by resolution of the Township
Committee. Any member of the Committee may request that an item be
removed from the consent agenda. That item shall then be considered
separately.
§ 2-1.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-1.9
1:8
§ 2-1.9. Ordinances.
All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
§ 2-1.10. Ordinance Book.
The ordinances book shall be signed by the Mayor and the Township Clerk.
§ 2-2. through § 2-3. (RESERVED)
§ 2-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
DEPARTMENT OF THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT
§ 2-4. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION. (RESERVED)
§ 2-5. BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-5.1. Creation of Office of Business Administrator. [Ord. No. 790
A I; Ord. No. 1273 A I]
The office of Business Administrator is hereby created in and for the
Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, et seq.
§ 2-5.2. Appointment; Vacancy; Absence or Disability. [Ord. No. 790
A II; Ord. No. 1273 A II]
§ 2-5.3. Qualifications and Requirements. [Ord. No. 790 A IV; Ord.
No. 98-28 § 1]
a. The Business Administrator and the Assistant Business Administrator
shall be appointed by a majority of the Township Committee and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
b. Any vacancy in this office shall be filled by appointment of the Township
Committee.
c. Absence or Disability: During the absence or disability of the duly
appointed Business Administrator, the Assistant to the Business
Administrator shall perform the duties of this office during such
absence or disability. Such absence or disability shall be limited to three
(3) months after which time, such absence or disability may be deemed
a vacancy.
d. The Business Administrator and the Assistant to the Business
Administrator shall not be removed from office except in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138 which Statute is incorporated herein by
reference.
a. The Business Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his
executive and administrative abilities and qualifications with special
regard to education, training and experience in governmental affairs,
including the interworking of governmental agencies and boards.
b. (Reserved)
c. The Business Administrator shall be appointed to serve and devote his
or her full time to the duties of this office, except that nothing herein
shall prevent him or her from also holding another municipal office of
the Township and fulfilling the duties thereof.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.4
1:11
§ 2-5.4. Salaries. [Ord. No. 790 A IV; Ord. No. 1273 A IV]
The Business Administrator and the Assistant to the Business Administrator
shall receive a salary as may be established by the Township Committee in
the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-5.5. Supervision of Business Administrator. [Ord. No. 790 A V]
The Business Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the Township and shall, at all times, be under the supervision of and
responsible to the Township Committee for all actions relevant to the duties
and responsibilities of this office to the extent not prohibited by law.
§ 2-5.6. Duties. [Ord. No. 790 A VI]
The Business Administrator, for the purpose of carrying out his or her
responsibilities, shall develop, promulgate and implement with the approval
of the Township Committee, sound administrative, personnel and
purchasing practices and procedures for all departments, offices and
agencies of the Township, and shall to that end:
a. Study, recommend, implement and enforce personnel organization and
policy of the Township and its departments after consultation with
department heads.
b. Study, recommend, implement and enforce administrative procedures
and policies of the Township and its departments after consultation
with department heads.
c. Study, recommend, implement and enforce purchasing, procedures and
policies of the Township and its departments after consultation with
department heads.
d. Study, recommend, implement and enforce procedures and policies of
the Township and departments for receipts, dissemination and collation
of and responses to communications and information after consultation
with department heads.
e. Assign responsibility for departmental action and coordinate
intradepartmental operations as authorized by the Township
Committee.
f. Study, recommend, implement and enforce the procedures and policies
of the Township and its departments for the coordination, compiling,
editing and prompt dissemination and release of public information,
upon the recommendation and authorization of the Township
Committee.
g. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or its
inhabitants in any statute or contract are faithfully kept and performed
and upon knowledge of and violation, call the same to the attention of
the Township Committee.
§ 2-5.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-5.6
1:12
§ 2-5.7. Powers of Municipal Officials Not Impaired. [Ord. No. 790 A
VII]
Nothing in this section shall derogate from or authorize the Municipal
Business Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of the elected and
appointed officials or employees.
h. Study, recommend, implement and enforce the financial procedures
and policy of the Township and its departments after consultation with
department heads.
i. Conduct a continuous study of all activities and operations of the
Township government and recommend changes for the purpose of
increasing efficiency and effectiveness; prescribe such rules and
regulations as he shall deem necessary with the approval of the
Township Committee for the conduct of administrative procedures and
revoke, suspend or amend any such rules or regulations, subject to
approval of the Township Committee in all background matters to assist
it with the establishment of policy.
j. To require the various departments to effect an adequate inventory of
all equipment, materials and supplies in stock and to recommend sale of
any surplus, obsolete or unused equipment when authorized by the
Township Committee.
k. The Business Administrator shall make studies and surveys of such
municipal problems of the Township as shall be assigned to him or her
by the Township Committee, and prepare and submit written reports of
his/her findings and determinations to the Township Committee for
their consideration and action. The Business Administrator shall be
responsible to see that any complaints concerning the functions and
obligations of the Township made by any of its residents, citizens or
taxpayers are promptly attended to and a written record kept of such
complaints when made, and when and what action was taken in
response thereto.
l. The Business Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be
specifically assigned to him or her by the Township Committee.
m. The Business Administrator shall attend all public meetings of the
Township Committee and any other meetings when so requested by the
Township Committee.
n. The Business Administrator shall assist the Township Committee in the
preparation of the annual Township operating and capital budgets to be
considered and adopted by the Township Committee.
o. The Business Administrator shall keep the Township Committee
informed as to Federal aid projects, State aid projects and any other aid
programs for which the Township may qualify.
§ 2-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.8
1:13
§ 2-5.8. Assistant to the Business Administrator. [Ord. No. 790 A I;
Ord. No. 1273 A I]
There is hereby created the position of Assistant to the Business
Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Assistant to the Business
Administrator to perform those duties assigned by the Business
Administrator.
§ 2-6. TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-6.1. Term of Office; Salary. [New]
The office of the Township Clerk shall be an appointed position and, unless
otherwise provided by law, the term of offices shall be three (3) years and
shall commence on the date of appointment. The salary of the Township
Clerk shall be as established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-6.2. General Powers and Duties. [New]
The Township Clerk shall:
a. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other State Law
or Township ordinance, and receive the fees prescribed therefor for the
use of the Township.
b. Until such time as a separate Alcoholic Beverage Control Board may be
established pursuant to law, issue such licenses as may be authorized
by the Township Committee pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law (N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 et seq.) and ordinances of the Township.
c. Keep all records, resolutions, ordinances and minutes of the meetings
of the Township Committee.
d. Issue all licenses required by law or ordinance, faithfully make all
reports required by law or ordinance to the Township Committee and
account monthly for all fees received by the Office of the Township
Clerk.
e. See to it that all ordinances and notices of the Township of Neptune are
properly advertised.
f. Take care of all correspondence of the Township and of the Township
Committee.
g. Administer oaths.
h. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law, ordinance or regulation.
§ 2-5.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-6.3
1:14
§ 2-6.3. Deputy Township Clerk. [Ord. No. 123 § 1]
A Deputy Township Clerk shall be appointed. The Deputy Clerk shall have
all the authority and powers of the Township Clerk in his or her absence and
shall hold office at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 2-7. FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-7.1. Chief Financial Officer. [New]
§ 2-7.2. Division of Purchasing.1 [Ord. No. 1570 §§ 1—4]
a. Appointment; Duties. There shall be appointed by the Township
Committee a Chief Financial Officer who shall meet all qualifications as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, and shall hold office for a term of
four (4) years. In addition the duties prescribed by Statute, the Chief
Financial Officer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance or resolution of the Township Committee.
b. Salary. The annual salary of the Chief Financial Officer shall be
established in the Salary Ordinance.
a. Established. This section shall be cited as the Purchasing Ordinance of
the Township of Neptune.
b. Purpose and Scope. The purpose of the section is to prescribe the
manner in which the Purchasing Agent shall implement procedures and
supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, equipment, work and
contractual services of the Township of Neptune.
c. Department/Division/Office of Purchasing. There is hereby established
by the Township Committee under the general supervision of the
Township Committee and under the specific direction of the Chief
Financial Officer, a Purchasing Division within the Finance Department,
and the position of Purchasing Agent/ Deputy Treasurer as head of such
division. There shall be an Assistant Purchasing Agent and such support
staff as may be necessary.
d. Powers and Duties. The Purchasing Agent/Deputy Treasurer shall have
general supervision of the Purchasing Division. The Purchasing Agent/
Deputy Treasurer shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this
subsection subject to the review and supervision of the Township
Committee generally, and the Chief Financial Officer specifically.
The Purchasing Agent/Deputy Treasurer shall have the power, and it
shall be his/her duty:
To develop municipal purchasing goals, objectives, policies, programs,
procedures, rules and regulations for the acquisition of materials,
supplies, equipment and services.
1. Editor's Note: For Township of Neptune Purchasing Manual see Section 2-55.
§ 2-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.2
1:15
§ 2-7.3. Tax Collector. [New]
To develop and prepare a purchasing procedures manual to be
promulgated by the governing body and distributed to all municipal
departments, nonautonomous using agencies and boards containing
procedures and instructions for initiating the purchasing style.
To stimulate both bid and quotation competition in order to obtain
the highest quality goods and services at the least expense to the
municipality.
To discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open
competition as possible on all purchases.
To explore the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take advantage
of discounts.
To prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the successful
operation of the purchasing function.
To consolidate requisitions of like or common items to obtain the
maximum economic benefit.
To monitor and evaluate vendor performance.
To maintain a centralized organization of qualified procurement
personnel.
To acquaint and, when necessary, train appropriate municipal
personnel in purchasing procedures.
To establish and supervise storerooms and warehouses and maintain
current inventory records of all materials, supplies and equipment
placed in storerooms and warehouses.
To arrange, after governing body approval, for the disposal of surplus
materials and equipment either by transfer to other municipal agencies
or by public sale.
a. Appointment; Duties. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq., the Mayor
and Township Committee shall appoint the Municipal Tax Collector who
shall be charged with the duty of collecting taxes upon real property in
the Township.
b. Term of Office; Vacancies. The Municipal Tax Collector shall hold office
for a term of four (4) years from January 1 next following his
appointment. Vacancies other than those due to expiration of term shall
be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
c. Certificate Required. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as
Municipal Tax Collector unless he or she shall hold a Tax Collector
certificate issued by the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services.
§ 2-7.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-7.3
1:16
§ 2-7.4. Self-Insurance Fund for Group Health Benefits. [Ord. No.
2016-14]
d. Certification Requirements. A Tax Collector certificate shall be obtained
upon qualification and successful completion of the examination given
by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services.
Qualifications for certification shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.4 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.4. Revocation or suspension of any
certificates shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8, N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.9 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.5.
a. There is hereby established a Trust Fund to be known as "The Self-
Insurance Fund for Group Health Benefits" (hereafter the Fund)
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-1 et seq. and regulations established by the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
b. The Township Chief Financial Officer shall remain and bear
responsibility for the Fund in the same manner and to the same extent
as other public funds under his/her care. All interest earned on the
Fund shall accrue to the Fund's principal.
c. The Township Administrator shall annually estimate the probable
maximum exposure of the Fund during the coming year. He/she shall
make this estimate on such factors as contributory and noncontributory
self-funded or partially self-funded health benefits to
Township employees, their dependents, retirees or both in accordance
with rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
d. The Township Administrator shall include as part of the recommended
annual operating budget for the coming year, an amount, in his/her
opinion, over and above the current balance in the Fund needed to
adequately and responsibly account for the costs associated with the
above estimate as to Fund exposure for the coming year.
e. The Township Administrator shall fix reasonable rates of premium for
all insurance carried by the Insurance Fund to be applied to the various
covered persons and dependent categories, and shall effect all
insurance in the Insurance Fund or with any insurance company or
companies authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
f. The Township Committee of the Township of Neptune shall appropriate
such funds as are necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the
Neptune Township Self-Insurance Fund for Group Health Benefits is
established.
g. The Township Chief Financial Officer shall collect and incorporate in
the Fund employee and retiree contributions for health benefits which
are made pursuant to applicable Township ordinances and contracts or
in accordance with Chapter 78, P.L. 2011.
§ 2-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:17
§ 2-8. DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSING.
§ 2-8.1. Tax Assessor. [New]
§ 2-9. CONSTRUCTION DEPARTMENT.2
The Construction Department shall be established in accordance with the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 2-10. POLICE DEPARTMENT.3
§ 2-10.1. Department Established. [Ord. No. 2014-31; Ord. No.
2017-29; Ord. No. 2017-37; Ord. No. 2017-42]
There is hereby created in and for the Township of Neptune Police
Department, which shall consist of such employees and officers as shall be
deemed necessary by the Township Committee and may include a Police
Chief in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Township Committee
shall, from time to time determine the number of employees and officers
of the Police Department together with their compensation. The structure
of the Police Department will include at a maximum one (1) Police Chief;
one (1) Deputy Police Chief; three (3) Captains, seven (7) Lieutenants, in
addition to the number of Sergeants and Patrolmen determined by the
Township Committee. The Governing Body shall also appoint from among
its members a Police Committee composed of two (2) Township
Committeepersons, and a third member who may be a retired Police Officer
from the Neptune Township Police Department, retired in good standing;
an active duty or retired Police Officer or other Law Enforcement Officer
from another Police Department or Law Enforcement Agency; a non-police
a. Office Established. There is hereby established the office of Tax
Assessor of the Township. The Tax Assessor shall be nominated by the
Mayor subject to the confirmation of the Township Committee pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.
b. Qualifications. The Tax Assessor shall be qualified as set forth in N.J.S.A.
54:1-35.25 as same may be amended.
c. Term of Office. The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four (4)
years from July 1 next following his appointment to the office.
d. Compensation. The compensation of the Tax Assessor shall be
determined in the salary ordinance.
e. Duties. The Tax Assessor shall perform the duties required of the holder
of such office pursuant to Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes and such
regulations as may be promulgated by the New Jersey Division of
Taxation and the Monmouth County Board of Taxation.
2. Editor's Note: See Section 11-1, State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
3. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 453, 463, 776, 777, 1025, 1241,
1561, 1632, 98-46, 08-04.
§ 2-8 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-10.1
1:18
officer/employee of Neptune Township or another town, or a non-employee
volunteer or paid professional at the Township Committee's sole discretion.
The Police Committee shall designate a person to serve as its Chairperson
or Township Police Commissioner of the Police Committee from among the
three (3) members appointed to the Police Committee by the Township
Committee. The Police Committee is hereby designated as the appropriate
authority as provided for in the New Jersey Statutes, and shall be
responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department, as set
forth more fully below.
§ 2-10.2. Designation of Appropriate Authority. [Ord. No. 2014-31;
Ord. No. 2017-29]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Police Committee, as set forth
above, is hereby designated as the Appropriate Authority, and is hereby
vested with the powers and duties of an Appropriate Authority as delegated
by law.
§ 2-10.3. Responsibilities of Police Department, Police Committee
and Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 2014-31; Ord. No. 2017-29]
a. Police Department. The Police Department shall preserve the public
peace; protect life and property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders
of the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of
Neptune; direct and control traffic; provide attendance and protection
during emergencies; provide appearances in court; cooperate with all
other law enforcement agencies; provide training for the efficiency of
its members and officers.
b. Police Committee.
1. The Police Committee shall report to the Township Committee and
shall be responsible to review the performance of the Police
Department. It shall serve as the administrative and executive head
of the Police Department. It shall review and recommend to the
Township Committee all adopted and promulgated rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and for
the discipline of its employees. The Police Committee's duties
include, but are not limited to:
(a) Establishing the procedures to be followed by the Chief of
Police and other subordinate officers for the purchase of
equipment and supplies. Such procedures may include the
requirement that the Police Committee approve all
expenditures with regard to the equipment and supplies.
(b) The Police Department and Chief Financial Officer shall keep a
record of all business transacted by the Police Department and
approve all bills for the expense of the Police Department after
review and approval of the Police Committee.
§ 2-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10.3
1:19
(c) The Police Department shall keep and maintain accurate
records and submit an annual report to the Township
Committee, on or before January 31, which shall assess the
operations of the Police Department, and its personnel,
equipment and property.
(d) The Police Department shall keep and maintain all records,
reports, documents and other data required to be kept and
maintained by the Federal and/or State government, with the
Police Committee's right of review to the extent allowed by law.
(e) The Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of all
appointments, dismissals, removals, resignations and deaths of
officers and other Department employees as they take place,
with such other information as may be necessary, with the
Police Committee's right of review to the extent allowed by law.
(f) The Police Department and Chief Financial Officer shall
develop the annual budget for the Police Department, subject
to the Police Committee overseeing any and all expenditures of
the Police Department, and reviewing and approving said
annual budget.
(g) The Police Chief shall analyze crime trends and statistics to
ensure that the Police Department makes the best use of
available funds, personnel, equipment and supplies, with the
Police Committee's right of review.
(h) The Police Committee, in conjunction with the Police
Department, shall evaluate the effectiveness of work program
and procedures of all organizational components within the
Police Department and developing effective work methods for
subordinates.
(i) The Police Committee, in conjunction with the Police
Department, shall undertake special studies pertaining to
Police functions and promoting close coordination of planning
efforts.
(j) The Police Committee, in conjunction with the Police
Department, shall establish and maintain helpful and
cooperative relations with civic and business organizations,
schools, and court offices, and with other groups and public
authorities and other jurisdictions, and with others interested
in the maintenance of law and order.
(k) All such other duties not specifically reserved to the Chief of
Police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A14-118.
2. The Chief of Police or designee shall report directly to the Police
Committee and the Police Committee shall receive daily or other
§ 2-10.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-10.3
1:20
§ 2-10.4. Appointment of Officers. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The selection criteria for a Police
Officer shall be established in Department policy consistent with New
Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-10.5. Appointment of Probationary Officers. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
The Township Committee shall have the power and authority to appoint
such Probationary Officers as in its discretion shall be deemed necessary for
the proper maintenance of the Police Department for a period not to exceed
one (1) year.
§ 2-10.6. Excess Duty During State of Emergency. [Ord. No.
2014-31]
periodic reports, as designated by the Police Committee, from the
Chief of Police or designee.
3. The Police committee shall also be responsible for ensuring that all
Police Officers and employees are compensated in accordance with
State and Federal Wage and Hour Requirements.
4. The Police Committee shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The members of the Police Committee shall serve at
the pleasure of the Township Committee and may be removed by
the Township Committee at their discretion.
5. In addition to the two (2) members of the Township Committee
appointed to the Police Committee, and a third member, the
Governing Body may also appoint, or the Police Committee may
request, any professional needed to accomplish its duties,
including Labor Counsel, the Township Attorney, Chief Financial
Officer or any other consultant or professional that the Police
Committee may feel appropriate.
c. Chief of Police.
1. If a Police Chief is appointed, he/she shall exercise any and all of
the rights, authorities, powers and responsibilities reserved solely
to the Chief of Police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. Any other
rights, authorities, powers and responsibilities not reserved solely
to the Chief of Police by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 shall be assumed or
delegated by the Police Committee.
2. If a Police Chief is not appointed, any and all of the rights,
authorities, powers and responsibilities reserved solely to the Chief
of Police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, which cannot be
performed by the Police Committee, shall be delegated to a Chief
Law Enforcement Officer, which shall be highest ranking sworn
officer, as designated by the Police Committee.
§ 2-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10.6
1:21
§ 2-10.7. Special Police Officers. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
a. Whenever an emergency exists, as provided by Statute or as declared
by the Mayor, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to summon and
keep on duty any member of the Police Department for such a period of
time in excess of ordinary duty hours which, in the sole discretion of the
Chief of Police, is necessary to adequately perform the duties of the
Police Department and to preserve public safety and welfare in the
Township.
b. Members of the Police Department shall be compensated for time on
duty in excess of their regular hours of duty at the same rate per hour
as they are paid for regular duty. This additional compensation shall be
in lieu of any compensatory time off and in addition to the regular salary
paid to members of the Police Department.
a. The position of Special Police Officer in the Neptune Township Police
Department is hereby established.
b. The Mayor, subject to the approval by resolution of the Township
Committee, shall appoint Special Police Officers for a term not
exceeding one (1) year, and shall not revoke such appointments without
cause or hearing unless the appointment is for four (4) months or less.
Such Special Police Officers shall carry out their duties and
responsibilities under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police, and
their powers, rights and duties shall be specifically defined by the Chief
of Police, pursuant to the statutory duties of a Special Law Enforcement
Officer and within the scope of their training as determined by the
Police Training Commission. These powers, rights and duties, however,
shall immediately cease at the expiration of the term for which they
were appointed, or upon revocation of their appointment. The
resolution approving appointment of Special Police Officers shall
designate the rate of pay if any.
c. No person shall be appointed as a Special Police Officer unless he or
she is a citizen of the United States; is able to read, write, and speak the
English language; is physically qualified and of good moral character,
and shall not have been convicted of any crime. Every such Special
Police Officer shall be fingerprinted and his fingerprints shall be filed
with the Division of the State Police and Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Reports shall be made by the Chief of Police to the
Township Committee concerning the eligibility and qualifications of any
person proposed to be appointed a Special Police Officer.
d. Class One Officers (Class I). Class I Officers shall be authorized to
perform routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties.
Class I Officers shall have the power to issue summonses for disorderly
persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of
a firearm by an Officer of this class shall be strictly prohibited and no
§ 2-10.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-10.7
1:22
§ 2-10.8. Employment of School Crossing Guards. [Ord. No.
2014-31]
§ 2-10.9. Establishing the Rules and Regulations of the Police
Department. [Ord. No. 2014-31; Ord. No. 2017-42]
The Police Committee as the "Appropriate Authority" shall, from time to
time as may be necessary, adopt and amend the rules and regulations for
the government and discipline of the Police Department and employees
thereof subject to approval of the Township Committee per the Police
Committee's recommendation. Said rules and regulations may fix and
provide for the enforcement of such rules and regulations and the
enforcement of penalties for the violation of such rules and regulations.
All employees of the Police Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations and penalties. Disciplinary hearings shall be conducted by the
Township Administrator or his designee.
§ 2-10.10. Disciplinary Actions. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
Discipline of employees and Police Officers will be imposed consistent with
New Jersey State Statutes and the Rules and Regulations of the Neptune
Township Police Department. Employees may be subject to discipline for
Class I Officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the
carrying or use of a firearm.
e. Class Two Officers (Class II). Class II Officers shall be authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent,
regularly appointed full-time Police Officer. The use of a firearm by an
officer of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been
fully certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
commission. Class II Officers are not authorized to carry an off duty
weapon.
f. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146-17, the Township Committee
may employ a maximum of twenty-five (25) Class II and fifteen (15)
Class I Officers.
g. The Special Police Officer shall be subject to the terms and conditions,
rules and regulations of the Personnel Ordinance of the Township of
Neptune and subject further to such rules and regulations as shall be
established by the Chief of Police and/or Business Administrator.
h. The Special Police Officer shall be paid such hourly salary as provided
for in the salary ordinance of the Township.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.1, the Township Committee shall have
the power, by resolution, to employ Police Officers to act as School
Crossing Guards.
b. Such Adult School Crossing Guards shall receive compensation as
established by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 2-10.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10.10
1:23
violating laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations and written
directives.
§ 2-10.11. County Mutual Aid Agreement. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
§ 2-11. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-11.1. Creation of the Department. [New]
The Department of Public Works is hereby established.
§ 2-11.2. Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 1390 A 1 and 2; Ord.
No. 95-10 § 1]
a. Participation by the Township of Neptune in a County-wide compact
which shall be known as "The Monmouth County Mutual Aid
Agreement" is hereby authorized.
b. This subsection is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6) and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-156.1 and is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all
municipalities participating in the County-wide mutual aid compact.
Pursuant to this agreement, the Township of Neptune shall render
assistance to any participating municipality by providing members of
the Neptune Township Police Department, upon request, to help
preserve the public peace and order.
c. The municipality requesting assistance shall compensate the officers at
an agreed-upon rate by forwarding payment to the municipality, which
will then compensate those officers who rendered assistance.
d. In the event that an officer is injured while rendering assistance, the
municipality providing assistance shall be primarily responsible for any
costs as a result of the injury. Nothing in the Agreement shall serve as a
bar to the municipality providing assistance from seeking
indemnification from the municipality receiving assistance.
e. This subsection is separate and distinct from any mutual aid
agreements previously entered into between the Township of Neptune
and any other municipalities and shall remain in full force and effect
until specifically repealed by an affirmative act of the Governing Body.
a. Authority of Director.
1. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to manage
and allocate the supervisor and other personnel of the Public Works
department.
2. The exercise of such authority shall, at all times, be subject to the
review of the Administrator in his or her capacity as Chief
Personnel Officer of the Township, and may be subject further to
his or her modification.
§ 2-10.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-11.2
1:24
3. The Director is instructed, empowered and authorized to
implement, alter, modify or rescind operating procedures, recordkeeping
procedures and equipment maintenance schedules;
stream, drainage, storm and sanitary sewer, road, drive-way and
sidewalk maintenance schedules; and such other procedures
designed to achieve efficiency, reduce costs or preserve the useful
life of Township rolling stock or property, subject to review by the
Administrator, in his/her capacity as Chief Administrative Officer,
and subject further to the Administrator's notifying the Committee
with respect to any of the foregoing and receiving its consent with
respect thereto.
4. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to control the
use, operation and allocation of all equipment of the Department
and the divisions thereof.
5. The Director of Public Works shall have such additional authority
necessary to fulfill the responsibilities delegated to him under this
section, which responsibilities are not specifically delegated to any
other official by State Statute or local ordinance.
b. Responsibilities of the Director.
1. The Director of Public Works shall report to the Township
Administrator concerning matters of operation, personnel,
planning, citizen inquiries, complaints or requests for assistance
and such other matters pertaining to the Department which will
enable the Administrator to exercise his/her responsibilities to the
Committee.
2. The Director of Public Works shall submit, at least monthly, to the
Administrator and the Committee, a written report concerning
operations and other matters pertinent to the Department. The
monthly written reports shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the status of work projects, studies, reports and other actions
authorized, contracted or directed by the Committee; items
concerning personnel; needs of the Department; recommendations
with respect to operating or other procedures or modifications
thereto; and the number and status of citizen inquiries, complaints
or requests for assistance. At least annually, the Director shall
submit to the Administrator and the Committee a report
summarizing the activities of the Department; recommendations
with respect to all operations of the Department; and other matters
of interest to the Township and the Committee.
3. The Director shall serve as liaison to such subcommittees of the
Committee or agencies or instrumentalities of other governmental
units as the Committee may direct and the Director shall report to
the Administrator and the Committee matters of interest or
concern to the Township and the Committee.
§ 2-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11.2
1:25
4. The Director shall receive all injuries, complaints or requests for
assistance pertaining to the Department from all sources and shall
direct the investigation of same, ordering, where appropriate,
division action to satisfy said inquiries, complaints or requests.
5. The Director shall cause the preparation of all operating budget
requests of the Department and its divisions in the form and within
the time specified by the Committee. The Director shall review the
operating budget requests of the supervisors of the divisions and
shall have the power to alter or modify such requests after
consultation with the supervisors.
6. The Director shall, after conferring with the supervisors of the
divisions of the Department, applicable subcommittees of the
Committee and the Committee liaison to the Department, submit to
the Township Committee, not later than the first business day in
September of each year, a capital budget request for the following
year's budget.
7. The Director shall develop a six-year capital plan for the
Department of Public Works, which shall be submitted to the
Committee and Administrator consisting of:
(a) Items of construction.
(b) Acquisition of real or personal property.
(c) Original and replacement items.
(d) Items funded by bonding or current tax levy.
(e) Items which must be contracted out.
This plan shall be submitted to the Administrator for approval,
rejection, and/or amendment before finalization.
8. The Director shall submit the six-year capital plan of the
Department to the Committee not later than the first day in
September of each year, and by June 30 each year thereafter.
9. The Director shall supervise the development of all bid and
contract specifications for the purchase of services, products or
property or the sale of services, products or property required by
the Department or its divisions, or as may be directed by the
Committee.
10. The Director shall review all bids received by the Township
pertaining to the Department or as directed by the Committee, and
shall, with the advice of appropriate supervisors, represent to the
Committee compliance of the bidder with Township and other
requirements imposed by law and the responsibility of the lowest
bidder.
§ 2-11.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-11.2
1:26
§ 2-11.3. Superintendent of Parks and Recreation. [Ord. No. 940
§§ 1—4]
§ 2-11.4. Supervisor of Sewer Maintenance. [Ord. No. 1050 §§ 1—3]
11. The Director shall review all proposed verbal or written contracts,
purchase orders and vouchers prepared or initiated by the
supervisors or employees of the Divisions of the Department before
submission to the Treasurer, Purchasing Agent, Committee,
Township Clerk or other Township officials and before any
obligation shall have been incurred by the Township in order to
assure budgetary compliance; to satisfy himself or herself of the
need for such purchase; and for such other purposes appropriate to
the discharge of his/her responsibilities.
c. Tenure. A person holding office, position or employment as full-time
Director of Public Works in the Township of Neptune who has held that
office, position or employment continuously for five (5) years or more
shall continue to hold the office, position or employment,
notwithstanding he is serving a fixed term, during good behavior and
efficiency and shall not be removed therefrom for political or other
reasons except for good cause, upon written charges filed with the
Municipal Clerk and after a public, fair and impartial hearing.
a. Office Created; Appointment of Superintendent. There is hereby
created within the Department of Public Works, the Office of
Superintendent of Parks and Recreation for the Township of Neptune.
The Superintendent of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee.
b. Powers and Duties. The Superintendent shall have charge of the care
and upkeep of all Township-owned parks and recreational facilities and
shall see that they are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
report to the Business Administrator when any of the parks or
recreational facilities need repair. The Superintendent shall see to it
that all play areas and facilities are kept in good and safe condition and
that all restrooms and facilities are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
c. Rules and Regulations Posted. The Superintendent shall, with the
approval of the Mayor and Township Committee, post such rules and
regulations as he/she deems necessary for conduct of persons in the
parks and for the use of the recreational facilities.
a. Creation of Office; Appointment. There is hereby created within the
Department of Public Works the position of Supervisor of Sewer
Maintenance. The Supervisor of Sewer Maintenance shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee.
§ 2-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11.4
1:27
§ 2-12. CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-12.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 1205, Preamble]
The enforcement of the ordinances and regulations of the Township dealing
with minimum housing standards and the licensing of various trades,
professions and activities within the Township requires the creation of a
Code Enforcement Department separate and apart from the Construction
Department established to enforce the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code Regulations.
The establishment of the position of Code Enforcement Supervisor is
necessary for the proper administration of the Code Enforcement
Department.
§ 2-12.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1205 § 1]
As used in this section except as the context may otherwise require:
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
"Writing" or "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using proper or similar material which is in general
use as well as legible handwriting.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which
the Township Offices are closed, that day shall be excluded.
§ 2-12.3. Code Enforcement Department. [Ord. No. 1205 § 2; Ord.
No. 1299 § 1]
There is hereby established a code enforcing agency to be known as the
Neptune Code Enforcement Department consisting of a Code Enforcement
Supervisor and such other personnel as shall be determined by the
b. Duties. The Supervisor shall have charge of the care and maintenance
of those sections of the sewer collection under the care, custody and
control of the Township.
The words "care and maintenance" shall include, but are not restricted
to, the inspection, cleaning and repair of the sewer lines, force mains,
laterals and pumping stations of the Township of Neptune sewer
system, to assure the maximum operational efficiency and cleanliness.
The Supervisor shall report to the Business Administrator when any of
the sewer collection facilities need repair.
c. Supervision of Employees. The Supervisor shall be in charge of and
shall have direct supervision over the employees assigned to work in
the Sewer Maintenance Department.
§ 2-11.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-12.3
1:28
Township Committee. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be the Chief
Inspector of the Department.
§ 2-12.4. Duties of Code Enforcement Supervisor. [Ord. No. 1205
§ 3; Ord. No. 1299 § 2]
There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Supervisor who
shall perform the following duties:
§ 2-12.5. Appointment; Term. [Ord. No. 1205 § 4; Ord. No. 95-39 § I]
The appointment and term of the Code Enforcement Supervisor and the
reasons for a vacancy or for discharge from the position shall be as follows:
a. To administer and enforce the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Neptune and all ordinances of the Township which pertain
to minimum housing standards in Schedule A following Section 2-22
and such other ordinances hereinafter adopted by the Township
Committee and designated by the Township Committee for
administration and enforcement by the Neptune Code Enforcement
Department.
b. To investigate, process, approve or disapprove all applications for
licenses required by the several ordinances set forth in Schedule A; and
keep permanent records thereof.
c. To make such inspections, evaluations, studies and surveys concerning
code enforcement as shall be assigned to him by the Business
Administrator and/or the individual assigned by the Business
Administrator the responsibility for departmental action in accordance
with paragraph e of subsection 2-5.6, and to prepare and submit in
writing, reports there-on to said Administrator of Code Enforcement
and Construction.
d. To keep a written record of all complaints made to the Department
concerning code enforcement in the Township together with the nature
of the investigation thereof and the action taken in response thereto.
e. To perform such other duties as may be assigned to him verbally and/or
in writing by the Business Administrator and/or the individual assigned
by the Business Administrator the responsibility for departmental
action in accordance with paragraph e of subsection 2-5.6.
a. The head of the Code Enforcement Department shall be the Code
Enforcement Supervisor who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for an unspecified term. He/she shall be a person qualified
by education, training and experience to perform the duties of this
office.
b. Any vacancy in this position shall be filled by appointment by the
Township Committee only for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 2-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12.5
1:29
§ 2-12.6. Qualifications.
c. During the absence from duty or disability of the Code Enforcement
Supervisor, the Township Committee may appoint by resolution, an
officer or employee of the Township to perform the duties of the Code
Enforcement Supervisor during this absence or disability. Such absence
or disability shall be limited to three (3) consecutive months at which
time the position shall be declared vacated by resolution of the
Township Committee.
d. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall not be removed from his/her
position except for cause and upon written notice of the charges against
him/her. In the event that the Code Enforcement Supervisor makes a
request in writing to the Business Administrator for a hearing before
the Township Committee of the charges against him/her, the Township
Committee, within thirty (30) days of the request and upon written
notice of the time and place thereof directed to the Code Enforcement
Supervisor and/or his/her attorney, shall conduct a hearing into the
facts, take testimony and such other proofs as may be presented. At
such hearing, the Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be entitled to
confront witnesses and proofs against him/her and present evidence
and testimony on his/her own behalf. The Township Committee
thereupon shall vote either to dismiss the charges against him/her,
suspend him/her from office without pay for a period of time not to
exceed thirty (30) days, discharge him/her both from the position and as
an employee in accordance with the Personnel Ordinance of the
Township.
a. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be appointed on the basis of
his/her administrative ability, educational qualifications and his training
and experience in code inspection and enforcement.
b. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be a resident of the State of
New Jersey and of the Township of Neptune and shall remain a resident
of the Township during his/her term of office. Should he/she change his/
her residence during his/her term of office, the position shall be deemed
vacated by resolution of the Township Committee.
c. No Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be appointed to the position
unless he/she is able to devote his/her full time to the duties of that
position except that nothing herein shall prevent him/her from holding
another municipal position or office of the Township and fulfilling the
duties thereof.
d. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall receive as salary, such sums as
may be fixed in the current Salary Ordinance adopted by the Township
Committee.
e. The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be the Code Enforcement
Officer and at all times shall be under the supervision of and
responsible to the Business Administrator and/or the individual
§ 2-12.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-12.6
1:30
assigned by the Business Administrator the responsibility for
departmental action in accordance with paragraph e of subsection
2-5.6, and the Township Committee for all actions arising out of and in
the course of his/her duties and responsibilities as Code Enforcement
Supervisor.
Schedule A of Section 2-12
Ordinances of the Township of Neptune to be implemented and
enforced under the Neptune Code Enforcement Department and
administered by the Neptune Code Enforcement Supervisor.
Hedges
Height of Hedges-Fences4
Housing
Minimum Housing Standards. See Chapter 1, Building and Housing,
Section 11-2.
Littering
Littering Ordinance. See Chapter 12, Property Maintenance, Section
12-2.
Mercantile License
Mercantile License Ordinance. See Chapter 4, General Licensing,
Section 4-1.
Motor Vehicles
Unlicensed or Inoperative Motor Vehicles. See Chapter 3, Police
Regulations, Section 3-3.
Pool Halls
Pool or Billiard Halls. See Chapter 4, General Licensing, Section
4-12.
Sidewalks
Encroachment on Sidewalks. See Chapter 13, Streets and
Sidewalks, Section 13-3.
Signs
Display of Price Signs. See Chapter 3, Police Regulations, Section
3-18.
Solicitors
Solicitors License Fee. See Chapter 4, General Licensing, Section
4-4.
Structures
Removal of Unsafe Structures. See Chapter 11, Building and
Housing, Section 11-3.
4. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 201 and 722 have been repealed by Ord. No. 1491. See
Memorandum.
§ 2-12.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12.6
1:31
§ 2-13. DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
§ 2-13.1. Creation.
There shall be a Department of Recreation which shall provide recreation
programs for the residents of the Township and supervise parks and
playgrounds.
§ 2-13.2. Superintendent of Recreation.
The head of the Department of Recreation shall be the Director of
Recreation who shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He/she
shall be a person qualified by education, training and experience to perform
the duties of this office.
§ 2-13.3. Duties of Director of Recreation. [New]
The Director of Recreation shall:
§ 2-13.4. (Reserved)5
Taxicabs
Taxicab Stands and Taxi Driver License. See Chapter 4, General
Licensing, Section 4-7. #1450 and #1486
Trailers
Trailer License Ordinance. See Chapter 24, Trailers, Sections 24-1
through 24-4.
a. Propose, develop, organize and supervise recreational programs for the
residents of the Township and formulate plans for utilization of the
recreational facilities of the Township.
b. Cooperate with the Board of Education and other public and private
agencies and organizations in planning and conducting recreational
programs.
c. Coordinate the activities of the Department of Recreation with those of
other Township departments.
d. Supervise personnel of the department.
e. Be responsible for maintaining accurate records of the department.
f. Submit to the Township Committee, or such members thereof as may be
designated by resolution, monthly reports on the operations of the
department and the programs and activities sponsored by it and such
other reports, recommendations and information as may be requested.
5. Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-13.4, Recreation Program Fees, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 03-32, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 08-18. See subsection 2-61.3 for recreation program fees.
§ 2-12.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-14
1:32
§ 2-14. LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD.
§ 2-14.1. Creation; Composition. [New]
There shall be a Local Assistance Board of the Township composed of five
(5) members appointed by the Township Committee. The term of one (1)
member of the Local Assistance Board shall be for one (1) year and such
member only may be appointed from among the members of the Township
Committee, and the terms of the other members thereof shall be for four (4)
years each, one (1) term expiring in each year. The term of each member
of the Board shall begin on January 1, and each member shall continue in
office until his successor is appointed and qualifies. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired terms only. The Board shall have such powers and perform
such duties as are prescribed by general law and ordinance, and it shall
appoint a Director of Welfare pursuant to State Law.
§ 2-14.2. Organization of Board; Director of Welfare. [New]
The Local Assistance Board shall organize and select a chairman and a
secretary, and shall appoint a Director of Welfare who shall be the first
executive and administrative officer of the Board. He shall hold office for
a term of five (5) years from the date of his appointment, and shall be
paid such salary as may be fixed by the Board subject to approval of the
Township Committee. In case of vacancy in the Office of Director of Welfare,
one temporary or acting director may be appointed to serve for not more
than ninety (90) days.
§ 2-14.3. Other Employees. [New]
Other employees, including assistants, clerks, investigators, case workers
and nurses, in such number as may be necessary to properly administer
public assistance, shall be appointed in the same manner as other
employees of the Township. No employee of the Local Assistance Board
whose compensation is paid from funds received or appropriated for public
assistance or the administration thereof in any manner shall hold office in
any political party.
§ 2-14.4. Duties of Director of Welfare. [New]
The Director of Welfare shall:
a. Supervise by periodic investigation every person receiving public
assistance, such investigation to be made by visitation at least once a
month.
b. Reconsider from month to month the amount and nature of public
assistance given, and alter, amend or suspend the same when
circumstances so require.
§ 2-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-14.4
1:33
§ 2-15. DEPARTMENT OF SENIOR CITIZENS. [New]
There is hereby established the Department of Senior Citizens, the head
of which Department shall be the Director of the Department of Senior
Citizens.
§ 2-16. DEPARTMENT OF THE LIBRARY AND THE MUSEUM. [New]
There is hereby created the Department of the Library and the Museum.
The Director of the Library shall be in charge of the Library and the
Museum Curator shall be in charge of the museum.
The Children's Librarian shall be in charge of the Children's Library.
§ 2-17. DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
§ 2-17.1. Creation of the Department. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Department of Emergency Medical Services is hereby established.
§ 2-17.2. Manager of Emergency Medical Services. [Ord. No.
2016-07]
c. Devise ways and means for bringing persons unable to maintain
themselves to self-support or to the support of any other person or
agency able and willing to do so.
d. Keep full and complete records of such investigations, supervision,
assistance and rehabilitation, and of all certifications of persons for
employment or benefits and cancellations thereof.
e. Institute appropriate action for commitment to any State or County
institution when the best interest of the needy person would be so
served.
a. Authority of Manager.
1. The Manager of Emergency Medical Services shall have the
authority to manage and allocate the supervisors and other
personnel of the Department of Emergency Medical Services.
2. The exercise of such authority shall, at all times, be subject to the
review of the Administrator, and may be subject further to his or
her modification.
3. The Manager is instructed, empowered and authorized to
implement, alter, modify or rescind operating procedures, recordkeeping
procedures and equipment maintenance schedules; and
such other procedures designed to achieve efficiency, reduce costs
or preserve the useful life of Township rolling stock or property,
subject to review by the Administrator, in his/her capacity as Chief
§ 2-14.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-17.2
1:34
Administrative Officer, and subject further to the Administrator's
notifying the Committee with respect to any of the foregoing and
receiving its consent with respect thereto.
4. The Manager of Emergency Medical Services shall have the
authority to control the use, operation and allocation of all
equipment of the Department.
5. The Manager of Emergency Medical Services shall have such
additional authority necessary to fulfill the responsibilities
delegated to him or her under this section, which responsibilities
are not specifically delegated to any other official by State Statute
or local ordinance.
b. Responsibilities of the Manager.
1. The Manager of Emergency Medical Services shall report to the
Township Administrator concerning matters of operation,
personnel, planning, citizen inquiries, complaints or requests for
assistance and such other matters pertaining to the Department
which will enable the Administrator to exercise his/her
responsibilities to the Township Committee.
2. The Manager of Emergency Medical Services shall submit, at least
monthly, to the Administrator and the Committee, a written report
concerning operations and other matters pertinent to the
Department. The monthly written reports shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the status of work projects, studies, reports and
other actions authorized, contracted or directed by the Committee;
items concerning personnel; needs of the Department;
recommendations with respect to operating or other procedures or
modifications thereto; and the number and status of citizen
inquiries, complaints or requests for assistance. At least annually,
the Manager shall submit to the Administrator and the Committee
a report summarizing the activities of the Department;
recommendations with respect to all operations of the Department;
and other matters of interest to the Township and the Committee.
3. The Manager shall serve as liaison to such subcommittees of the
Committee or agencies or instrumentalities of other governmental
units as the Committee may direct and the Manager shall report to
the Administrator and the Committee matters of interest or
concern to the Township and the Committee.
4. The Manager shall receive all injuries, complaints or requests for
assistance pertaining to the Department from all sources and shall
direct the investigation of same, ordering, where appropriate,
action to satisfy said inquiries, complaints or requests in
accordance with policies of the Township.
§ 2-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.2
1:35
§ 2-17.3. Rules and Regulations of the Department of Emergency
Medical Services. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The rules and regulations regulating the Department of Emergency Medical
Services of the Township of Neptune attached to this section by reference
are hereby approved. The Business Administrator is authorized to attach
one (1) copy of the rules and regulations to this section.6
5. The Manager shall cause the preparation of all operating budget
requests of the Department and its divisions in the form and within
the time specified by the Chief Financial Officer.
6. The Manager shall submit to the Chief Financial Officer and
Governing Body liaison, all capital budget requests for the
following year's budget, when requested to do so by the Chief
Financial Officer and/or Administrator.
7. The Manager shall develop a six-year capital plan for the
Department of Emergency Medical Services, which shall be
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer, Committee liaison and
Administrator consisting of:
(a) Acquisition of real or personal property.
(b) Original and replacement items.
(c) Items funded by bonding or current tax levy.
This plan shall be submitted to the Administrator and Chief Financial
Officer for approval, rejection, and/or amendment before finalization.
8. The Manager shall supervise the development of all bid and
contract specifications for the purchase of services, products or
property or the sale of services, products or property required by
the Department or as may be directed by the Committee, in
accordance with the Township Purchasing Policy.
9. The Manager shall review all bids received by the Township
pertaining to the Department or as directed by the Committee.
10. The Manager shall review all proposed verbal or written contracts,
purchase orders and vouchers prepared or initiated by the
supervisors of the Department before submission to the Chief
Financial Officer, Purchasing Agent, Committee, or other Township
officials and before any obligation shall have been incurred by the
Township in order to assure budgetary compliance; to satisfy
himself or herself of the need for such purchase; and for such other
purposes appropriate to the discharge of his/her responsibilities.
6. Editor's Note: The rules and regulations may be found on file in the Township offices.
§ 2-17.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-17.4
1:36
§ 2-17.4. Third-Party Payment Plan for Emergency Medical Services
— Findings. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
§ 2-17.5. Plan Established; Fees; Annual Review. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Township of Neptune hereby establishes the third-party payment plan
and a subscription membership plan in accordance with Healthcare Finance
Administration Guidelines ("HCFA") so that taxpayers will not be
responsible for co-payments.
a. The New Jersey Department of Health has issued licensure for the
Neptune Township Emergency Medical Services Program to be
administered by the Department of Emergency Medical Services of the
Township of Neptune.
b. The Department of Emergency Medical Services has applied for a
"provider number" from the Federal and State Medicare/Medicaid
Program, enabling the Township to institute a third-party payment plan.
c. Most residents have an insurance plan or Medicare/Medicaid which
provides payments to relieve or to partially relieve their payment
obligations.
a. The Manager of the EMS Department ("EMS Manager") and the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township of Neptune ("CFO"), in consultation
with the Township Insurance Consultant, shall be responsible for the
plan's billing.
b. The fee for services is initially set as seven hundred ($700.00) dollars
plus costs as detailed in an annual fee schedule approved by the
Governing Body.
c. The EMS Manager and the CFO shall annually review the plan's cost
accounting records. The EMS Manager and CFO shall obtain the
statewide industry average.
d. The CFO shall annually, no later than March 1 on the year following
adoption of this section, adjust the fee for services as set forth herein
pursuant to the recommendation of the EMS Manager and the
Insurance Consultant.
e. The subscription plan shall be reviewed annually by the CFO and the
subscription plan allocation shall be adjusted in the following year's
budget in accordance with HCFA guidelines. The Insurance Consultant
with the assistance of the CFO, shall prepare a report to be filed with
the Office of the Township Clerk.
f. All fees associated with the EMS Program shall be adopted annually by
resolution of the Township Committee and may be amended from time
to time during the calendar year upon recommendation of the EMS
Manager, Administrator and CFO.
§ 2-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18
1:37
§ 2-18. through § 2-20. (RESERVED)
§ 2-18 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-18
1:38
ARTICLE III
STATUTORY OFFICES
§ 2-21. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.
§ 2-21.1. Position Created; Statutory Authority. [Ord. No. 961 § 1]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A-139 there is hereby created by the
Township of Neptune the position of Municipal Attorney.
§ 2-21.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 961 § 2]
The Municipal Attorney shall be a duly licensed Attorney-at-Law of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 2-21.3. Appointment. [Ord. No. 961 § 3]
The Municipal Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall hold such position for a term of one (1) year from January 1 of the year
in which the appointment is made.
§ 2-21.4. Duties. [Ord. No. 961 §§ 4—6]
§ 2-21.5. Compensation. [Ord. No. 961 §§ 7, 8]
The Municipal Attorney shall be paid an annual retainer as provided for in
the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and such other reasonable
compensation for additional services performed only if authorized by the
Township Committee.
This retainer shall be full compensation for the following; attending all
regular Township meetings and any and all advisory services in connection
therewith. For any services not covered by the retainer, the Attorney shall
receive such compensation as may be authorized by the Township
Committee.
a. The Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the Township Committee
and to the Township Officers and employees on matters pertaining to
their duties, to represent the Township in litigations except where the
Township Committee directs otherwise, to draft all contracts,
ordinances or other documents needed by the Township and to render
such other legal services as may be required by the Township
Committee.
b. It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all
judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the Township and
of all similar interlocutory orders.
c. It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
§ 2-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:39
§ 2-22. MUNICIPAL COURT PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-22.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 911 § 1]
There is hereby created by the Township the position of Municipal Court
Prosecutor.
§ 2-22.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 911 § 2]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be a duly licensed Attorney-at-Law of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-22.3. Appointment; Term. [Ord. No. 911 § 3]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Township Committee for the term of one (1) year effective
January 1 of each year and until December 31 of the same year and until the
appointment and qualification of his successor.
§ 2-22.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 911 § 4]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be paid an annual salary as provided
in the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and such other
reasonable compensation for additional services performed only if
authorization of the Township Committee is first secured.
§ 2-22.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 911 § 5]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall, under the supervision of the
Township Attorney, appear in the Municipal Court in the Township of
Neptune on behalf of the State of New Jersey or the Township of Neptune
in any case therein pending on request of the Judge of the Municipal Court,
the Council member in charge of the Police Department and upon directive
of the Township Committee.
The Prosecutor shall exercise such powers and duties as are assigned to
such office by the Statutes of New Jersey and such other authority as may
be assigned by the Township Committee.
§ 2-23. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-23.1. Office Created. [Ord. No. 1393 § 1]
There is hereby created the Office of Public Defender within the Township.
§ 2-23.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 1393 § 2]
The Public Defender shall be an Attorney-at-Law of the State of New Jersey.
The Public Defender does not need be a resident of the Township.
§ 2-22 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-23.3
1:40
§ 2-23.3. Appointment; Term. [Ord. No. 1393 §§ 2, 3]
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, appoint a Public Defender, including the filling of a vacancy in
the office which shall be for the unexpired term only. The term of office of
the Public Defender shall be for one (1) year, commencing on January 1 and
terminating on December 31 of the same year and until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified.
§ 2-23.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 1393 § 5]
§ 2-23.5. Fee for Representation. [Ord. No. 1651 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
98-13 § 1; Ord. No. 11-43]
§ 2-23.6. Absence of Public Defender. [Ord. No. 98-13 § 1]
Should the appointed Public Defender be unable to represent an indigent
defendant as a result of a conflict or as a result of absence due to illness,
alternate counsel shall be named by the Municipal Judge from a list
established by the Township Committee. The hourly rate for persons serving
as substitute Public Defender shall be set by resolution of the Township
Committee.
§ 2-24. through § 2-30. (RESERVED)
a. The Public Defender shall have, possess and exercise all of the
functions, duties, powers, and jurisdiction of a Public Defender as
provided by general law and ordinance.
b. The duties of the Public Defender shall be to defend all cases within the
jurisdiction of the Court brought against indigent defendants in the
Municipal Court of the Township whenever such defendants are
entitled to such representation by law or whenever such representation
is deemed necessary and desirable in the interest of justice and in the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. In every instance the
Public Defender shall be assigned to each case by order of the Court.
a. The Township of Neptune pays for the services rendered to an indigent
defendant by the Township Public Defender.
b. The Public Defender fee shall be set forth as two hundred ($200.00)
dollars per case made payable to the Township of Neptune.
c. The Municipal Court Judge may waive any such required application fee
in whole or in part, if the court determines in its discretion, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking such representation.
§ 2-23.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:41

ARTICLE IV
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 2-31. POSITIONS ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-31.1. Development Coordinator. [Ord. No. 912 §§ 1—5]
§ 2-31.2. Special Project Coordinator. [Ord. No. 1003 A VII]
a. Position Created. There is hereby created the position of Development
Coordinator in the Township.
b. Appointment; Term. The Development Coordinator shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Township Committee for the term
of one (1) year effective January 1 of each year and until December 31
of the same year and until appointment and qualification of his
successor.
c. Compensation. The Development Coordinator shall be paid such annual
salary as provided for in the current municipal budget and Salary
Ordinance and such other reasonable compensation for additional
services performed only after authorization of the Township Committee
is secured.
d. Duties. The duties of the Development Coordinator shall be as follows:
1. Make recommendation to and advise the Mayor and Township
Committee on all matters regarding urban renewal and matters
involving commercial and industrial development.
2. Act as liaison between the Mayor and Township Committee, the
Urban Renewal Administration of the Housing and Home Finance
Agency of the United States of America and the planning
consultant of the Township of Neptune.
3. Integrate and coordinate the activities of Planning Consultant of
the Township of Neptune, the Planning Board and the Citizens
Advisory Committee or Urban Renewal Development relating to
commercial and industrial development.
4. The Development Coordinator shall in all matters, act under the
direction and supervision and subject to the approval of the
Township Committee.
a. Findings. It is deemed to be in the best interest of the Township to
create the position of Special Project Coordinator in order to avail itself
of the various sources of municipal funding from County, State and
Federal programs; and, it is advisable for the Township, because of the
complexity of its continued growth, to examine on a regular basis the
various available funding programs and projects and coordinate
therewith, the activities of the various departments of the Township to
assure the efficient and economical operation thereof. The ability of the
§ 2-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31.2
1:43
Township to qualify for these various funding programs and projects
depends on the availability of a representative of the Township to
attend the various conferences on these programs and to prepare
and personally present applications on behalf of the Township. It is
necessary in order to obtain the maximum benefits from these
programs that the Township have a person with expertise in this field to
advise the members of the governing body and to instruct the Business
Administrator together with other department heads on the scope and
benefits of the various funding programs and projects and to
recommend implementation by the Township. The Township Committee
of the Township of Neptune has determined that it is necessary for the
continued efficient operation of the Township that they provide for the
appointment of a Special Project Coordinator thereto.
b. Office Created. The Office of Special Project Coordinator is hereby
created in and for the Township pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
c. Appointment; Expiration of Term. A Special Project Coordinator shall
be appointed by the Township Committee and shall hold office until
December 31 next following his/her appointment.
1. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by appointment of the
Township Committee for the unexpired portion of the term only.
2. Absence or Disability. During the absence or disability of the
Special Project Coordinator, the Township Committee may, by
resolution, appoint an officer or regular employee of the Township
to perform such duties of the Special Project Coordinator during
such absence or disability. Such absence or disability shall be
limited to three (3) months after which time the office may be
deemed vacant.
d. Qualifications. The Special Project Coordinator shall be appointed on
the basis of his/her executive and administrative ability and
qualifications; with special regard to education, training and
experience in governmental affairs, including the interworking of
governmental agencies and boards.
e. Supervision by Business Administrator. The Special Project Coordinator
shall be under the supervision of and responsible to, the Business
Administrator for all actions relevant to the duties and responsibilities
of his/her office to the extent not prohibited by law.
f. Reimbursement of Expenses; Compensation. The Special Project
Coordinator shall be reimbursed for such expenses as shall be
authorized by the Business Administrator. Those expenses incurred in
accordance with this section shall be paid from available funds in the
current budget.
§ 2-31.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-31.2
1:44
The Special Project Coordinator shall receive no other compensation
for any services performed unless the service and the compensation is
authorized by resolution by the Township Committee.
g. The Special Project Coordinator, for the purpose of carrying out his/her
responsibilities, shall continuously examine and study any and all State
and Federal funding programs and submit recommendations to the
Business Administrator for review and consideration prior to
presentation to the Township Committee.
1. Nothing in this section shall be construed to the Special Project
Coordinator any authority to commit or obligate the Township
Committee or the Township of Neptune to any program or project
in any manner whatsoever, without first being authorized by official
resolution adopted by a majority vote of the governing body.
2. The Special Project Coordinator shall see that all terms and
conditions of any funding program, project or contract to which the
Township of Neptune is obligated by reason of its participation in
any of such programs, are faithfully kept and performed and that
any violations are called to the attention of the Business
Administrator.
3. The Special Project Coordinator shall survey and make studies of
such municipal problems of the Township as may be assigned to
him by the Business Administrator, and he/she shall prepare and
submit written reports of his findings and determinations to the
Business Administrator for his consideration and action. The
Special Project Coordinator shall be responsible to see that any
complaints concerning the functions and obligations of the
Township relating to any funding programs or projects made by any
of its residents, are attended to promptly; that a written record is
kept of such complaints when made, and the date and nature of the
action taken in response thereto.
4. The Special Project Coordinator shall perform such other duties as
may be assigned specifically to him/her by the Business
Administrator.
5. The Special Project Coordinator shall attend all public meetings of
the Township Committee and such other meetings as requested by
the Business Administrator.
6. The Special Project Coordinator shall keep the Business
Administrator informed in writing as to all Federal aid projects,
State aid projects and any other aid programs for which the
Township may qualify.
h. Powers of Appointed Officials Not Derogated. Nothing in this section
shall derogate from or authorize the Special Project Coordinator to
exercise the powers and duties of the elected and appointed officials or
employees.
§ 2-31.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31.3
1:45
§ 2-31.3. Children's Librarian. [Ord. No. 851 §§ 1—3]
§ 2-31.4. Director of Recreation. [Ord. No. 552 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-31.5. Office of Emergency Management.7 [Ord. No. 913; New]
a. The position of Children's Librarian in the Township is hereby
established.
b. The Children's Librarian shall perform such services in that section of
the Township's Library devoted to children's books, periodicals and
activities as shall be prescribed by resolution of the Township
Committee.
c. The annual salary of the Children's Librarian shall be established in the
Salary Ordinance.
a. The position of Director of Recreation in the Township is hereby
established.
b. The Director of Recreation shall perform such services as shall be
prescribed by resolution of the Township Committee.
c. The salary of the Director of Recreation shall be established in the
Salary Ordinance.
a. Creation of Office. In compliance with N.J.S.A. Appendix A:9-40.6, et
seq., the Mayor shall appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator
who shall be a resident of the Township for a term of three (3) years.
b. Qualifications. At the time of his or her appointment or within one (1)
year following, the appointee shall be qualified as required in Appendix
A:9-40.1.
c. Duties. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible
for the planning, activating, coordinating, and the conduct of
emergency management operations within the Township.
d. Deputy. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint a
Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator with the approval of the
Mayor. Whenever possible such Deputy shall be appointed from among
the salaried officers or employees of the Township.
e. Compensation. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be paid
such salary as provided in the Salary Ordinance.
f. Proclamation of State of Local Disaster Emergency; Powers of
Coordinator. Whenever, in the opinion of the Coordinator, a disaster has
occurred or is imminent in the Township, the Emergency Management
Coordinator shall proclaim a state of local disaster emergency within
7. Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted as Ord. No. 913, entitled An Ordinance
to Establish an Office of Civil Defense, which was subsequently revised to conform to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1 et seq.
§ 2-31.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-31.5
1:46
§ 2-31.6. Emergency Management Council. [New]
An Emergency Management Council shall be created. The Emergency
Management Council shall be composed of not more than fifteen (15)
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office at the
will and pleasure of the Mayor. The Emergency Management Coordinator
shall be a member and shall serve as chairman of the Emergency
Management Council. The Emergency Management Council shall perform
such duties as required in accordance with N.J.S.A. Appendix A:9-40.6.
§ 2-32. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON.
§ 2-32.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 06-49 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township of Neptune's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 2-32.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 06-49 § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Shall mean the entity responsible for
administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable
housing program for the Township of Neptune to ensure that the restricted
units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented,
as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — Shall mean the employee charged by
the governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Township of Neptune.
§ 2-32.3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position and
Compensation; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 06-49 § 1]
the Township. The Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance
with regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency
Management, shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders as
may be necessary to implement and carry out emergency management
operations and to protect the health, safety, and resources of the
residents of the Township.
No representative of any Township shall request aid in time of disaster
or emergency directly from noncontiguous municipalities unless and
until such aid has been directed by the County Emergency Management
Coordinator or his/her deputies. Specific exemptions from the action of
this section may be granted only by authority of the State Director of
Emergency Management.
§ 2-31.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32.3
1:47
a. Establishment of Position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Township
of Neptune.
b. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Governing
Body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
c. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
Neptune, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
1. Serving as the Township of Neptune's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents, and interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Neptune's Fair Share Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable;
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
6. If applicable, serving as the Administrative Agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Township of Neptune as described in
paragraph f below.
d. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Neptune may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the Governing Body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Township of Neptune. If the Township of Neptune contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing
Plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
Administrative Agent.
e. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Governing Body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
f. Administrative Powers and Duties Assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
1. Affirmative Marketing.
§ 2-32.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-32.3
1:48
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Neptune and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low and moderate income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
2. Household Certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or ineligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Neptune when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
3. Affordability Controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate County's Register of Deeds or
County Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability
controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
§ 2-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32.3
1:49
(e) Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resale and Rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
Administrative Agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
5. Processing Request from Unit Owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the Administrative
Agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
§ 2-32.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-32.3
1:50
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
7. The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 2-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32.3
1:51

ARTICLE V
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT
§ 2-33. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-33.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 329; New]
There is hereby established in the Township of Neptune pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:8-1, as amended and supplemented, a Municipal Court which shall be
entitled the "Municipal Court of the Township of Neptune."
§ 2-33.2. Seal of the Court. [Ord. No. 329; New]
The Municipal Court of the Township of Neptune shall have a seal which
shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 2-33.3. Judge of the Municipal Court. [New]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by Township Committee. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall
serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of his/her appointment and
until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill
a vacancy caused other than by expiration of term shall be made for the
unexpired term only.
§ 2-33.4. Functions, Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction. [New]
The Municipal Court shall have, possess and exercise all the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction, both territorial and subject matter, in such
matters as conferred upon the Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, et seq., as
amended and supplemented, and by any other Acts of the State Legislature.
§ 2-33.5. Compensation. [New]
The salary of the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be an annual salary as
established by the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-33.6. Municipal Court Administrator and Personnel. [New]
The Mayor and Township Committee shall provide for a Municipal Court
Administrator, Deputy Court Administrator and, any other necessary
clerical and other assistants as may be required for the Municipal Court.
Compensation for the Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy County
Administrator and other Court personnel shall be established by the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33.6
1:53

ARTICLE VI
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
§ 2-34. BOARD OF HEALTH.8
§ 2-34.1. Established.
There shall be established in this Township a Board of Health, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 26:3-10.
§ 2-34.2. Members; Terms. [Ord. No. 5 § 2; Ord. No. 574 §§ 1—2]
The Board of Health shall be composed of six (6) members to be appointed
by the Township Committee. All appointments shall be appointed for a term
of three (3) years.
§ 2-34.3. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 5 § 3]
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its government,
and shall elect a President from its members.
§ 2-34.4. Appointment of Secretary and Sanitation Inspector. [Ord.
No. 5 § 4]
The Board of Health may appoint a Secretary and such other officers and
assistants as the Board of Health may deem necessary.
§ 2-34.5. Removal of Members. [Ord. No. 5 § 5]
The appointees of the Board of Health shall be governed by the rules of said
Board, and may be removed for cause by the Board.
§ 2-34.6. Appropriation of Funds. [Ord. No. 5 § 6]
The Board of Health shall not contract for any debts of any kind beyond the
amount of the appropriation made for its use by the Township Committee.
§ 2-34.7. Registrar of Vital Statistics. [New]
There shall be a Registrar of Vital Statistics. The Registrar of Vital Statistics
shall have charge of the administration duties involved in obtaining reports
of and recording births, marriages and deaths in the Township, together
with such related work as may be required in accordance with general law
and ordinances of the Township.
§ 2-35. (RESERVED)9
8. Editor's Note: The Board of Health joined the Monmouth County Board of Health by
resolution on January 14, 1982.
9. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-35, Shade Tree Commission, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 626 and 00-50 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 05-31. See Section 2-39 for the Environmental/Shade Tree Commission.
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36
1:55
§ 2-36. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-36.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 494 Preamble]
There exists in the Township insanitary or unsafe dwelling accommodations
and persons of low income who are forced to reside in such insanitary or
unsafe accommodations. There is a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling
accommodations available at rents which persons of low income can afford
and such persons are forced to occupy overcrowded and congested dwelling
accommodations. These conditions cause an increase in and spread of
disease and crime and constitute a menace to the health, safety, morale
and welfare of the residents of the Township, and impair economic values.
These conditions necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures
of public funds for crime prevention and punishment, public health and
safety, fire and accident protection, and other public services and facilities.
These areas in the Township cannot be cleared, nor can the shortage of safe
and sanitary dwellings for persons of low income be relieved, through the
operation of private enterprise, and the construction of housing projects for
persons of low income (as defined in the Local Housing Authorities Law)
would therefore not be competitive with private enterprise. The clearance,
replanning and reconstruction of the areas in which insanitary or unsafe
housing conditions exist and the providing of safe and sanitary dwelling
accommodations by any public body for persons of low income are public
uses and purposes for which public money may be spent and private
property acquired and are governmental functions. There is a need for
housing for elderly persons of low income.
§ 2-36.2. Creation of Authority; Statutory Authority. [Ord. No. 494
§ 1; Ord. No. 963 § 1; Ord. No. 04-07 § 2]
a. Pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Housing Authorities Law,"
N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 et seq., as amended, a body corporate and politic to be
known as the "Housing Authority of the Township of Neptune," is
hereby created and established.
b. The Authority shall consist of seven (7) members known as
Commissioners, who shall be appointed and hold office for the terms as
hereinafter provided.
c. The Township Committee shall appoint five (5) Commissioners of the
Authority and the Mayor shall appoint one (1) Commissioner.
d. The Commissioners so appointed shall hold office for a term of five (5)
years and until their respective successors are appointed and have
qualified except that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
e. The Director of the Public Housing and Development Authority in the
State Department of Conservation and Economic Development shall
appoint one (1) member who shall serve at his pleasure.
§ 2-36 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-36.2
1:56
§ 2-36.3. Filing of Copies. [Ord. No. 494 § II]
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this section with the executive officer of the Public Housing and
Development Authority in the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development.
§ 2-36.4. Township Committee Authorized to Carry Out
Redevelopment Projects. [Ord. No. 997 §§ 2, 3]
§ 2-37. NEPTUNE SEWERAGE AUTHORITY.
§ 2-37.1. Authority Created; Title. [Ord. No. 873 § 1]
There is hereby created and established a Sewerage Authority for the
Township under the corporate name entitled "Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority."
§ 2-37.2. Powers of Authority. [Ord. No. 873 § 2]
The Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority shall be permitted in its
powers to install, maintain and operate regional trunk mains, regional
force mains, regional pumping stations, regional treatment plant, regional
out-fall line, and appurtenant facilities for the purposes of collecting and
treating the sewage from sewer lines and mains installed, maintained,
f. Not more than one (1) Commissioner of any Authority may be an officer
or employee of the Township of Neptune.
g. A certificate of appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner
shall be filed with the Township Clerk and such certificates shall be
conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such
Commissioner.
h. The prohibition of employment practices (Chapter 9, subsection 9-1.22
of this Code) shall be added to subsection (d) of the Housing Authority
Code, so that the foregoing shall apply to the appointment of members
to the Neptune Township Housing Authority as made by the Neptune
Township Committee and/or Mayor of Neptune Township, and to all
hiring or appointments of any and all employees within the Authority
made by the members of the Authority.
a. As authorized by N.J.S.A. 55:14A-56, the Township of Neptune through
its Township Committee is hereby authorized to carry out
redevelopment projects as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:14A-31 et seq; to act
therein as the "Local Public Agency" and to exercise and carry out all
the rights, powers, privileges and immunities conferred by said law.
b. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this section with the State Commission of Conservation and
Economic Development.
§ 2-36.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37.2
1:57
and operated and controlled by the municipalities consisting of Neptune
Township, Neptune City, Bradley Beach, Avon-by-the-Sea, and the Ocean
Grove Camp Meeting Association of the United Methodist Church, the
Township of Wall, and the Borough of New Shrewsbury all located within
the Neptune region.
§ 2-37.3. Appointment of Members. [Ord. No. 873 § 3; Ord. No.
04-07 § 3; Ord. No. 04-10 § 1]
The members of the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority shall be
hereafter appointed by resolution of the Township Committee in the manner
provided in Chapter 138 of the Laws of New Jersey of 1946, as amended,
and each member shall receive such compensation not in excess of two
thousand ($2,000.00) dollars, and the Chairman not in excess of two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars in any one (1) year as shall
hereafter be determined by the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority.
The prohibition of employment practices (Chapter 9, subsection 9-1.22 of
this Code) shall be added to the Code governing the Neptune Township
Sewerage Authority, so that the foregoing shall apply to the appointment
of members to the Neptune Township Sewerage Authority as made by the
Neptune Township Committee and/or Mayor of Neptune Township, and to
all hiring or appointments of any and all employees within the Authority
made by the members of the Authority.
Members of the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority shall be ineligible
for enrollment in any New Jersey State Health Benefits Program, any other
health benefits program, any drug prescription program or any dental
program.
§ 2-37.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 873 § 4]
The Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority shall have and exercise all
of the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by Chapter 138
of the Laws of New Jersey of 1946 as amended, together with any other
powers and duties which may hereafter be conferred by law upon Sewerage
Authorities, as limited by the provisions of subsection 2-37.2.
§ 2-37.5. Filing of Copy. [Ord. No. 873 § 5]
A copy of this section duly certified by the Township Clerk shall forthwith
be filed by the Township Clerk in the Office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 2-38. (RESERVED)
§ 2-39. ENVIRONMENTAL/SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-37.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-39.1
1:58
§ 2-39.1. Commission Established; Purpose. [Ord. No. 925 § 1; Ord.
No. 05-31 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A et seq., there is hereby established in and for
the Township, an Environmental/Shade Tree Commission. The Commission
is established for the protection, development, or use of natural resources,
including water resources, open land areas, areas of scenic, historic,
aesthetic, or educational and scientific value within the territorial limits of
the Township.
§ 2-39.2. Members; Appointment; Removal. [Ord. No. 925 § 2; Ord.
No. 98-1 § 1; Ord. No. 05-31 § 2]
The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the other members of the Township
Committee, one (1) of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board
and all of whom shall be residents of the Township. The members shall
serve without compensation. The Commission shall designate one (1) of the
members to serve as chairperson and presiding officer of the Commission.
The terms of office of the first commissioners shall be three (3) members for
a one (1) year term, three (3) members for a two (2) year term, and three (3)
members for a three (3) year term. Their successors shall be appointed to
terms of three (3) years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors.
The Commission shall also consist of two (2) alternate members appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the other members of the
Township Committee. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except that the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be two (2) years for Alternate No. 1
and one (1) year for Alternate No. 2.
The Township Committee may remove any member of the Commission for
cause on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at this the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
Any member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she
has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 2-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-39.3
1:59
§ 2-39.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 925 § 3; Ord. No. 05-31 § 2]
The Commission shall prepare and maintain a Natural Resource Inventory
and shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas and may recommend plans and
programs to the Planning Board and Township Committee for inclusion into
the Township Master Development Plan and for the development and use of
such areas.
The Commission shall have the power to study and to make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, waste resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna. The Commission may coordinate and
support the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes,
and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes.
The Commission shall have such other powers and duties of environmental
commissions as are now or shall hereafter be provided for by State Statute.
The Commission shall regulate the planting, care and control of shade
and ornamental trees and shrubbery upon or in the highways, parks, or
parkways of the Township.
§ 2-39.4. (Reserved)10
§ 2-39.5. Records and Annual Report. [Ord. No. 925 § 5; Ord. No.
05-31 § 2]
The Commission shall keep agenda and minutes of its meetings and records
of its activities and make an annual report to the Township Committee.
§ 2-39.6. Appropriations. [Ord. No. 925 § 6; Ord. No. 05-31 § 2]
The Commission may incur expenses as are appropriate and necessary to its
purposes providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the Township Committee.
§ 2-40. (RESERVED)
§ 2-41. WESLEY LAKE COMMISSION.
§ 2-41.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1373 Preamble; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1]
The Township of Neptune has been meeting with the City of Asbury Park
for the purpose of creating a joint work plan for the improvement of Wesley
Lake. The State has made appropriations in the amount of $270,000.00 for
10.Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-39.4, Acquisitions by Commission, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 925, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 05-31.
§ 2-39.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-41.1
1:60
improvements to Wesley Lake. Wesley Lake borders both the City of Asbury
Park and the Township of Neptune. A proposed Agreement of Charter of the
Wesley Lake Commission establishes the purposes and responsibilities of
the intermunicipal body; and the agreement has been amended to add the
change of Item 5A, 3 to state that the appointment of the representatives
will be by the governing body of each municipality. The Agreement of
Charter embodies the mutual understandings between the City of Asbury
Park and the Township of Neptune. The "Agreement of Charter of the
Wesley Lake Commission" is made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48B-1 et seq.
and which was forwarded to the Township of Neptune for its approval, a
copy of which is on file in the Office of the Township Clerk and is hereby
incorporated herein by reference. The Township Committee has reviewed
this Agreement and deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the
Township of Neptune to be a party to the Commission.
§ 2-41.2. Creation and Participation. [Ord. No. 1373 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-12, § 1]
The Township of Neptune has agreed to create and participate in the Wesley
Lake Commission. The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized to
execute an agreement known as the "Agreement of Charter of the Wesley
Lake Commission."
§ 2-41.3. Amendments. [Ord. No. 1373 § 3; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1; Ord.
No. 2015-50]
The Agreement of Charter of the Wesley Lake Commission dated July 14,
2015, shall be the official and adopted Agreement of Charter and that
appointments to the Commission will be by the Governing Body of each
municipality unless expressly stated otherwise in said Agreement of
Charter.
§ 2-42. FLETCHER LAKE COMMISSION.
§ 2-42.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 1567 Preamble]
The Township of Neptune has been meeting with the Borough of Bradley
Beach for the purpose of creating a joint work plan for the improvement of
Fletcher Lake. Fletcher Lake borders both the Borough of Bradley Beach
and the Township of Neptune. A proposed Agreement of Charter of The
Fletcher Lake Commission establishes the purposes and responsibilities of
the intermunicipal body. The Agreement of Charter embodies the mutual
understandings between the Borough of Bradley Beach and the Township of
Neptune; and the "Agreement of Charter of The Fletcher Lake Commission"
is made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48B-1 et seq. and which was forwarded
to the Township of Neptune for its approval, a copy of which is on file
in the Office of the Township Clerk and is hereby incorporated herein
by reference. The Township Committee has reviewed this Agreement and
deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township of Neptune to
be a party to said Commission.
§ 2-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-42.2
1:61
§ 2-42.2. Execution of Agreement. [Ord. 1567 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-43. NEPTUNE URBAN DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE GRANT
RECIPROCAL LOAN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
§ 2-43.1. Committee Established. [Ord. No. 1125 § 2; Ord. No. 1444
§ 1; Ord. No. 1527 § 1; Ord. 99-38 § 1]
There is hereby established a Neptune Urban Development Assistance
Grant (The U.D.A.G.) Reciprocal Loan Review Committee which will act
as a subcommittee of the Neptune Township Economic Development
Corporation (the EDC). This Committee shall be made up of seven (7)
members appointed by the EDC and shall consist of the following:
§ 2-43.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1125 § 3; Ord. No. 99-38 § 1]
The Neptune EDC will establish program guidelines; setting forth
application procedures, eligibility and terms and conditions, to be referred
as recommendations to the Neptune Township Committee for adoption by
resolution or ordinance.
§ 2-43.3. Reciprocal Loan Program Under Federal Housing and
Community Development Act. [Ord. No. 1125 Preamble, §§ 1, 4]
a. The Township of Neptune has agreed to create and participate in The
Fletcher Lake Commission.
b. The Mayor and Township Clerk be and they are hereby authorized to
execute an agreement known as the "Agreement of Charter of The
Fletcher Lake Commission."
a. One (1) member of the Township Committee for a like term, consistent
with his/her elected position.
b. The Township Business Administrator for same term as his/her position.
c. The EDC President or his/her designee for a one (1) year term.
d. Three (3) EDC members or citizens of the Township of Neptune for a
term of one (1) year.
e. The Township Chief Financial Officer for same term as his/her position.
a. Findings. Under Section 119 of the Federal Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974 as amended, and also known as the Urban
Development Action Grant Program, the Township of Neptune has and
will receive grant monies for various commercial and industrial
projects; and, the Township has loaned grant monies to approved
developers in accordance with Urban Development Action Grant
guidelines. These funds are to be repaid with varying rates of interest to
the Township; and, Section 119 of the Federal Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-383) as amended, requires
§ 2-42.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-43.3
1:62
§ 2-44. FACADE REVIEW COMMITTEE/FACADE IMPROVEMENT
LOAN/GRANT PROGRAM.
§ 2-44.1. Committee Authorized. [Ord. No. 00-3 § 1]
There is hereby authorized a Facade Review Committee which shall be
appointed by the members of the Neptune Township Economic
Development Corporation to administer the Facade Improvement Loan/
Grant Program.
§ 2-44.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 00-3 § 1]
The Facade Review Committee will establish application guidelines and
procedures and terms and conditions of loans and grants so authorized.
Grants and loans awarded under this program are for exterior
improvements only. Any combination of the following are eligible:
Chemical/steam cleaning.
Graffiti removal and shielding glaze.
New awnings.
Code violation eradication.
Wall repair including repair and installation of decorative details.
Painting.
Window repair and replacement.
Door repair and replacement.
Exterior lighting.
Miscellaneous facade improvement.
Signs.
that these funds be used for future development projects within the
Township of Neptune, pursuant to that Section.
b. Account Established. All monies and interest repaid to the Township of
Neptune in accordance with the U.D.A.G. guidelines will be deposited
by the Treasurer in an interest-bearing account entitled "Neptune
U.D.A.G. Reciprocal Loan Program," which will be self-perpetuating,
and not to be a part of the Township's Surplus, General Fund, or other
various accounts.
c. Program Established. A Reciprocal Loan Program will be established to
assist prospective developers by offering reduced interest loans,
pursuant to Section 119 of the Federal Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-383) as amended.
§ 2-43.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44.3
1:63
§ 2-44.3. Eligibility Criteria. [Ord. No. 00-3 § 1]
The following criteria must be met to be eligible for a Facade Improvement
Loan/Grant Program:
§ 2-44.4. Available Assistance. [Ord. No. 00-3 § 1; Ord. No. 01-15
§ 1; Ord. No. 02-10 § 1; Ord. No. 03-10 § 1]
The Facade Improvement Loan/Grant Program will provide the following
assistance opportunities:
a. The owner of eligible property must not have any delinquent property
taxes on the eligible property and any other property owned in the
Township of Neptune. Businesses leasing property with delinquent
taxes will be considered for the program. Program approval for
properties which the owner owes property taxes or other fees to the
Township will be granted by resolution of the Township Committee.
b. The eligible property and all other properties owned by the eligible
property owner must be in compliance with all property maintenance
codes or a corrective action plan.
c. Applicant and contractor agree to use the Township's Facade
Construction Agreement.
d. Applicant and owner agree to maintain the facade for five (5) years
after completion of the improvements.
e. Applicant completes the required application and receives approval
from the Facade Review Committee.
f. Any other criteria as established by the Economic Development
Corporation.
g. Compliance with all applicable requirements for project approvals as
are required by Township ordinances and State statutes.
a. One-to-One Grant/Private Investment Financing. Funding must have a
leverage ratio of not less than one ($1.00) dollar of private sector
funding for every one ($1.00) dollar of grant funding. Maximum grant
funding shall be five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars per store-front. Once
per annum, the Facade Review Committee will accept competitive
applications and award up to ten (10) grants per annum up to a
maximum of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars.
b. Three-to-One Loan/Private Investment Financing. Funding must have a
leverage ratio of not less than one ($1.00) dollar of private sector
funding for every three ($3.00) dollars of loan funding. Loan will be
payable in quarterly, semi-annual or annual installments at a rate of fifty
(50%) percent of the prime lending rate at the time of the application
approval. Maximum loan amount shall be five thousand ($5,000.00)
dollars per store front.
§ 2-44.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-44.4
1:64
§ 2-44.5. Application Process/Procedures. [Ord. No. 00-3 § 1]
The application procedures and application review process shall be set by
the Facade Review Committee. A Facade Improvement Loan/Grant Program
application shall be prepared and made available by the Committee.
§ 2-45. PROJECT ANCHOR COMMITTEE.
§ 2-45.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 00-46 § 1]
The Project ANCHOR Committee will administer a program to provide
counseling and mentoring along with diverse and interest laden activities
for referred Neptune elementary students in grades kindergarten through
fifth grade in order to improve social skills, behavior, self-esteem and
academics.
§ 2-45.2. Committee Authorized. [Ord. No. 00-46 § 1]
There is hereby authorized a Project ANCHOR Committee. The Committee
shall be made up of thirteen (13) members and shall consist of the following:
§ 2-45.3. Appointment. [Ord. No. 00-46 § 1]
The members shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee.
The members shall serve without compensation. Initial appointment of
c. Combination Grant/Loan Financing. Maximum amount of seven
thousand five hundred ($7,500.00) dollars per storefront, of which two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars can be granted in
accordance with the terms of paragraph a in this subsection and the
balance in accordance with terms of paragraph b in this subsection.
a. One (1) member of the Township Committee.
b. Two (2) representatives of Jersey Shore Medical Center.
c. Three (3) representatives of the Neptune Township Board of Education.
d. One (1) member of the Neptune Township Police Department.
e. One (1) representative of the Neptune Housing Authority.
f. One (1) representative of the Neptune Township Finance Department.
g. One (1) representative of the Neptune Township Municipal Alliance
Against Alcoholism and Drug Abuse.
h. One (1) representative of the clergy of Neptune Township.
i. One (1) citizen member at-large.
j. One (1) member of the Neptune Township business community at-large.
§ 2-44.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-45.3
1:65
members shall be for a term of office of three (3) years; thereafter
appointments shall be made for a term of one (1) year.
§ 2-45.4. Organization and Officers. [Ord. No. 00-46 § 1]
The members of the Project ANCHOR Committee shall conduct an annual
reorganization at which time from among the membership a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer shall be selected.
§ 2-46. TREE PLANTING MATCHING GRANT PROGRAM.
§ 2-46.1. Commission Authorized. [Ord. No. 02-9 § 1]
The Shade Tree Commission is hereby authorized to administer the Tree
Planting Matching Grant Program pursuant to rules, regulations and
guidelines established by the Business Administrator and Chief Financial
Officer.
§ 2-46.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 02-9 § 1]
The Business Administrator and Chief Financial Officer will establish
application guidelines and procedures and terms and conditions of
matching grants so authorized. The Township Committee shall approve all
matching grants by resolution.
§ 2-46.3. Eligibility Criteria. [Ord. No. 02-9 § 1; Ord. No. 08-32 § 1]
The following criteria must be met to be eligible for a Tree Planting
Matching Grant:
a. Any homeowner with property located within the Township who
satisfies all of the eligibility criteria and who does not have any
delinquent property taxes on the eligible property or any other property
owned in the Township of Neptune.
b. Applicant must agree to utilize the Township's Tree Planting
Agreement, select a species of tree as recommended by the Shade Tree
Commission and ensure that all work and materials are in compliance
with the specifications of the Agreement.
c. Applicant must agree to maintain the tree(s) planted under this
program.
d. Applicant is responsible for picking up the tree(s) from Township
vendor and planting trees within fourteen (14) days of approval.
e. Funds shall be utilized for a specific species of trees selected from a list
maintained by the Shade Tree Commission. Trees will be purchased
from an approved Township vendor. The Township has acquired special
pricing from local vendors who are required to maintain an adequate
stock of trees for this program.
§ 2-45.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-46.3
1:66
§ 2-46.4. Available Assistance. [Ord. No. 02-9 § 1; Ord. No. 08-32
§ 1]
The Tree Planting Matching Grant Program will provide a one-to-one grant
for the acquisition of trees to be planted in the front yard of a residence
(as defined by Township Zoning regulations) or in the Township right-of-way
when approved by the Department of Public Works. Each project considered
for funding must have a leverage ratio of not less than one ($1.00) dollar
of private sector funding for every one ($1.00) dollar of grant funding.
Grant funding shall be available at a minimum of fifty ($50.00) dollars and a
maximum of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per home. Sales tax will not
be counted when calculating the local or grant share.
§ 2-46.5. Application Process/Procedures. [Ord. No. 02-9 § 1]
The application procedures and application review process shall be set by
the Business Administrator and Chief Financial Officer, with the consent
of the Township Committee. Tree Planting Matching Grant Program
applications shall be made available by the Commission.
§ 2-47. (RESERVED)11
f. The Township of Neptune, with guidance from the Shade Tree
Commission, will pay the Township's share to the vendor in accordance
with the terms of the contract with the vendor. The applicant must pay
the applicant's share of the cost of tree acquisition at the time of pickup
from the vendor. The applicant also has the option to pay the entire cost
of tree acquisition at the time of pick-up from the vendor in which case
the Township will reimburse the applicant for the Township's share.
g. Tree(s) must be planted in the front yard of the residence, or in the
Township right-of-way as approved by the Department of Public Works,
in accordance with the plan approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
h. The homeowner is responsible for obtaining all required permits and
approvals and must allow a Township Inspector to inspect the property,
unannounced, during the course of work.
i. Applicant must receive both Shade Tree Commission and Township
Committee approval.
j. Should the homeowner fail to comply with Township requirements, the
homeowner will be notified in writing that the full amount of the
Township share of the costs under this program must be reimbursed to
the Township within thirty (30) days of said notification or the amount
due will become a municipal lien against the property.
k. The Township accepts no responsibility for damages in connection with
this program.
11.Editor's Note: Section 2-47, Neptune Harbor Commission was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2016-04.
§ 2-46.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-48
1:67
§ 2-48. HUMAN RELATIONS COMMITTEE.
§ 2-48.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 07-35 § 1]
The Human Relations Committee will promote, through education,
awareness and outreach programs, the diversity of the human relations
spirit among the citizens of the Township of Neptune so as to foster good
will, cooperation and respect among all diverse groups. The Committee
will endeavor to encourage board community involvement to educate its
citizens and protect its citizens while advocating the equality of life for
all Neptune citizens who share the diversity of race, creed, color, national
origin, nationality, ancestry, age, sex, affectional or sexual orientation,
marital status, civil union status, liability for service in the armed forces,
mental or physical handicap or disability. The Committee will be charged
with maintaining and preserving the principles of fairness in which every
citizen is entitled and shall do so through education and promotion of good
will, cooperation and equal opportunity in social, employment, recreational
and community activities. The Committee will foster participation,
cooperation and conciliation among all and commit itself to the elimination
of ignorance, bias and discrimination.
§ 2-48.2. Committee Authorized. [Ord. No. 07-35 § 1]
Membership to the Committee is open to all residents of the Township.
The number of members shall be unlimited. There will be efforts made to
include, but not be limited to, participation from the following groups:
a. Neptune Township Committee.
b. Neptune Township Police Department.
c. Neptune Township Municipal Clerk.
d. Neptune Township Board of Education members and faculty.
e. Junior Class representative.
f. Senior Class representative.
g. Local civic organizations.
h. Local religious organizations.
i. Neptune Senior Center.
j. JSUMC Mental Health Worker.
k. Social Services.
l. Neptune Township Housing Authority.
§ 2-48 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-48.3
1:68
§ 2-48.3. Appointment. [Ord. No. 07-35 § 1]
Members of the Committee shall be appointed by resolution of the Township
Committee. The members shall serve without compensation and serve for a
term of one (1) year.
§ 2-48.4. Organization and Officers. [Ord. No. 07-35 § 1]
The members of the Human Relations Committee shall conduct an annual
reorganization at which time from among the membership a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary shall be selected.
§ 2-49. through § 2-54. (RESERVED)
§ 2-48.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-49
1:69

ARTICLE VII
ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ 2-55. PURCHASING MANUAL.12
§ 2-55.1. Manual Adopted. [Ord. No. 96-41 § 1; Ord. No. 00-14 § 1]
The Township of Neptune Purchasing Manual, dated March 27, 2000, a copy
of which is on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk, be and is hereby
adopted as the Official Purchasing Manual and Purchasing Procedures of
the Township of Neptune, County of Monmouth, New Jersey.
§ 2-56. REQUIRING THE PAYMENT OF TAXES AND LIENS PRIOR
TO PAYMENT OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS.13
§ 2-56.1. Certificate of Search for Municipal Liens Required Prior to
Distribution of Funds. [Ord. No. 1132 § 2]
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in this State shall pay any claims
for fire damages in excess of two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars
on any real property located within the Township unless or until the insured
person submits an official certificate of search for municipal liens certifying
that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or charges, levied and
assessed and due and payable against said property have been paid. Any
request pursuant to this section, for an official certificate of search for
municipal liens shall specify that the search concerns fire damage property.
§ 2-56.2. Procedure If Taxes or Assessment Due. [Ord. No. 1132 § 3]
If the municipal search shall reveal the presence of any taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens or charges due and payable, then such amounts
shall be paid by either the owner of such real property or by the insurance
company prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) dollars on such real property
located within the municipality except as provided herein, an insurance
company is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any
claims for fire damages in excess of two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00)
dollars to pay to the municipality the amount of the liens appearing on
the official certificate (tax search) and such other recorded liens or related
charges as may be certified to the insurance company.
12.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-55, Payment of Claims, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 932, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
96-41.
13.Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted by Ord. No. 1075, adopted on August 6,
1975.
§ 2-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-56.3
1:71
§ 2-56.3. Procedure If All Taxes and Liens Are Paid. [Ord. No. 1132
§ 4]
An insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of an
agreement referred to above from the Township Committee is hereby
authorized to make full payment of the claim to the insured person.
§ 2-56.4. Appeal on Amount of Lien. [Ord. No. 1132 § 5]
If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the Court
of record, to be held by the Court in an interest-bearing escrow account
in a banking institution or savings and loan association in this State, in
an amount totaling seventy-five (75%) percent of the full amount of the
lien or charge being contested but not to exceed the proceeds payable
under its insurance policy, and the insurance company shall issue a draft
payable to the Township for the remaining twenty-five (25%) percent of the
lien or charge being contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance
company to the Court and the Township not to exceed the proceeds payable
under its insurance policy pending termination of all proceedings, at which
time such monies and all interest accruing thereon at a rate pay on interestbearing
accounts in banking institutions for savings and loan associations
in this State, shall be disbursed in accordance with final order or judgment
of the Court.
§ 2-56.5. Procedure of Municipal Claim. [Ord. No. 1132 § 6]
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of the holder of a purchase money mortgage held as
a first mortgage or an institutional lender which is a holder of a mortgage
on the fire damage property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of
the loss listed the mortgagee as the holder of an insurable interest, in which
event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to
the municipal lien under this section only to the extent of the amount due
and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract. As used in this
paragraph, "institutional lender" means any bank, savings bank, State or
Federal chartered savings and loan association, or insurance company.
§ 2-56.6. Authority to Enforce Liens Not Impaired. [Ord. No. 1132
§ 7]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of the
Township to enforce a Township lien under any other law of this State.
§ 2-57. PAYMENT OF PAST-DUE TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS
REQUIRED PRIOR TO GRANT OR RENEWAL OF BUSINESS
LICENSE PERMITS.14
§ 2-56.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-57.1
1:72
§ 2-57.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 1509, Preamble]
The Township Committee is empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq.
to make, amend, repeal, and enforce ordinances to license and regulate
business concerns; and the Township is desirous of ensuring that all real
property taxes, assessments and sewer fees are paid in a timely fashion
by the owners of real property who make application for the granting or
renewal of a business license or permit. The Township is empowered to
withhold the granting or renewal of a business license or permit to the
owner of real property who owes back real estate taxes, assessments or
sewer fees for the property where the license is to be maintained or the
permit is sought.
§ 2-57.2. Payment of Taxes and Assessments Required Prior to
Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. No. 1509 § 1]
Neptune Township shall not grant or renew the business license or permit
of an applicant property owner unless the applicant has paid all past-due,
if any, real property taxes, assessments, and sewer fees for the property
where the license is maintained or the permit is sought.
§ 2-57.3. Revocation of Business Licenses or Permits on Failure to
Pay Taxes. [Ord. No. 1509 § 1]
The Township shall be empowered to revoke or suspend the business license
or permit of a property owner who has failed to pay for three (3) consecutive
quarters the real estate taxes, assessments, or sewer fees for the property
where the license is maintained. Upon payment of the same, the license or
permit may be restored.
§ 2-57.4. Applicability. [Ord. No. 02-34 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall apply to all applicants/licensees who
apply for a license or seek a permit in their individual names, in partnership,
with others operating under a partnership name, or as a shareholder/
stockholder, officer or director or a corporation, acting under a corporate
name or designation. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or
include any of the following:
§ 2-58. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION FOR APPLICANT FOR
MEMBERSHIP IN VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY OR FIRST AID
SQUADS.
a. Alcoholic beverage licenses or permits issued pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
b. Construction and subcode licenses or permits issued pursuant to the
State Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5-23 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See Chapter 4, General Licensing.
§ 2-57.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.1
1:73
§ 2-58.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1684 § 1]
This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S. 40:42-1 et seq., The Home Rule
Act, which directs municipalities to act for the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens and to implement N.J.S. 15:8-1.1.
§ 2-58.2. Membership Defined. [Ord. No. 1684 § 2]
Membership in a volunteer fire company means membership in a volunteer
fire company organized pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes or Title
15A of the New Jersey Statutes, membership in a volunteer fire company
or similar organization constituted in a fire district pursuant to N.J.S.
40A:14-70.1, membership in a junior firemen's auxiliary established
pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:14-95, or non-paid membership in a part-paid fire
department or force established pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-58.3. Application for Membership. [Ord. No. 1684 § 3]
Any person desiring membership in a volunteer fire company shall
complete, in duplicate, an application, the form of which may be prescribed
by the Board of Fire Commissioners, and which shall contain at a minimum,
the following information about the applicant:
a. Name.
b. Home address.
c. Birth date.
d. Social Security Number.
e. Diver's license number.
f. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S. 2C:17-1.
1. Aggravated arson or;
2. Arson; or
3. Failure to control or report dangerous fire; or
4. Directly or indirectly pays or accepts any form of consideration for
the purpose of starting a fire or explosion;
g. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S. 2C:33-3 False Public Alarms.
h. Any conviction of a crime or disorderly persons violation.
i. Such other information as the volunteer fire company deems relevant to
the application provided none of such information is prohibited by law.
§ 2-58.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-58.3
1:74
§ 2-58.4. Investigation by Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 1684 § 4]
Following the filing of such application, the Board of Fire Commissioners
shall transmit a background and criminal history release authorization
form, duly signed by the applicant, to the Chief of Police of the Township of
Neptune. The applicant shall then make an appointment with the Neptune
Township Police Department to submit to fingerprinting. Upon receipt of
said authorization form and the completion of the fingerprinting of the
applicant, the Neptune Township Police Chief shall direct that a state
applicant fingerprint card be submitted to the New Jersey State Police to
complete a criminal background and history check on said applicant. If,
as the result of such investigation, the applicant is found to have been
convicted of a violation of N.J.S. 2C:17-1a, b, c and/or d or N.J.S. 2C:33-3
or any other crime or disorderly persons violation or any other information
that would indicate the applicant may be a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the community, the Chief of Police shall report such information
and the particulars thereof to the Board of Fire Commissioners, who shall
then make a determination as to whether to accept the applicant as a
member of a volunteer fire company in the Township of Neptune.
§ 2-58.5. Time Limit for Investigation. [Ord. No. 1684 § 5]
The above investigation by the Chief of Police shall be completed within
thirty (30) days of the completion of the fingerprinting of the applicant.
§ 2-58.6. Volunteer First Aid Squads. [Ord. No. 95-4 § 1]
§ 2-59. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRST AID SQUADS
EXEMPT FROM CERTAIN MUNICIPAL FEES.
§ 2-59.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 1; Ord. 12-01]
ACTIVE MEMBER — Shall mean volunteers in a Township fire company,
first aid squad, Office of Emergency Management or ANSWER team who
meet the definition of active member or active life member as certified in
writing by the Chief Executive Officer of a volunteer fire company, volunteer
first aid squad, volunteer Office of Emergency Management or volunteer
ANSWER team within the Township of Neptune to have served at least one
(1) year of continuous volunteer service in the company or squad, to possess
Upon completion of the application form, it shall be filed with the Neptune
Board of Fire Commissioners or the Ocean Grove Board of Fire Commissioners
respectively.
a. All of the provisions of this section shall apply to any person desiring
membership in a first aid squad within the Township of Neptune.
b. The first aid squad application form shall be prescribed by and filed
with the Neptune Township Office of Emergency Management/EMS
Board of Captains.
§ 2-58.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-59.1
1:75
the necessary certifications and/or training required by the said company or
squad.
FEES — Shall mean those charges established by the Township of Neptune
which are fully retained by the Township of Neptune as revenue.
Specifically excluded is any portion of the fee which is collected by the
Township on behalf of another entity including but not limited to the State
of New Jersey, the County of Monmouth, or an outside vendor.
§ 2-59.2. Incentive. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 2; Ord. 12-01]
All active members, as defined in subsection 2-59.1 shall be entitled to the
following benefits:
Exemption from the payment of any Township of Neptune fees for Township
recreation activities, Township training programs, Township licenses and
Township permit fees, including but not limited to certificates of occupancy,
Uniform Construction Code fees, and Board of Adjustment bulk variance
application fees. Exemption shall apply for the members primary residence
only.
§ 2-59.3. Exclusions. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 3]
§ 2-59.4. Administration. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 3; Ord. 12-01]
a. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for profit activity.
b. Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum
registration has been reached.
c. Fees and escrows associated with Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment site plan and subdivision applications.
d. Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
e. Dog license fees.
f. Posting of performance and maintenance guarantees where required.
g. Neptune or Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority charges.
a. On or about January 31 of each calendar year each fire company, first
aid squad, Officer of Emergency Management, and ANSWER team shall
submit to the Business Administrator a list of all individuals who meet
the definition for active member status. Updates shall be provided by
each organization to the Business Administrator on a periodic basis to
add those individuals who have completed their probationary status or
to delete individuals who have dropped their membership or who have
no longer met the criteria for active member status.
b. The Business Administrator shall issue each active member an
identification tag for use in the various municipal departments.
§ 2-59.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-59.4
1:76
§ 2-60. YOUTH DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.
§ 2-60.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 04-48 § 1]
The Youth Development Council will provide a safe and supervised
community based setting for local school aged youth to experience a needs
driven, age specific program encompassing municipally coordinated,
extracurricular activities and private sector, cooperative career connective
activities aimed at increasing and improving social, educational and
economic opportunities.
§ 2-60.2. Council Authorized. [Ord. No. 04-48 § 1; Ord. No. 05-01
§ 1; Ord. No. 06-12 § 1]
There is hereby authorized a Youth Development Council. The Council shall
be made up of fifteen (15) members and shall consist of one (1) member
representing each of the following groups/organizations:
c. All active members must comply with all registration procedures and
complete all application forms established by the Township of Neptune.
d. The Business Administrator is hereby authorized to enforce the
provision of this section.
a. Neptune Township Committee.
b. Neptune Township Board of Education.
c. Neptune Township Police Department.
d. Neptune Township Economic Development Corporation.
e. Midtown Urban Renaissance Corporation.
f. Neptune Township Municipal Alliance to Prevent Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse.
g. Jersey Shore University Medical Center.
h. Monmouth Council Boy Scouts of America.
i. Greater Neptune Area Chamber of Commerce.
j. Monmouth County Big Brothers/Big Sisters.
k. Infoage.
l. Neptune Township Education Foundation.
m. Monmouth Council Girl Scouts of America.
n. Neptune Township Education Association.
o. Optimist Club.
§ 2-59.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-60.3
1:77
§ 2-60.3. Appointment. [Ord. No. 6-12 § 1; Ord. 07-13 § 1]
Each group/organization shall recommend, to the Township Committee, a
representative to serve on the Youth Development Council. The members
shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee and shall serve
without compensation for a term of one (1) year.
§ 2-60.4. Organization and Officers. [Ord. No. 04-48 § 1]
The members of the Youth Development Council shall conduct an annual
reorganization at which time from among the membership a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Corresponding Secretary and Recording Secretary shall
be selected.
§ 2-61. MISCELLANEOUS FEES.
§ 2-61.1. All Departments. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. No. 06-43 § 1;
Ord. No. 10-33 § 1]
§ 2-61.2. Municipal Clerk. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. 10-33 § 2]
Township Street Map $1.00
Master Plan $50.00 (mailed $54.75)
Environmental Resource Inventory $20.00 (mailed $24.75)
a. General per Copy Charge. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2 entitled
"Public Records, right of inspection; copies; fees": the charge for copies
from any Township departments, unless otherwise stated herein, shall
be as follows:
$.05 per letter size page or smaller.
$.07 per legal size page or larger.
b. Nonstandard Media. Access to electronic records and non-printed
materials shall be provided free of charge, but there shall be a charge
for the actual costs of any needed supplies such as cassette tapes or
computer disks.
Costs associated with the production of copies of any nonstandard
media, such as, larger scale documents, maps, plans, photographs,
books or bound publications, and forms of electronically recorded
media, shall be determined on an as-provided basis based on the
reasonably approximated actual costs, excluding labor and overhead,
associated producing copies of the same, as determined by the
Municipal Clerk. Actual postage rates will be assessed to any records
sent through the mail or other private delivery service.
§ 2-60.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-61.3
1:78
§ 2-61.3. Recreation Department. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. No.
08-18 § 1; Ord. No. 09-12 § 1; amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-07; 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Neptune Day:
Food vendor $100
Merchandise (non-food) vendor $50
Nonprofit or civic group not selling
items
No charge
Summer Recreation Program:
First child $300
Each additional child $270
Each child qualifying for
sponsorship program
$150
Fee for picking up child late 10 minute grace period, $1 per
minute thereafter
Field use: There is hereby established, and incorporated in this chapter
by way of reference, a Table of Facility Use Reservation Fees for use of
recreational fields and field lighting. Said fees may be amended from time
to time by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 2-61.4. Tax Collection Department. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. No.
10-11 § 1]
Issuance of a duplicate tax sale certificate when
original lost by lien holder:
$100.00
Discharge of tax sale certificate when lost by lien
holder:
$20.00
Processing Returned Check: $20.00
Duplicate Bill Fee: $5.00 for the first bill;
$20.00 for each bill
thereafter
Calculation of the amount required to redeem a
tax sale certificate:
Property owner of party entitled to redeem—
First two calculations in a calendar year
No charge, thereafter
$50.00 for each
calculation
Lienholder $50.00 for each
calculation
§ 2-61.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61.5
1:79
§ 2-61.5. Department of Public Works. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. No.
07-58 § 1]
Freon Appliance $30.00
Tires $3.00 per tire
11 cubic yard dumpster rental
(From the morning of one business day to the morning
of the next business day)
$400.00
Trash receptacle for automated trash collection system
(initial receptacle provided free of charge):
Small size (35 gal.) $40.00
Medium size (65 gal.) $50.00
Large size (95 gal.) $60.00
Dedicated park bench
(Plaque not included)
$150.00
§ 2-61.6. Zoning and Planning. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1]
Zoning Permit $35.00
(Construction and building fees are authorized under the Uniform
Construction Code Ordinance)15
§ 2-61.7. Police Department. [Ord. No. 04-51 § 1; Ord. 10-33 § 3]
Discovery General copy charge as stated above
Firearms Identification Card $5.00
Permit to Purchase Handgun $2.00
§ 2-61.8. Engineering Department. [Ord. No. 2018-01]
Bid plans and specifications $50.00
§ 2-61.9. All Fees Nonrefundable. [Ord. No. 06-47 § 1]
All fees contained herein shall be nonrefundable.
§ 2-62. USE OF POWERS OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
§ 2-62.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 09-22 § 1]
It is the purpose and intent of the Township of Neptune to restrict the use
of its authority pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. as that law may be amended and supplemented,
to exercise the power to eminent domain under circumstances that would
15.Editor's Note: See subsection 11-1.3 for Uniform Construction Code fees.
§ 2-61.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-62.1
1:80
allow for the transfer of private property to or for the benefit of another
private citizen or entity while not limiting the Township's authority of
eminent domain for public use or public purposes established under the
New Jersey Eminent Domain Act.
§ 2-62.2. Use. [Ord. No. 09-22 § 1]
Eminent domain under traditional authority shall continue to exist as to
both residential and nonresidential property where required in the opinion
of the Township Committee for public use or public purpose such as but
not limited to road construction, park or recreation facility construction or
use or where the public health, safety or welfare has been determined to
be at issue and condemnation is the last and/or best process for correcting
the situation, but under no circumstances for purposes of transferring those
properties to a private developer or other private entity except as provided
by subsection 2-62.4. In all such cases, the procedure and the taking shall
be pursuant to State statute as set forth by the Eminent Domain Act and
similar State legislation.
§ 2-62.3. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 09-22 § 1]
Eminent domain shall be prohibited as to residential properties and
commercial properties pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law except where specifically allowed below.
§ 2-62.4. Exclusions—Eminent Domain is Allowed as an Exception.
[Ord. No. 09-22 § 1]
The provisions of subsections 2-62.2 and 2-62.3 shall not apply with regards
to the redevelopment of West Lake Avenue only as defined by the West
Lake Avenue Redevelopment Plan adopted by the Township Committee
under Ordinance 05-20 with designated properties set forth within the
aforesaid area pursuant to Resolution No. 05-212 and any subsequent
amendments of said resolution and ordinance and subject to the terms of
an existing Redevelopment Agreement between the Township of Neptune
and CityWorks West Lake, LLC entered June 13, 2005 and any subsequent
amendments made prior to adoption of this section.
§ 2-62.5. Residential and Nonresidential Relocation Rights in Areas
Where Eminent Domain is Allowed for Purposes of Redevelopment.
[Ord. No. 09-22 § 2]
Any residential or nonresidential properties which are subject to eminent
domain in the above stated excepted redevelopment area shall be subject
to relocation assistance pursuant to the Relocation Assistance Law of 1967,
N.J.S.A. 52:31B-1 et seq. and the Relocation Assistance Act of 1971, N.J.S.A.
20:4-1 et seq. and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the cost
and responsibilities of which are set forth more fully with regards to the
one excepted redevelopment area in the Redevelopment Agreement by and
between the Township of Neptune and CityWorks West Lake, LLC dated
§ 2-62.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-62.5
1:81
June 13, 2005 and its subsequent amendments, if any, prior to the adoption
of this section.
§ 2-62.6. Procedures for Implementation of Eminent Domain Where
Utilized. [Ord. No. 09-22 § 3]
Where eminent domain is allowed under traditional uses as set forth in
subsection 2-62.2 all standard procedures set forth in the New Jersey
Eminent Domain Act and other relevant statutory and case law shall be
followed. Where eminent domain is allowed as an exception pursuant to
subsection 2-62.4 and where implemented, all standard procedures
required under the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law shall be followed
along with the additional procedures set forth under the West Lake
Redevelopment Plan — Ordinance 05-20 and the Redevelopment
Agreement by and between the Township of Neptune, New Jersey and
CityWorks West Lake, LLC dated June 13, 2005 and subsequent
amendments, if any, prior to adoption this section.
§ 2-63. through § 2-64. (RESERVED)
§ 2-65. CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 2-65.1. Title. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Neptune Township
Code of Ethics."
§ 2-65.2. Findings. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
The Township Committee of the Township of Neptune finds and declares
that:
§ 2-65.3. Purpose and Authority. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
a. Public office and employment are a public trust;
b. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depends upon the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives;
c. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private interest
and the public duties of a government officer or employee, that
confidence is imperiled;
d. Governments have the duty both to provide its citizens with standards
by which they may determine whether public duties are being faithfully
performed, and to apprise their officers and employees of the behavior
which is expected of them while conducting their public duties.
a. It is the purpose of this section to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
§ 2-62.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-65.3
1:82
§ 2-65.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-04]
As used in this section:
AGENCY — Shall mean any agency, board, governing body, including the
chief executive officer, bureau division office, commission or other
instrumentality within the Township of Neptune, and any independent local
authority created by or appointed under the authority of the Township of
Neptune, if any, which performs functions other than of a purely advisory
nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any corporation, partnership,
firm, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or
other legal entity.
COMMISSION — Shall mean the Local Government Ethics Commission
established by the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person, whether compensated or not,
whether part time or full time, employed by or serving on an agency who is
not an officer.
INTEREST — Shall mean the ownership or control of more than ten (10%)
percent of the profits, assets or stock of a business organization but shall
not include the control of assets in a nonunion profit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Shall mean the spouse or
dependent child of an officer or employee residing in the same household.
OFFICER — Shall mean any person whether compensated or not, whether
part time or full time, who is one of the following.
officers and employees of the Township of Neptune shall be clear,
consistent, uniform in their application, enforceable and to provide
those officers or employees with advice and information concerning
possible conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.
b. It is further the purpose of this section to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29.
c. This section is enacted under the authority of Local Government Ethics
Law, P.L. 1991, c. 20 and under the further authority granted to the
Township of Neptune under the provisions of Titles 40 and 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes.
1. Member of the Township Committee;
Special Parking Enforcement Officer/Special Code Enforcement
Officer;
2.
3. Tax Assessor;
4. Township Clerk;
5. Township Attorney;
§ 2-65.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.4
1:83
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — Shall mean an officer or employee of the
Township of Neptune or of an agency under the authority of or appointed by
the Township of Neptune.
§ 2-65.5. Adoption of the State Local Government Ethics Law. [Ord.
No. 07-21 § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of PL 1991, c. 29, the Local Government Ethics
Law is hereby accepted, adopted and established as the minimum standard
to be used as a guide in determining ethical standards and requirements of
6. Township Engineer;
7. Township Planning Consultant;
8. Township Auditor;
9. Township Judge;
10. Township Prosecutor;
11. Planning Board Member;
12. Planning Board Attorney
13. Zoning Board of Adjustment Member;
14. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney;
15. Municipal Utilities Authority Member;
16. Municipal Utilities Authority Executive Director;
17. Board of Fire Commissioners Member, if any;
18. Fire Chief;
19. Board of Fire Commissioners Attorney, if any;
20. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2016-04]
21. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2016-04]
22. Deal Lake Commission Member;
23. Wesley Lake Commission Member;
24. Fletcher Lake Commission Member;
25. Historical Preservation Commission Member;
26. Special Counsel;
Any person who is a managerial executive or confidential employee, as
defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations
Act, N.J.S.A., 34:13A-3 or of any agency created under the authority of
or appointed by the Township of Neptune.
27.
§ 2-65.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-65.5
1:84
financial disclosure. A copy of the Local Government Ethics Law is annexed
to this section and three (3) copies of the same have been placed on file in
the office of the Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to
use and examine the same.
§ 2-65.6. Ethical Standards. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
Officers and employees of the Township of Neptune shall comply with the
following provisions:
a. No officer or employee of the Township of Neptune or member of his or
her immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization
or engage in any business transaction or professional activity, which is
in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in
the public interest;
b. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or
others;
c. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
manner where he, a member of his or her immediate family, or any
business organization which he or she has an interest, have a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence or judgment.
d. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service
whether compensated or not which shall reasonably be expected to
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or
her official duties;
e. No official or employee, member of his or her immediate family, or any
business organization which he or she has an interest, shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him, directly
or indirectly in the discharge of his or her official duties. This provision
shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the
campaign of an announced candidate for elective public office, if the
officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign
contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to influence the
officer in the discharge of his or official duties;
f. No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used, his or her public
office or employment, or any information, not generally available to
members of the public, which he or she receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his or her office or employment, for the
purpose of securing financial gain for himself, any member of his or her
immediate family, or any business organization with which he or she is
associated;
§ 2-65.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.6
1:85
g. No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or she
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
Township in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or
other matter pending before any agency of the Township of Neptune.
This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an employee from
representing another employee where the representation is within the
context of an official labor union or a similar representational
responsibility; nor shall this provision be applicable to the township
public defender, if any, with respect to the representation of defendants
in the Municipal Court;
h. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group, to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group;
i. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor; and
j. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Township of
Neptune, or members of his or her immediate family, from representing
himself, herself or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings
concerning his, her or their, own interest;
k. No officer or employee elected or appointed to the Township shall
without receiving formal written authorization from the appropriate
person or body, disclose any confidential information concerning any
other officer or employee or any other person or any property or
governmental affairs of the Township;
l. Approve or disapprove or in any way recommend the payment of any
bill, voucher or indebtedness owed or allegedly owed by the Township
in which he has a direct or indirect personal, pecuniary or business
interest;
m. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall
request, use or permit the use of any public property, vehicle,
equipment, labor or service for personal convenience or the private
advantage of himself or any other person. This prohibition shall not be
deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or
permitting the use of such public property, vehicle, equipment,
material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make
available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of
§ 2-65.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-65.6
1:86
§ 2-65.7. Financial Disclosure Statements. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
stated public policy for the use of officials and employees and the
conduct of official business.
a. Officers of the Township shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the officer's job title;
b. Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars received by the officer or a member of his or her
immediate family during the preceding calendar year. Individual client
fees, customer receipts or commissions on transactions received
through a business organization need not be separately reported as
sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the source of income,
the security need not be reported unless the local government officer or
member of his or her immediate family has an interest in the business
organization;
c. Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars from any single source
for personal appearances, speeches or writings received by the local
government officer or a member of his or her immediate family during
the preceding calendar year;
d. Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having an
aggregate value exceeding four hundred ($400.00) dollars from any
single source, excluding relatives, received by the local government
officer or a member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year;
e. The name and address of all business organizations in which the local
government officer or a member of his or her immediate family had an
interest during the preceding calendar year; and
f. The address and brief description of all real property in the State in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family held an interest during the preceding calendar year;
g. The Township of Neptune shall accept a financial disclosure statement
form prescribed by the commission for filing purposes. If a financial
disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey
Local Finance Board, in accordance with the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law, then that form shall be used. The Township
Clerk shall make the forms available to the officers and employees
required to file a financial disclosure statement;
h. The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk within
ninety (90) days after the effective date of the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or
§ 2-65.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.7
1:87
§ 2-65.8. Township Ethical Standards Board. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
§ 2-65.9. Advisory Opinions. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
§ 2-65.10. Complaints. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
§ 2-65.11. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
before April 30th of each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed
with the Commission;
i. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
a. The Township of Neptune shall not establish a Local Township Ethics
Standards Board but shall utilize the services of the Commission for
purposes of enforcement of this Ethics Code. Any complaint filed with
the Township Administrator or other official may in the discretion of the
Township Committee be reviewed to the extent desirable by the
Township Committee at a public meeting with regards to written
documentation and, if desirable, testimony to determine whether or not
there is probable cause to pass the complaint on to the Commission.
The Township Committee may choose not to determine probable cause
but merely to pass the complaint on automatically to the Commission.
a. An officer or employee of the Township of Neptune may request and
obtain from the Commission an advisory opinion as to whether any
proposed activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation
of the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements.
b. Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the
Commission by the vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of its members directs
that the opinion be made public.
c. Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer or
employee unless the Commission in directing that the opinion be made
public so determines.
a. The Commission, upon receipt of a signed written complaint by any
person alleging that the conduct of any officer or employee of the
Township of Neptune serving the Township is in conflict with the Code
of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge
receipt of the complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt and initiate an
investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in the
complaint.
b. The Commission shall make its determination pursuant to and in
accordance with its authority set forth in the Local Government Ethics
Law, PL 1991, c. 29.
a. An appointed officer or employee of the Township of Neptune found
guilty by the Commission of the violation of any provision of this section
or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this section, shall be fined
§ 2-65.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-65.11
1:88
§ 2-65.12. Records of the Commission. [Ord. No. 07-21 § 1]
All statements, complaints, requests, or other written materials filed
pursuant to this section, and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts
or other official papers prepared pursuant to this section shall be preserved
for a period of five (5) years from the date of filing or preparation, as the
case may be.
§ 2-66. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-66.1. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 08-27 § 1; Ord. No. 09-07 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Retirement Program:
not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars, which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the "penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1.
The Commission shall report its findings to the office or agency having
the power of removal or discipline of the appointed local government
officer or employee and may recommend that further disciplinary action
be taken.
b. An elected officer or employee of the Township of Neptune found guilty
by the Commission of the violation of any provision of this section or of
any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this section, shall be fined not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the "penalty enforcement law," N.J.S.A. 2A:
58-1.
c. The findings by the Commission that an appointed officer or employee
of the Township of Neptune is guilty of the violation of the provisions of
this section, or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this section,
shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal, suspension, demotion or
other disciplinary action by the officer or agency having the power of
removal or discipline. When a person who is in the career service is
found to have violated the provisions of this section or any Code of
Ethics in effect pursuant to this section, the procedure leading to
removal, suspension, emotion or other disciplinary action shall be
governed by any applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
a. Statutory-Based, Untenured Chief Administrative Officer of the Local
Unit.
1. Township Administrator.
b. Positions with principal responsibility of a government function(s),
commonly called "department heads" or similar title, that are filled by
§ 2-65.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-66.1
1:89
§ 2-66.2. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 08-27 § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2.
action of the Governing Body and who report directly to an elected
official(s) or chief administrative officer.
1. Director of Code Enforcement.
2. Senior Center Director.
3. Recreation Director.
4. Land Use Administrator.
5. Emergency Management Coordinator.
6. Registrar of Vital Statistics.
7. Librarian.
8. Director of Engineering and Planning (unless certified as Municipal
Planner).
c. Township Attorney.
d. Municipal Engineer.
e. Municipal Prosecutor.
f. Municipal Court Judge.
g. Township of Neptune Sewer Authority Commissioners.
h. Township of Neptune Housing Authority Commissioners.
a. Tax Collector;
b. Chief Financial Officer;
c. Construction Code Official;
d. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
e. Tax Assessor;
f. Municipal Planner;
g. Registered Municipal Clerk;
h. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
i. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 2-66.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 2-66.3
1:90
§ 2-66.3. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 08-27 § 3]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-67. (RESERVED)16
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-67, Responsible Contractor Policy, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 09-18 and 11-01 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordnance No. 11-37. It was adopted as Ord. No. 2014-19 and repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-03.
§ 2-66.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-67
1:91
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
[Editor's Note: For regulations concerning littering and illegal
dumping, see Chapter 12, Property Maintenance, Section 12-2.]
§ 3-1. UNNECESSARY AND DISTURBING NOISE.
§ 3-1.1. Unnecessary Noise Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1439 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, company, corporation or other
body of individuals to make or cause to be made or permit to be made,
any unnecessary, unreasonably loud, disturbing noise which either annoys,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or welfare of others.
§ 3-1.2. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 1439 § 2]
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this section but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, namely:
a. The playing of any radios, tape players, compact disc players,
phonographs, amplified musical instruments, motor vehicle sound
systems and similar devices played in such a manner or at such volume
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in any
dwelling, hotel or other type residence.
1. Playing or permitting the playing of any radio, tape player, compact
disc player, phonograph, amplified musical instrument, motor
vehicle sound system or similar device:
(a) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across real
property boundaries or within a noise sensitive zone;
(b) When played in any motor vehicle in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance outside the vehicle or as to be
plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50') feet;
(c) When played in any motor vehicle in such a manner as to
create a sound level of sixty-five (65) decibels on the "A" scale
as read by the slow response of a sound level meter when read
at the curb line of the adjoining street from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. or in such a manner as to produce sound which is plainly
audible to anyone other than occupants of the motor vehicle
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
(d) When played on any street or sidewalk, playground, school,
park or common area of any building, in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance;
(e) When played in any residential neighbor-hood so as to produce
sixty-five (65) decibels on the "A" scale as read by the slow
§ 2-67 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-1.2
1:92
response of a sound level meter when measured at a distance
of twenty-five (25') feet or at the next adjoining full property
line between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or when
played between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
any street, playground, school, park, or common area of any
building in such a manner so as to be heard by anyone other
than the operator of the device.
b. The keeping of any animal or bird causing frequent or long continued
noise which disturbs the comfort and repose of any person within the
vicinity.
c. The shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
d. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile or other
vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal, for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
e. For purpose of this section, noise disturbance shall mean any sound
which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals or
disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
f. The following acts are prohibited in the Township:
1. Possessing or carrying a "boom box" which is in operation on any
street, sidewalk, school, play-ground or public area, or:
2. Installing or possessing or operating in any motor vehicle garage in
the Township, a radio, tape player or sound system other than the
original equipment in which:
(a) The numbers of speakers exceed six (6); or
(b) Any speaker exceeds six and one-half (6 1/2") inches in width
or height or exceeds one hundred (100) watts in power output;
or
(c) Any speaker is external to the passenger compartment;
(d) BOOM BOX – Shall mean any radio, tape player, compact disc
player or loudspeakers, combination of radio, tape player,
compact disc player and loud speakers or similar device which
is operated to produce sixty-five (65) decibels on the "A" scale
as read by the slow response of a sound level meter when
measured at twenty-five (25') feet or at the next adjoining full
property line; and is
(1) Designed to operate while being transported or carried by
a single person; or
(2) Capable of being operated while carried or transported by
a single individual; or
§ 3-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.2
1:93
§ 3-1.3. Violations. [Ord. No. 1439 § 3; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. Each day this section is violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 3-2. NOISE FROM CONSTRUCTION.
§ 3-2.1. Purpose; Hours of Construction Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1413
Preamble; Ord. No. 08-42]
The Township Committee has determined that noise from construction with
the accompanying operation of heavy equipment and power equipment is
injurious to the health and welfare of the citizens of Neptune Township.
Construction or repair of buildings before 8:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
shall be prohibited, except as set forth in subsection 3-2.3.
§ 3-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1413 § 1; Ord. No. 08-42]
As used in this section:
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Shall mean those instruments or tools used in the
construction industry for the facilitation of major repairs or buildings.
POWER EQUIPMENT — Shall mean those instruments or tools used in
the construction industry which are operated by electricity, etc. for the
facilitation of major repairs or buildings.
(3) Contains speakers in excess of six and one-half (6 1/2")
inches in width or height or exceeds one hundred (100)
watts in power output.
(e) This section shall not prohibit:
(1) Any parade or concert or concert practice providing the
Police Chief receives notice at least two (2) days in
advance;
(2) Any event sponsored or conducted by the Township, the
State of New Jersey or any of their governmental agencies;
(3) Any event conducted by any block association or civic
association providing the Police Chief receives notice at
least two (2) days in advance.
(f) For the purpose of this section, decibel is defined as a unit of
measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times
the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of
the sound measured to the referenced pressure, which is
twenty (20) micropascals [(20) micronewtons per square
meter].
§ 3-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-2.3
1:94
§ 3-2.3. Heavy Equipment or Power Equipment. [Ord. No. 1413 § 2;
Ord. No. 08-42]
Heavy equipment or power equipment used for construction may not be
used before 8:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Such
activity shall not be allowed prior to 9:00 a.m. and after 4:00 p.m. on
Saturdays between Memorial Day and Labor Day of each year. The balance
of the year in this activity shall not be allowed before 8:00 a.m. and after
7:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Heavy equipment or power equipment used in
construction may not be used all day on Sundays, Memorial Day, Labor Day
and the 4th of July.
§ 3-2.4. Construction or Repair of Buildings. [Ord. No. 1413 § 3;
Ord. No. 08-42]
Construction or repair of buildings shall include the erection, including
excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building. This should not
be interpreted to include the natural and normal maintenance and care a
homeowner may affect upon his lawn or home.
§ 3-2.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1413 § 4]
§ 3-2.6. Construction or Repair Prohibited on Sundays and Certain
Holidays. [Ord. No. 1413 § 6; New; Ord. No. 08-42]
Except as heretofore permitted in an emergency, the erection including
excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building is hereby
prohibited on Sunday, Memorial Day, Labor Day and the 4th of July. This
should not be interpreted to include the natural and normal maintenance
and care a homeowner may effect upon his lawn or home.
§ 3-2.7. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1413 § 6; New]
Any violation of this section shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-3. (RESERVED)17
§ 3-4. DECLARATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
a. In case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety
and then only with a permit from the Township Inspector, which permits
may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days while the
emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues.
b. Nothing in this section shall limit the Township's ability to deploy its
employees when acting in the furtherance of the Township's interest.
c. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of a utility company from
acting in furtherance of the Township's interest.
§ 3-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4.1
1:95
§ 3-4.1. Authority of Mayor to Declare Emergency. [Ord. No. 814
§ 1]
When there exists in the Township a state of disaster or emergency, brought
about by natural causes or by the action of any person or persons, and
such state of disaster or emergency causes or may cause violence and
injury to be inflicted upon people in the Township and causes or may
cause damage and destruction to property of the people of the Township,
and in order to preserve the public peace and order, to prevent and quell
riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages, all being against the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Township, then, in that event,
the Mayor shall have the authority to declare that a state of disaster or
emergency exists and the Mayor shall have the authority and be empowered
to do the following:
§ 3-4.2. Notification of State of Emergency. [Ord. No. 814 § 2]
The Mayor, upon declaring that a state of disaster or emergency exists
in the Township, shall forthwith notify local newspapers and local radio
a. Issue orders, proclamations, rules and regulations as are necessary to
meet the various problems which have or may be presented by the
emergency.
b. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public streets,
ways and places in the Township.
c. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
streets in the Township.
d. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
businesses licensed by the Township to dispense in any way alcoholic
beverages, shall be closed to business.
e. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the Township shall be
closed to business.
f. Issue orders or proclamations to be in effect until it is declared that
such an emergency no longer exists.
g. Issue orders or proclamations prohibiting persons, other than those
authorized by law, to carry on or about his clothes or person or
otherwise have in his possession or under his control alcoholic
beverages, narcotics, firearms, weapons which may cause injuries to
persons or property, explosives or incendiary devices of any kind during
the emergency.
17.Editor's Note: Section 3-3, Inoperable or Unlicensed Motor Vehicles, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 643 and 1053 was rescinded by
Ordinance No. 2016-31.
§ 3-4.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-4.2
1:96
stations and request that the announced state of disaster or emergency be
publicized at once.
§ 3-4.3. Decision of Mayor Final. [Ord. No. 814 § 3]
The judgment of the Mayor that a state of disaster or emergency exists
within the Township and that it has caused or is likely to cause injury and
damage to person and property within the Township, shall be final and
absolute.
§ 3-4.4. Prohibited Actions After Declaration of Emergency. [Ord.
No. 814 § 4]
After the Mayor has declared that a state of disaster or emergency exists
in the Township, and has issued an order or proclamation regulating the
movements of persons or vehicles in or about the Township, or the
dispensing by licensed persons of alcoholic beverages therein, or the sale
of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the Township, or for persons to
carry on or about his/her clothes or person or otherwise have in his/her
possession or under his/her control alcoholic beverages, narcotics, firearms,
weapons which can cause injuries to persons or property, explosives or
incendiary devices of any kind in the Township, it shall be unlawful and
a violation of this section for any person to be upon the streets, ways or
places in the Township, to drive vehicles over the streets in the Township,
to carry on or about his/her clothes or person or otherwise have in his/her
possession or under his/her control alcoholic beverages, narcotics, firearms,
weapons which can cause injuries to persons or property, explosives or
incendiary devices of any kind in the Township, to dispense alcoholic
beverages or to sell gasoline at any gasoline service station during the
hours prohibited by the order or proclamation, unless otherwise permitted
by the Township.
§ 3-4.5. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 814 § 5; New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of an order or
proclamation issued by the Mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-5. CURFEW FOR MINORS.
§ 3-5.1. Title. [Ord. No. 1397; Ord. No. 11-45]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance of
the Township of Neptune."
§ 3-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1397 § 2; Ord. No. 11-45]
As used in this section:
§ 3-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.2
1:97
MINOR — Shall mean a person under the age of eighteen (18), or an
equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person seventeen (17) or
less years of age.
PARENT — Shall mean any person having legal custody of a minor:
STREET — Shall mean a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic or in the
case of sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the
legal right-of-way, including but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes,
the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term
"street" applies irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether
alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. The term street also includes the
boardwalk, shopping areas, parking lots, public buildings, and similar areas
that are open to the use of the public.
TIME OF NIGHT — Shall mean and is based upon the prevailing standard
of time, whether Eastern/Standard Time or Eastern/Daylight Savings Time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the Township, or then
observed in the police station.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune, Monmouth County,
State of New Jersey, a municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey with
its principal office located at 25 Neptune Blvd., Neptune, New Jersey.
YEAR OF AGE — Shall mean and continue from one (1) birthday, such as the
seventeenth, but not including the day of the next, such as the eighteenth
birthday; making it clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein
treated as equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen years of age." Similarly,
for example, thirteen (13) or less years of age means under fourteen (14)
years of age.
§ 3-5.3. Curfew for Minors. [Ord. No. 1397 § 3; Ord. No. 11-45]
a. As a natural or adoptive parent;
b. As a legal guardian;
c. As a person who stands in loco parentis;
d. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
a. It shall be unlawful for any persons seventeen (17) or less years of age
to be or remain in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, public
places and/or public buildings, places of amusement and/or
entertainment, public transportation facility, public vehicles used for
transportation, vacant lots or other public places within the confines of
the Township at night, during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and
beginning:
1. At 9:30 p.m. for minors thirteen (13) or less years of age.
2. At 11:00 p.m. for minors fourteen (14) or more years of age.
§ 3-5.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-5.3
1:98
§ 3-5.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1397 § 4; Ord. No. 11-45]
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a Township street during the
periods of time prohibited under subsection 3-5.3, shall not, however, be in
violation of the curfew regulations when any of the following shall occur:
b. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or
permit any minor to be in or upon any public streets, highways, roads,
public places and/or public buildings, places of amusement and/or
entertainment, public transportation facility, public vehicles used for
transportation, vacant lots or other public places within the confines of
the Township at any time during the hours in which said minor's school
is in session, unless such minor has been officially excused (excluding
suspension and expulsion) from attendance at such school by school
authorities.
c. Similarly, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow or permit any minor to remain in or
upon such establishment at any time during the hours in which such
minor's school is in session, unless such child has been officially
excused (excluding suspension and expulsion) from attendance at such
school by school authorities.
a. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
b. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
c. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by having in his/her possession a written
communication, signed by such minor and countersigned, if
practicable, by a parent of such minor with their home address and
telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner the
minor will be on the streets at night, an exercise of a First Amendment
right specified in such communication.
d. When the minor is returning home from a night school, fraternity,
church, social or school meeting, or is en route to or returning from a
doctor or dentist office, where treatment has been rendered or is to be
rendered by such doctor or dentist, provided such minor can evidence
the rendering of treatment or the need for treatment by a physician's
statement.
e. When the minor is no more than fifty (50') feet from the minor's place of
residence.
f. When the minor carries a certified card of employment or worker's
permit, pursuant to State Law.
§ 3-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.4
1:99
§ 3-5.5. Parental Responsibility. [Ord. No. 1397 § 5; Ord. No. 11-45]
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain
in or upon any Township public streets, highways, roads, public places
and/or public buildings, places of amusement and/or entertainment, public
transportation facility, public vehicles used for transportation, vacant lots
or other public places within the confines of the Township under
circumstances not constituting an exception, or otherwise beyond the scope
of, the curfew. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent
would reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
minor in the parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep
neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of
parental responsibility through an objective test. It is no defense that a
parent was completely indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts
of such minor.
§ 3-5.6. Enforcement Procedure. [Ord. No. 1397 § 6; Ord. No. 11-45]
If a Police Officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, public places and/or public buildings, places of
amusement and/or entertainment, public transportation facility, public
vehicles used for transportation, vacant lots or other public places within
the confines of the Township in violation of the curfew regulations, the
Officer shall notify the juvenile that he or she is in violation of the
regulations and shall require the juvenile to provide his or her name,
address and telephone number and how to contact his or her parent or
guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and, in the absence of
convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's license, a Police
Officer on the street shall use his or her best judgment in determining age.
If the Officer determines that a person is in violation of this section he/
she shall take the juvenile to the police station, where a parent or guardian
shall immediately be notified to come for the juvenile, and whereupon
they shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under
constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to centralize responsibility
in the person designated there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair,
impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making available
experienced personnel and access to information and records.
g. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate
movement through the Township and interstate travel beginning or
ending in the Township.
a. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the Police Officer may deliver to a parent or
guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances, for
example, a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and address
may readily be ascertained or are known.
§ 3-5.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-5.6
1:100
§ 3-5.7. Presumption of Knowledge. [Ord. No. 11-45]
There shall be a presumption that whenever a minor has been convicted of
a violation of this section, the parents, guardians, or other adult persons
having care of the minor knew or should have known of the minor's violation
of this section if the minor had been convicted on a prior occasion within six
(6) months of the date of the present violation.
§ 3-5.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1397 § 8; Ord. No.
11-45]
b. A Police Officer discharging an enforcement obligation under this
section shall file a written report with the Chief of Police or his/her
designee or shall participate to the extent of the information for which
he/she is responsible in the preparation of a report on the curfew
violation. It is not the intention of this section to require extensive
reports that will prevent Police Officers from performing their primary
police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible
and may be completed by police departmental personnel other than
sworn Police Officers.
c. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except that in
accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an adult
relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
d. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall send, by certified mail, to the parents or guardian of the
minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violations will result in full enforcement of the curfew
regulations, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
a. If, after receipt of a warning notice pursuant to subsection 3-5.6 of a
first violation by a juvenile, a second curfew violation is adjudicated
against the same minor, the parents or guardian of the minor shall be
subject to prosecution under subsection 3-5.5. For the first parental
offense a parent shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than
eighty ($80.00) dollars and for each subsequent offense by a parent
there shall be a mandatory Municipal Court appearance with any
penalties to be assessed by the Judge of the Municipal Court, in
accordance with Section 1-5. The Judge of the Municipal Court, upon
finding a parent guilty, may sentence the parent to pay this fine and the
costs of prosecution.
§ 3-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.8
1:101
§ 3-5.9. Notice. [Ord. No. 1397 § 8; Ord. No. 11-45]
Notice of the existence of this section and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public
places as may be determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, in
order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this
section and its regulations.
§ 3-6. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES BY MINORS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-6.1. Consumption or Possession in Public Places by Minors
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 480 §§ 1, 2]
§ 3-6.2. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 480 § 3; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-7. POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-7.1. Certain Acts Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1100 § 1]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, consume any liquor,
wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage, or have in his or her possession
b. If a minor has been found to be in violation of this section on a second
occasion within a six (6) month period, that minor shall receive a
summons and complaint from the Police Officer who apprehended the
minor for the violation of this section. The Judge of the Municipal Court,
upon finding the minor guilty, may sentence the minor to perform
community service for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
c. In addition, any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of the
curfew regulations more than three (3) times shall be reported by the
Chief of Police or his/her designee to the juvenile authorities as a
juvenile in need of supervision and the Chief of Police or his/her
designee may proceed to file such charges with the Superior Court of
New Jersey, Family Part, Monmouth County, as he/she may deem
appropriate.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to consume or to have in his or her possession any alcoholic
beverages in or upon any street, park, footway, or other public or quasipublic
place within the Township.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to consume or to have in his or her possession any alcoholic
beverage while in a motor vehicle on any street or while in motor
vehicle in any public or quasi-public place in the Township.
§ 3-5.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-7.1
1:102
any unsealed or open bottle, can, jar or any other vessel containing liquor,
wine, beer or alcoholic beverage, or discard any alcoholic beverage
container:
§ 3-7.2. Unsealed Container. [Ord. No. 1100 § 2]
For the purpose of this section, a container shall be regarded as unsealed
when its top or cork has been removed; or any of its contents have been
removed; or the government tax stamp has been removed or broken; or, in
the case of a metal container, when the container has been opened in any
fashion; or, in the case of a twist-top container, when the original seal has
been broken.
§ 3-7.3. Discarding of Containers. [Ord. No. 1100 § 3]
No person shall discard any bottle, can, jar or other vessel used to contain
liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage upon any public street,
lane, sidewalk, public parking lot, quasi-public place or upon any private
property not his or her own without the express permission of the owner or
any person having authority to grant such permission.
§ 3-7.4. Licensed Premises. [Ord. No. 1100 § 4]
The prohibitions contained in subsection 3-7.1 above shall not apply to any
conveyance or place specifically licensed for the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 3-7.5. Aiding and Abetting Violators. [Ord. No. 1100 § 5]
Any individual, firm or corporation, who or which suffers, aids, abets or
permits any person to violate any provision of this section shall also be
deemed in violation of this section.
a. While in or on a public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public
parking place, park, playground, recreation area or any other public or
quasi-public place or in any public conveyance; or upon any lane owned
or occupied by any Federal, State, County or municipal government.
b. While in a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked
in any public street, lane, public parking lot or other public or quasipublic
place.
c. While upon any private property, not his own, without permission of the
owner or other person having authority to grant such permission.
d. While in or about any other public or quasi-public place or place to
which the public is invited, including but not limited to any business,
banking, church, institutional, commercial or professional premises or
athletic events, contests or exhibition except when such consumption or
possession is with the express permission of the owner or other body,
board or person having the authority to grant such permission.
§ 3-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.6
1:103
§ 3-7.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1100 § 8; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-8. BICYCLES, MOPEDS, ROLLER-BLADES AND SKATEBOARDS.
§ 3-8.1. Restrictions on Use of Bicycles, Mopeds, Roller-blades and
Skateboards. [Ord. No. 1120 §§ 61, 62; Ord. No. 95-27 § 1]
§ 3-8.2. Restrictions on Chaining or Anchoring of Bicycles, Mopeds,
Skateboards, Scooters or Motorized Scooters. [Ord. No. 06-42 § 1]
No person shall cause a bicycle, moped, skateboard, scooter or motorized
scooter to be chained, anchored, or otherwise locked or attached to a lamp
post, light post or any type of decorative stanchion on any street, road or
avenue in the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-8.3. Restrictions on Skateboards and Roller-blades on Public
Property. [Ord. No. 12-19]
a. No person shall operate a bicycle, roller-blades or a skateboard in the
following designated areas from May 1 to October 1, between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m.
1. On the Ocean Grove Boardwalk within the boundaries of the
Township of Neptune between the boundaries of the City of Asbury
Park and Borough of Bradley Beach.
b. No person shall operate a moped at any time in the Township of
Neptune in the following areas:
1. On the Ocean Grove Boardwalk within the boundaries of the
Township of Neptune between the boundaries of the City of Asbury
Park and Borough of Bradley Beach.
2. Any and all sidewalks.
a. No person shall use a skateboard or roller-blade on public property
unless the use of a skateboard or roller-blade on such property is
authorized by ordinance, or is otherwise authorized by the
governmental agency responsible for such property. The term "public
property" includes parking areas, parking lots, steps, walkways and
ramps that provide access to buildings, and recreational areas not
designated for skateboard and roller-blade use. The term "public
property" does not include public roads, highways, sidewalks abutting
private property, or bicycle and/or skateboard paths.
b. Any person authorized to enforce ordinances may issue a summons to
any person in violation of this section. In addition, whenever a police
officer has probable cause to believe a skateboard or roller-blade was
§ 3-7.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-8.3
1:104
§ 3-9. USE AND OPERATION OF BOATS.
§ 3-9.1. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 644 §§ 1, 2]
§ 3-9.2. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 644, § 3; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section, shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 3-10. SALE AND USE OF CHEMICAL IRRITANTS.
§ 3-10.1. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 1614 §§ 1, 2]
§ 3-10.2. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 1614 § 3; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense. Any violation by a juvenile offender shall
constitute juvenile delinquency and shall be prosecuted as provided by the
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:4.
§ 3-11. (RESERVED)
used or is being used in violation of this section the officer may seize
the item.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation in
charge of, or occupying, any boat within the territorial limits of the
Township to discharge or release any feces, excrement, ordure, fecal
matter, effluent material, manure, urine, or any impure, nasty, foul,
squalid, dirty, polluted, filthy, unclean, soiled, tarnished, stained,
sullied, rank, fetid, or putrid material or liquid in any of the waters or
upon any land, docks, piers, or wharves within the territorial limits.
b. Every person, firm or corporation in charge of, or occupying, any boat
within the territorial limits of the Township shall keep all heads, toilets,
toilet and washing facilities locked, closed and not used on any boat
while within the territorial limits.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, transfer or provide
any chemical irritant, device, canister, container or implement to a
person under the age of eighteen (18) years within the limits of the
Township.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged within the limits of the Township any chemical irritant not
consistent with its lawful use.
§ 3-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:105
§ 3-12. HUNTING; GUNNING; USE OF FIREARMS.
§ 3-12.1. Prohibited Actions; Area of Prohibition. [Ord. No. 222 § 1;
Ord. No. 1399]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hunt, gun or attempt to
hunt or gun any animal, bird or fowl of any kind or character, or to discharge
or cause to be discharged any pistol, rifle, shotgun or any other firearm
of any kind or description whatsoever, within the territorial limits of the
Township.
§ 3-13. DRUG-FREE ZONES.
§ 3-13.1. Adoption of Drug-Free Zone Map. [Ord. No. 1464 § 1; Ord.
No. 95-8 § 1; Ord. No. 98-37 § 2; Ord. No. 2015-23]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44
(C.2C:35-7), and L. 1998, the Drug-Free Zone Map produced on or about
May 14, 2015, prepared by Leanne Hoffmann, Township Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and
areas within the municipality of property which is used for:
§ 3-13.2. Location and Boundaries of Property. [Ord. No. 1464 § 2;
Ord. No. 98-37 § 3]
The Drug-Free Zone maps approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
3-13.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries or areas:
a. School purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board, and of the areas on or within one
thousand (1000') feet of such school property.
b. Public housing facilities owned by or leased to a local housing authority,
public parks owned and controlled by a State, County or local
government unit, publicly owned or leased library or museum, and of
the areas on or within five hundred (500') feet of such property.
a. On or within one thousand (1000') feet of property owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or School Board which is used
for school purposes;
b. On or within five hundred (500') feet of property owned by or leased to
a local housing authority which is used as a public housing facility,
property owned and controlled by a State, County or local government
unit which is used as a public park or publicly owned or leased library
or museum until such time if any that this section shall be amended to
reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and
boundaries of school property and Drug-Free zones.
§ 3-12 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-13.3
1:106
§ 3-13.3. Change in Location or Boundaries. [Ord. No. 1464 § 3]
The School Board, or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-13.4. Copies of Map on File. [Ord. No. 1464 § 4]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the Map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-13.1,
and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or Court which may request such a copy, along with a certification
that such copy is a true copy of the Map approved and adopted herein and
kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such Map and
of this section shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the
office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 3-13.5. Additional Matters. [Ord. No. 1464 § 5; Ord. No. 98-37 § 4]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-13.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State law, such Map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes;
4. The location and boundaries or areas which are on or within one
thousand (1000') feet of such school property;
5. The location of public housing facilities owned by or leased to a
local housing authority;
6. The location of public parks owned and controlled by a State,
County or local government unit;
7. The location of a publicly owned or leased library or museum;
§ 3-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.5
1:107
§ 3-14. PROTECTION OF PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
§ 3-14.1. Actions Prohibited. [Ord. No. 827 §§ 1—4]
8. The location and boundaries or areas which are on or within five
hundred (500') feet of such public housing facilities, public parks,
public library or public museum.
b. Except as otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted Map, all of the property depicted on the Map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by (or leased to) a school
or School Board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C. 2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44 and L. 1998 _____, a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that Statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-13.1. The failure of the
Map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board or
is a public park owned and controlled by a State, County or local
government unit or is a public housing facility owned by or leased to a
local housing authority or is a publicly owned or leased library or
museum, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved Map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
School Board, or that such property is not used for school purposes or is
not a public park owned and controlled by a State, County or local
government unit or is not a public housing facility owned by or leased to
a local housing authority or is not a publicly owned or leased library or
museum.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 and L. 1999, _____
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free Zone
Map have been complied with.
a. No person shall mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, or post
hand bills on, or in any other manner deface or injure, any public school
building within the Township, or on the fences, trees, lawns or other
fixtures to such buildings, nor shall any person trespass on the lawns
belonging to the grounds of any school buildings by crossing or
tramping upon same.
b. No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making in any
public school building, or on any street, or on any public or private
grounds within a radius of two hundred (200) yards of any building in
which a public school shall be in actual session, any noise or
§ 3-13.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-14.1
1:108
§ 3-14.2. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 827 § 6; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Municipal Court Judge of the Township, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-15. LIBRARY REGULATIONS.
§ 3-15.1. Failure to Return Library Materials Prohibited. [Ord. No.
1159 § 1]
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any
other article borrowed from the Free Public Library of the Township after
thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed
to that person at the last address furnished.
§ 3-15.2. Damage to Library Property. [Ord. No. 1159 § 2]
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual
material or other article or any part thereof, which is borrowed from,
owned by or is in the custody of the library.
disturbance by which the peace, quiet and good order of such school
shall be disrupted.
c. No person shall utter any loud and offensive or profane or indecent
language on any of the lands or premises belonging to the Board of
Education of the Township, or occupied by the Board, or on any street
or grounds within a radius of two hundred (200) yards of said lands or
premises.
d. No person shall, in any school room where any public school is
assembled or in any building in which such school is in session or on the
grounds within a radius of two hundred (200) yards of the same, disturb
or interrupt the peace and good order of such school and no person,
whether a student in the school or who is a parent of a student
attending the school, or any other person, shall conduct or behave
himself so as to disturb or interrupt the peace, quiet and good order of
the school, either in the school or on the grounds within a radius of two
hundred (200) yards of the same and any person must leave the school
premises on the request of a teacher or person in charge of the school;
or the grounds within a radius of two hundred (200) yards of the school
upon the request of a Police Officer, when the person is disturbing the
peace and good order of the school.
§ 3-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15.3
1:109
§ 3-15.3. Rules and Regulations to Be Posted. [Ord. No. 1159 § 3]
The Board of Library Trustees shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place
in the Free Public Library building, rules, regulations and procedures
governing the borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets, or any other item
or article which may be available for such borrowing to the public.
§ 3-15.4. Compliance with Rules, Regulations and Procedures. [Ord.
No. 1159 § 4]
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any other
item or article from the Free Public Library Building without complying with
the rules, regulations and procedures of the Library for borrowing such
items or articles.
§ 3-15.5. Filing of Complaint by Library Director. [Ord. No. 1159
§ 5]
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal
Court under the following conditions: a. A certified letter, return receipt
requested, shall be sent by the Library Administration after six (6) weeks,
informing the person that the book or material is overdue and that he is
subject to prosecution pursuant to this section. b. In the case of a minor,
the letter shall be sent to the parents of the minor involved. c. The book,
material or article shall be overdue for at least two (2) months.
§ 3-15.6. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 1159 § 6]
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty
($50.00) dollars or twice the cost of the book, whichever is greater and a
penalty of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for the second and
each succeeding offense.
§ 3-16. DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS.
§ 3-16.1. Distribution of Obscene Materials Prohibited. [Ord. No.
906 § 1]
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from
one (1) person to another or expose in any public place or anywhere in
view of a store or place frequented by the public, any morally, indecent or
obscene publications or explicit sexual material, printed or written manner
or picture or other representation. It shall be unlawful to keep any such
publication, printed or written matter, picture or other representation in
any place frequented by or where it may come into the possession of minors
or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor.
§ 3-15.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-16.2
1:110
§ 3-16.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 906 § 2]
As used in this section:
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Shall mean, within the terms of this
section, any pictorial or three-dimensional material depicting human sexual
intercourse, masturbation, bestiality, oral intercourse, anal intercourse,
direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture
in the context of a sexual relationship or human genitalia, nudity, sexual
conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse.
OBSCENE — Shall mean any material or performance for which, if
considered as a whole: a. Its predominant appeal is to the prurient,
shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, excretion, sadism or masochism;
and b. it is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community
standards in describing or representing such matters; and c. which taken as
a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
§ 3-16.3. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 906 § 3; New]
Any person having been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-17. LOITERING.
§ 3-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 834 § 1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about
aimlessly.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — Shall mean and include any adult person having
care or custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the
order of any court or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place to which the public has access
and shall include any street, highway, road, alley, or sidewalk. It shall also
include the front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as
parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the
control of the person charged with violating this section, or in the case of a
minor, not owned or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 3-17.2. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. [Ord. No. 834 § 2]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created a disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
§ 3-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17.2
1:111
§ 3-17.3. Discretion of Police Officer; Refusal to Obey Officer. [Ord.
No. 834 § 3]
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 3-17.2,
he/she may, if he/she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public
peace and safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 3-17.4. Loitering by Minors Prohibited; Parental Responsibility.
[Ord. No. 834 § 4]
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall
knowingly permit that minor to loiter in violation of this section.
§ 3-17.5. Notice of Violation. [Ord. No. 834 § 5]
Whenever any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years is charged with a
violation of this section, his/her parent or guardian shall be notified of this
fact by the Chief of Police or any other person designated by him/her to give
such notice.
§ 3-17.6. Subsequent Violations by Minor; Presumption of
Knowledge of Parent or Guardian. [Ord. No. 834 § 6]
If at any time within thirty (30) days following the giving of notice as
provided in subsection 3-17.5, the minor to whom such notice relates again
violates this section, it shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the
contrary that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his/her
parent or guardian.
§ 3-17.7. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 834 § 7; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-18. SCREENING OF PERSONNEL EMPLOYED BY CHILD CARE
CENTERS OR EMPLOYEES WHO WORK IN CHILD CARE.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in subsection 3-17.1. This paragraph shall include the
making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting
nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in
whose hearing, they are made.
§ 3-17.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-18.1
1:112
§ 3-18.1. Screening of Personnel Required. [Ord. No. 1447 § 1]
Every person, corporation or other entity, including the Township who
operates centers where children are cared for in any manner or who is
under contract with the Township to provide child care services shall be
responsible for the recruitment of appropriate personnel, verification of
credentials and references, screening of all current and future personnel
and the selection of and hiring of all personnel necessary to furnish child
care services of any kind.
Such screening shall include, but not limited to, the following steps:
§ 3-18.2. Fingerprinting Required; Written Consent by Employee.
[Ord. No. 1447 § 2]
Each operator is authorized and required to have all current or prospective
personnel fingerprinted by the appropriate agency. As a condition of
employment and/or continued employment, the operator shall obtain
written consent from all current and prospective child care services
personnel for fingerprinting and review of criminal records. Denial of such
consent by any employee shall be grounds for dismissal or refuse to hire.
§ 3-18.3. Fingerprinting; Investigations; Results to Be Confidential.
[Ord. No. 1447 § 3]
All fingerprinting, investigations, obtaining of criminal records shall be
done by the Police Department of the Township. The results of such
procedure shall be revealed to the person, corporation or other entity by
the Police Department, and the person, corporation or other entity shall not
reveal the results of the investigations to anyone other than the personnel
employed by such person, corporation or other entity who must see the
results by virtue of their job duties, and to the current or prospective
employee. Any violation of this provision shall be liable, upon conviction, to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Fingerprinting;
b. Review of criminal convictions and pending criminal actions, upon
receipt of the results of a Police investigation, pursuant to subsection
3-18.3 hereof, providing that the operator shall not dismiss or
permanently deny employment to current or prospective personnel
merely because they are subjects of pending criminal action;
c. Making inquiry with the Statewide central register of child abuse and
maltreatment; and
d. For prospective personnel, inquiry of the applicant's three (3) most
recent employees.
§ 3-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18.4
1:113
§ 3-18.4. Documentation of Compliance Required. [Ord. No. 1447
§ 4]
The Township shall require appropriate documentation from the operator
indicating compliance with this section.
§ 3-18.5. Requirements to Be Incorporated into Contracts. [Ord. No.
1447 § 5]
The requirements imposed upon operators of child care service centers
shall be incorporated in contracts for child care services entered into
between the Township and such operators, and any violation thereof shall
be a material breach of contract, sufficient to enable the Township to
terminate the contract without liability to such operator.
§ 3-18.6. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1447 § 6]
As used in this section:
CHILD CARE SERVICE CENTERS — Shall mean any location where
services of any kind are provided with respect to children under the age of
eighteen (18), except school, which are regulated by the State.
CHILD CARE SERVICES — Shall mean any services performed at centers
mentioned in these definitions.
FAMILY DAY CARE SERVICE CENTERS — Shall mean any location where
any services of any kind are provided with respect to children under the age
of eighteen (18), except school, which are regulated by the State.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person, corporation or other entity including
the Township who are under contract with the Township, County, State
of New Jersey, and/or Federal government to provide child care service
centers or family day care service centers in the Township. This term shall
also include the owner or owners of such child care service center or such
family day care service center.
PERSONNEL — Shall mean employees of child care service centers, family
day care providers, members of their households and Head Start
employees.
§ 3-19. FALSE INFORMATION TO A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
§ 3-19.1. Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1650 §§ I, II]
a. No person shall, with purpose to hinder the apprehension, prosecution,
conviction or punishment of another for an offense, provide false
information to a law enforcement officer.
b. No person shall, with the purposes to hinder that person's own
apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment, provide false
information to a law enforcement officer.
§ 3-18.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-19.2
1:114
§ 3-19.2. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1650 § III]
The general penalty provisions set forth in Section 1-5 of "The Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Neptune" are incorporated herein.
§ 3-20. (RESERVED)18
§ 3-21. SALE OF TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
TWENTY-ONE (21) AND USE OF TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES
PROHIBITED.
§ 3-21.1. Retail Sale of Tobacco Products. [Ord. No. 96-9, § 1; Ord.
No. 2017-26]
§ 3-21.2. Identification Required. [Ord. No. 96-9, § 2; Ord. No.
2017-26]
a. No person shall sell tobacco products or nicotine delivery products in
the Township of Neptune unless the sale of such products is controlled
by an employee of the establishment. A person may only sell tobacco
products or nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange
between the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays of tobacco
products or nicotine delivery products shall be prohibited.
b. No person shall sell tobacco products or nicotine delivery products to
any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years or give tobacco
products or nicotine delivery products to any person under the age of
twenty-one (21).
c. Retail establishments where tobacco products or nicotine delivery
products are sold shall conspicuously post and reasonably maintain
signs having a minimum size of six (6) inches by eight (8) inches where
these products are displayed and at all check-out counters notifying
customers that proof of age is required to purchase tobacco products or
nicotine delivery products.
a. All clerks, selling tobacco products or nicotine delivery products shall
verify by means of government-issued photographic identification
containing the bearer's date of birth that no person purchasing the
tobacco or nicotine containing products is younger than twenty-one
(21) years of age. No such verification is required for any person over
the age of twenty-six (26). No clerk shall sell tobacco products or
nicotine delivery products to a person under twenty-one (21) years of
age who has a note from an adult requesting such sale.
b. No person selling tobacco products or nicotine delivery products shall
allow an employee to sell or distribute such products until the employee
has read the Monmouth County Board of Health regulations and State
18.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-20, Registration of Sex Offenders and Offenders Who
Commit Other Predatory Acts Against Children, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 1685, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 09-24.
§ 3-19.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.2
1:115
§ 3-21.3. Prohibition of Tobacco Vending Machines and Tobacco
Vending Machine Sales. [Ord. No. 96-9, § 3]
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a vending
machine in the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-21.4. Removal of Tobacco Vending Machines. [Ord. No. 96-9 § 4]
All tobacco vending machines made unlawful by the terms of this section
shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this
section.
§ 3-21.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 96-9 § 5]
§ 3-21.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 96-9 § 6]
§ 3-22. PREVENTION OF VICE AND IMMORALITY.19
§ 3-22.1. Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 1]
No person shall engage in any type of disorderly conduct within the
territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-22.2. (Reserved)20
laws pertaining to the sale or distribution of tobacco products and
nicotine delivery products and has signed a statement that the
employee has read the regulations. Such form statement will be
supplied by the Monmouth County Board of Health and kept on file at
the establishment subject to review by the Monmouth County Board of
Health.
a. Whenever a police officer reasonably believes there exists a violation of
this section, he/she may issue a summons which shall state the nature
of the violation.
b. A police officer, after giving proper identification, may inspect any
matter, thing, premise, place, person, record, vehicle, incident, or event
as necessary.
c. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars,
nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each offense.
b. Each sale of tobacco to a minor shall constitute a separate violation.
19.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1 and 96-7.
§ 3-21.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-22.3
1:116
§ 3-22.3. Indecent or Lewd Dress, Behavior or Activities Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 96-40 § 3]
No person shall appear on any street, avenue, road or any public place
within the territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune in a state of
nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or cause any indecent or lewd
exposure to another person whatever or offer to sell any indecent or lewd
book, picture or thing nor shall anyone exhibit or perform any indecent,
immoral or lewd act and/or representation of such an act.
§ 3-22.4. House of Ill Fame Prohibited. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 4]
No person shall keep or maintain a disorderly house of ill fame within the
territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune nor shall any person
permit their house or other place to be used as a house of ill fame.
§ 3-22.5. Exhibition of Animals for Fighting Prohibited. [Ord. No.
96-40 § 5]
No person shall allow any cockpit or other place for the exhibition of
animals in a fight within the territorial boundaries of the Township of
Neptune.
§ 3-22.6. Disturbing the Peace Prohibited. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 6]
No person shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making improper, loud
noise or disturbance, riot or breach of the peace within the territorial
boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-22.7. Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks Prohibited. [Ord. No.
96-40 § 7]
No person shall unnecessarily impede or obstruct public travel by standing
on the public sidewalk or in the public street without the authority to do so
within the territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-22.8. Disturbing Places of Worship Prohibited. [Ord. No. 96-40
§ 8]
No person shall disturb any congregation or assembly meeting for religious
worship in any church or any building by making a noise or by rude or
indecent behavior or profane language so as to disturb the assemblage
within the territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
20.Editor's Note: Former subsection 3-22.2, Intoxication Prohibited, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 96-40, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 10-28.
§ 3-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22.9
1:117
§ 3-22.9. Conduct Annoying to Persons on Street Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 96-40 § 9]
No person shall engage in any practice, exercise or conduct having a
tendency to annoy persons passing on the sidewalks or in the streets within
the territorial boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-22.10. Destruction of Public Property Prohibited. [Ord. No.
96-40 § 10]
No person shall injure or destroy or assist in injuring or destroying any
public property belonging to the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-22.11. Security Gates at Wesley Lake. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 11]
No person shall attempt to walk around, jump over, scale or in any other
way pass through or go around the security gates that are established and
erected on the footbridges of Wesley Lake during such time as the gates
are closed to pedestrian traffic pursuant to Township resolution as may be
changed from time to time.
§ 3-22.12. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 96-40 § 12]
Any person violating the provisions of this section, shall, on conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months in jail,
or both, within the discretion of the court.
§ 3-23. BOATS AND PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
§ 3-23.1. Establishment of Slow-Speed, No Wake Zone. [Ord. No.
97-25 § 1]
The Township of Neptune hereby establishes a slow-speed, no-wake zone
within fifty (50') feet of the shore line within all of the territorial waters
within the Township of Neptune located along the Shark River and North
Channel. This section shall only be in effect when the area is clearly marked
by appropriate buoys, markers or signs.
§ 3-23.2. Regulation of Speed Required. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 2]
The speed of any boat or watercraft shall at all times be regulated so as
to avoid danger or injury to any persons in the water or to watercraft and
its occupants, whether floating, moored, anchored or underway, or to piers,
wharfs, bulkheads, docks or other watercraft construction, either directly
by the effect of wash or wave raised by such boat or watercraft through its
speed or otherwise.
§ 3-22.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-23.3
1:118
§ 3-23.3. Personal Watercraft Defined. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 3]
Personal watercraft shall be defined as a power vessel which is designed to
be operated by a person or persons, sitting, standing or kneeling; uses an
internal combustion engine to power a water jet pump which propels the
vessel through the water; and, uses an internal combustion engine that does
not have the ability to reverse the pump's thrust so as to allow the vessel to
be operated in reverse or have the ability to disengage the pump so as to
prevent the vessel from making headway.
§ 3-23.4. Boat and Watercraft Prohibited in Certain Areas. [Ord. No.
97-25 § 4]
The operation of any boat, personal watercraft or jet-ski shall be prohibited
on the north side of the East End Avenue bridge at all times.
§ 3-23.5. Boat Ramp and Launching Regulations. [Ord. No. 97-25
§ 5]
§ 3-23.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 6]
§ 3-24. OFF-ROAD VEHICLES.
a. The Township Committee of the Township of Neptune deems necessary
the adoption of the within section in order to protect the health and
welfare of its residents and citizens from the nuisance-like conditions
created by jet-skis launched from the riverfront.
b. It shall be a violation of this section for anyone to launch a motorized
boat, vessel, motorized watercraft, jet-ski or personal watercraft from
any location along the Shark River or North Channel except from a
permanent launching ramp, dock or pier.
c. The provisions established by this section shall not apply to any
Township-sanctioned special events.
a. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of no less
than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and no more than one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars, by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or
by community service of not more than ninety (90) days or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service, as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
b. The violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 3-23.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24.1
1:119
§ 3-24.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 97-21 § 1]
The Township Committee enacts this section in order to improve standards
of safety as well as to minimize the impact of the operation of certain
motorized vehicles on residents of the Township, the public at large and the
environment since such operation has been in a manner so as to create loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace,
quiet and tranquility of others.
§ 3-24.2. Definition. [Ord. No. 97-21 § 2]
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — Shall include, but not be limited to, minibikes,
trail bikes, dirt bikes, motor scooters, go-carts, motorized skate boards, allterrain
vehicles and dune buggies.
§ 3-24.3. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 97-21 § 3]
It shall be unlawful to operate any off-road vehicle anywhere within the
Township under the following circumstances:
§ 3-24.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 97-21 § 4]
This section shall not be applicable to police or other emergency vehicles,
including but not limited to ambulances, motorcycles, fire control vehicles
and the like, or to motorized lawnmowers, tractors or farm vehicles or
construction equipment.
§ 3-24.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 97-21 § 5]
a. On any public street, sidewalk, bicycle path, open spaces, park or any
other public lands within the Township; provided, however, that
vehicles registered under N.J.S. 39:3C-19, et seq. shall be regulated by
that Statute as to operation on the aforesaid areas.
b. On the private property of another person or party within the express
written permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property;
the written permission shall be exhibited to Police Officers on request.
c. Without any muffler device or, in the case of vehicles with two-cycle
engines, without any spark arrester.
d. In a manner creating loud or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere
with the peace, quiet or health of other persons.
e. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety or the property of any person or wildlife.
f. Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
a. For persons eighteen (18) year of age or over, violation of the provisions
of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to one (1) or more of
the following in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court:
impounding of the motorized vehicle for six (6) months at the violators
§ 3-24.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-24.5
1:120
§ 3-25. FEEDING OF WATERFOWL.
§ 3-25.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43 § 1]
It has been determined that the presence of large numbers of all types of
waterfowl on or around ponds, lakes, the Shark River, and the beachfront
within the Township of Neptune and on all other property in the Township
of Neptune creates a public health nuisance due to the accumulation of
droppings in and around said ponds, lakes, the Shark River and the
beachfront, which is inimical to the health and general welfare of the public.
The purpose of this section is to prevent such conduct that may attract such
waterfowl to the properties within the Township.
§ 3-25.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43 § 1]
As used in this section:
WATERFOWL — Shall be defined to include those species of birds commonly
known as "swans", "geese", "brant", "seagulls", "river and sea ducks",
"mallards" and any other type of waterfowl that is found within the
boundaries of the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-25.3. Feeding of Any and All Types of Waterfowl Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43 § 1]
No person or persons shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for any
and all types of waterfowl within the Township of Neptune on lands either
publicly or privately owned.
expense, or imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by
the Township for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollars or by a period of community service not to exceed ninety (90)
days.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this section exists, shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, any violation of this section shall be considered a
separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
b. In the event the provisions of this section are violated by an operator or
a registered owner of the vehicle who is at the time of such violation
under the age of eighteen (18), such violation will result in the
following: impoundment of the motorized vehicle for six (6) months at
the expense of the violators, parents or guardian and institution of
juvenile delinquency proceedings against such minor operator or
owner.
§ 3-24.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-25.4
1:121
§ 3-25.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43 § 1]
This section shall not be construed to prohibit humane acts towards
waterfowl in individual cases, such as temporary nurturing of a wounded
bird on one's own premises. The prohibitions contained in this section on
feeding waterfowl shall on the beachfront only apply to Canadian Geese.
§ 3-25.5. Prohibited Conditions. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43
§ 1]
No person or persons shall create or foster any condition to exist or
continue which results in a congregation or congestion of any type of
waterfowl or in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or droppings on private
or public property within the Township of Neptune creating a public health
nuisance or in any manner threatening the health, safety and welfare of the
public and/or the waterfowl.
§ 3-25.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No. 00-43 § 1]
The Police Department and Code Enforcement Department are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 3-25.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 00-11 § 1; Ord. No.
00-43 § 1]
Any person or persons convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall be punished by a fine no less than ten ($10.00) dollars, nor
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. A warning only shall be issued for
the first violation of this section.
§ 3-26. ALARM SYSTEMS AND DEVICES.
§ 3-26.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices
and equipment, whether they operate by producing a visual or audible
signal and whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means of
activating a device requiring response thereto by the Police Department.
§ 3-26.2. Scope. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm, or local alarm designed
to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency or designed to
summon the Police Department, Fire Department or any agency serving the
municipality to any location in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 3-25.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-26.3
1:122
§ 3-26.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
ALARM CONSOLE — Shall mean the console, panel or collection of devices
giving a visual and/or audio response and located within the confines of the
police or communications department of the Township of Neptune.
ALARM DEVICE — Shall mean any type of alarm system activating
equipment in the alarm console providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril.
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean equipment or a device or an assembly of
equipment and devices designed to signal the presence of an emergency or
hazard requiring urgent attention and to which Police or Fire Department
or any other services may be expected to respond.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean any type of alarm using telephone lines
transmitting an alarm directly through the police phone system providing
warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or signal of an alarm system
actuated by inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a
person other than an intruder, and shall include as well, alarm caused by
malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant equipment, but shall
not include alarms caused by malfunction of the alarm console or police
device.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or device which, when actuated,
produces a signal not connected to another source, such as store burglar
alarms actuating bell devices.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person owning an alarm device or a local
alarm within the scope of this section.
POLICE CHIEF — Shall mean the Chief of Police of the Township of Neptune
or his designated representative.
§ 3-26.4. False Alarms. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1; Ord. No. 01-40 § 1]
a. In the event of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall
cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of all false alarms.
False alarms shall result in the following penalties:
For the first and second alarm in a calendar year, a warning shall be
issued.
For the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a penalty of fifteen
($15.00) dollars shall be paid to the Township of Neptune.
For the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a penalty of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars shall be paid to the Township of Neptune.
For the fifth and each and every subsequent false alarm thereafter in
the same calendar year, a penalty of fifty ($50.00) dollars shall be paid
to the Township of Neptune.
§ 3-26.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-26.4
1:123
§ 3-26.5. Payment of Penalties. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1; Ord. No. 01-40
§ 1]
The Neptune Police Department shall enforce the provisions of subsection
3-26.4 by the signing of the appropriate complaint with the Neptune
Municipal Court.
§ 3-26.6. Time Limit on Audible Alarms. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for an alarm device, dial alarm, local alarm or other
audible alarm to ring or put forth any other sound for a period in excess
of thirty (30) minutes. Any such occurrence shall result in a penalty of fifty
($50.00) dollars for each violation.
§ 3-26.7. Local Alarm Tests. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this section
shall notify the Police Department immediately prior to and after testing
is completed. Failure to make the required notifications shall result in a
penalty of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each violation.
§ 3-26.8. Hearing. [Ord. No. 01-33 § 1]
An alarm owner/user disputing the assessment of a penalty hereunder may
request a hearing by the Chief of Police or his designated representative
by serving a request therefore upon the Chief of Police within five (5) days
of service of the notice of violation. Such request shall set forth briefly the
grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the
factual matters contained in the notice of violation, which are to be disputed
at the hearing. The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the request, shall set a
hearing date within thirty (30) days. A decision will be issued within thirty
(30) days of the hearing.
§ 3-27. FEEDING OF PIGEONS.
§ 3-27.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 02-12 § 1]
It has been determined that the presence of large numbers of pigeons in
and around parks, recreation areas, ponds, lakes, rivers, and the beachfront
within the Township of Neptune and on all other property in the Township
of Neptune creates a public health nuisance due to the accumulation of
droppings in and around said areas which is inimical to the health and
general welfare of the public. The purpose of this section is to prevent
such conduct that may attract such pigeons to the properties within the
Township.
b. If, in the determination of the Neptune Township Police Department, a
false alarm was the result of weather conditions, electrical failure, or
other uncontrollable malfunction, a penalty shall not be assessed nor
shall that alarm be counted for enforcement purposes.
§ 3-26.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-27.2
1:124
§ 3-27.2. Feeding of Any and All Types of Pigeons Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 02-12 § 1]
No person or persons shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food or
nourishment to any and all types of pigeons within the Township of Neptune
on lands either publicly or privately owned.
§ 3-27.3. Prohibited Conditions. [Ord. No. 02-12 § 1]
No person or persons shall create or foster any condition to exist or
continue which results in a congregation or congestion of any type of pigeon
or in an accumulation of feces or droppings on private or public property
within the Township of Neptune creating a public health nuisance or in any
manner threatening the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 3-27.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 02-12 § 1]
The Police Department and Code Enforcement Department are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 3-27.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 02-12 § 1]
Any person or persons convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall be punished by a fine no less than ten ($10.00) dollars, nor
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. A warning only shall be issued for
the first violation of this section.
§ 3-28. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS OF
EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS INVOLVED WITH PROGRAMS
INVOLVING MINORS.
§ 3-28.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division and/or the State
Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION OR CHRI — Shall mean
information collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and
stored in the computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI
Criminal History Information System, the National Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System or other states' computerized repositories
containing criminal history record information consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal
charges, and any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions,
dismissals, correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Neptune Township Police Department.
§ 3-27.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-28.1
1:125
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Shall mean any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requestors, as required or permitted
by a Federal or State statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by this section,
to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH SERVING ORGANIZATION OR ORGANIZATION —
Shall mean corporation, association or other organization established
pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey
Statutes, or other law of this State, but excluding public and nonpublic
schools, and which provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or
other activities or services for persons younger than eighteen (18) years of
age.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION OR SBI — Shall mean the New Jersey
State Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et
seq.) as a bureau within the Division of State Police.
TOWNSHIP SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Shall mean any programs
sponsored by the Township which provide and utilize Township facilities
and/or Township property and/or are covered under the Township's
insurance.
§ 3-28.2. Request for Criminal Background Checks. [Ord. No. 05-32
§ 1]
§ 3-28.3. Conditions Under Which a Person is Disqualified from
Service. [Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
a. The Township requires that all employees and volunteers of a nonprofit
youth serving organization request through the Department, that the
State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police conduct a
criminal history record background check on each prospective and
current employee or volunteer of the organization. A criminal history
record background check at the same level performed by the same third
party independent agency contracted by the Township within three (3)
years of the date of application to serve as an employee or volunteer of
a nonprofit youth serving organization shall be accepted by the
Township as a valid criminal history record background check.
b. The Division of State Police shall inform the third party independent
agency contracted by the Township whether the person's criminal
history record background check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying
crime or offense set forth in subsection 3-28.3 of this section.
c. The Township shall facilitate a criminal history record background
check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check from the
prospective or current employee or volunteer.
§ 3-28.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-28.3
1:126
§ 3-28.4. Submissions; Exchange of Background Check Information.
[Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
a. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
1. In New Jersey, any crime of disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et
seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
2. In any other State or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in paragraph a1 of this subsection.
b. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth servicing organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Township sponsored programs
involving minors, the Township shall presume that the employee or
volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions on the record.
c. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record background check is sufficient to disqualify an employee
or volunteer shall be made by the third party independent agency
contracted by the Township of Neptune. A person who is disqualified
from employment or serving as a volunteer due to the results of a
criminal history record background check shall be notified by the
Recreation Director that he or she has been disqualified. The
Recreation Director, or any other employee of the Township, shall not
have access to the specific reasons for a failed background check, only
that the individual has failed. The disqualified person shall be entitled
to file an appeal with the criminal background check appeal panel
created pursuant to subsection 3-28.7.
§ 3-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-28.4
1:127
§ 3-28.5. Limitations on Access and Use of Criminal History Record
Background Checks. [Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
§ 3-28.6. Employee or Volunteer May Challenge Accuracy of Report.
[Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant or existing
employee or volunteer for any purpose, the Township shall provide the
disqualified person with an opportunity to challenge the accuracy of the
information contained in the criminal history record. The disqualified
person shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to challenge and
correct this record. A person is not presumed guilty of any charges or
arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on the record.
a. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of nonprofit youth
serving organizations and/or employees and volunteers of Township
sponsored programs involving minors shall submit their name, address,
fingerprints and written consent to the organization for the criminal
history record background check to be performed. The organization
shall submit this documentation to the Neptune Township Police Chief,
or his designee, who shall coordinate the background check.
b. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this section.
c. The Township may, in its discretion, engage the services of a third party
independent agency to conduct the criminal history record background
checks authorized under this section.
a. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment is restricted to
authorized personnel on the nonprofit youth serving organization and/
or the Township sponsored program involving minors on a need to know
basis, as authorized by Federal or State statute, rule or regulation,
executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution
regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history record
information obtained under this section.
b. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating Federal or State regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
§ 3-28.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-28.7
1:128
§ 3-28.7. Appeal Process and Appeal Panel. [Ord. No. 05-32 § 1]
§ 3-29. (RESERVED)21
§ 3-30. SOLICITATIONS ON ROADWAYS.
§ 3-30.1. When permitted. [Ord. No. 11-22]
The Township of Neptune shall permit charitable organizations as defined
in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 to solicit contributions in roadways situate in the
Township of Neptune in accordance with the provisions contained herein.
§ 3-30.2. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 11-22]
All charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 who desire
to solicit contributions in roadways situate in the Township of Neptune
shall file an application for a permit with the Neptune Township Police
Department on a form supplied by said Police Department specifying the
following information:
a. Criminal Background Check Appeal Process. If the criminal background
check disqualifies an employee or volunteer or denies the challenge
concerning the accuracy of a criminal history report, the employee or
volunteer may appeal that determination by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Clerk of the Township of Neptune no later than twenty
(20) days after receiving the determination from the Recreation
Director. Any appeal requested shall proceed before the Criminal
Background Check Appeal Panel.
b. Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. In order to monitor and
supervise the enforcement of this section by the Recreation Director,
the Township of Neptune hereby creates a Criminal Background Check
Appeal Panel, which shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the
Neptune Township Committee. The three (3) members shall be
represented as follows: one (1) member of the Neptune Township
Committee, the Chief of Police (or his designee) and the Recreation
Director.
c. Powers of the Appeal Panel. The Criminal Background Check Appeal
Panel is granted and shall have and exercise, in addition to other
powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and appropriate to
carry out and execute the purposes of this section, including but not
limited to, holding hearings and adjudicating appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the determination of the criminal
background check concerning the disqualification of the employee or
volunteer and/or the accuracy of the criminal history record.
a. Name of applicant organization.
21.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-29, Sex Offender Residency Prohibition, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 05-38, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 09-24.
§ 3-28.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-30.2
1:129
§ 3-30.3. Approval of Denial of Application. [Ord. No. 11-22]
Upon the filing of a complete application in accordance with the provisions
of this section, the Neptune Township Police Department shall review said
application and make a recommendation of approval or denial to the
Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall present same to the Township
Committee of the Township of Neptune at the next regular meeting of the
Township Committee or as soon thereafter as the matter may be reached for
their review and consideration, after which the Township Committee shall
grant or deny the applicant's request. In the event the Township Committee
grants the applicant's request, the Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit
to the applicant which shall be subject to the representations contained
in the applicant's applicant and any conditions imposed by the Township
Committee.
§ 3-30.4. Minors Prohibited. [Ord. No. 11-22]
In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization from
the Township of Neptune for said charitable solicitation use any individual
under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to perform any function or task
associated with the said charitable solicitation in any roadway.
§ 3-30.5. Compliance with State Statutes Required. [Ord. No. 11-22]
Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the Township of
Neptune for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all of the terms
b. Address of applicant organization.
c. Telephone number of applicant organization.
d. Contact person of applicant organization.
e. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
f. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
g. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any county highway,
or intersection of a county highway said application shall include a copy
of an authorization from the Monmouth County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to permit said charitable solicitation.
h. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any State highway,
or intersection of a State highway said application shall include a copy
of an authorization from the Commissioner of the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey to permit said charitable
solicitation.
i. Identity the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be conducted
and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the members of
the public who will be traveling the roadways situate in the Township of
Neptune.
§ 3-30.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 3-30.5
1:130
and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, Chapter 82,
approved April 30, 1997.
§ 3-30.6. Township Not Liable. [Ord. No. 11-22]
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Township of
Neptune shall not be liable in any civil action for damages for property
damage or personal injury resulting from a motor vehicle accident arising
from or out of or in the course of roadway solicitations for the purpose of
soliciting contributions, conducted by charitable organizations as defined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20.
Chapter 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 4-1. REGISTRATION REQUIRED; ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 1576
§ 1; Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other business
entity to commence or carry on any profession, trade, business, calling,
soliciting, canvassing, peddling, hawking, or any itinerant merchant or
transient vending occupation or business (hereinafter inclusively referred
to as "occupation") in the Township of Neptune (the "Township"), in the
County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey, without first having procured
a mercantile registration from the Township authorizing such occupation
to conduct such business in the Township. An applicant conducting an
occupation at one (1) or more locations shall be required to obtain a
mercantile registration for each address, building, building unit (unless
connected by a common interior door and used for the same occupation),
property, structure or premises to conduct such occupation. Noncompliance
with any and all of the provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance
adopted by the Township being in full force and effect, shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation for each and every day that such occupation
continues to be conducted without procuring a mercantile registration.
Neptune Township Code Enforcement and the Neptune Township Police
Department, or any of their designated representatives, shall enforce the
mercantile registration, and the codes and regulations adopted herein, in
all buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries
of Neptune Township, excluding one-family owner-occupied structures. The
applicant shall also faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act, Uniform Fire Code and any and all other ordinances
adopted by the Township, or any regulations, statutes, laws, codes or
otherwise enforceable by the Township of Neptune, County of Monmouth,
State of New Jersey, United States of America or any other governmental
entity who may have authority to regulate the applicant's business.
§ 3-30.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:131
§ 4-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 1576 § 2]
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BUSINESS — Shall mean, for the purpose of this chapter, any person,
whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself/herself
or any other person, or for any body corporate or an officer of any
corporation or otherwise, shall be deemed engaging in business and subject
to the provisions of this chapter when he or she does one (1) act of selling
any goods or service or soliciting business or offering goods or services for
sale or hire or acquiring or using any vehicle, machine or device, or any
land or premises in the Township for business purposes.
PEDDLER OR HAWKER — Shall mean and include any person, whether a
resident of the Township or not, who goes from house to house, from place
to place or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Shall mean and include any person,
whether a resident of the Township or not, who goes from house to house,
from place to place or from street to street, soliciting or taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines, books, periodicals, photographs or personal property
of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for service to be performed
in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for
sale a sample of the subject for such order or whether or not he or she is
collecting advance payments on such orders.
ITINERANT MERCHANTS OR TRANSIENT VENDORS — Shall mean and
be defined in the category of hawker, peddler, solicitor, canvasser or junk
dealer, as herein set forth.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any firm, partnership, partner,
corporation or corporations, or persons. This chapter shall also include any
person who distributes circulars or any other matter from house to house in
the Township.
SALE — Shall mean any act wherein any person transfers to a customer
goods, wares, merchandise, food or services in the ordinary course of their
business and shall include not only the act of selling but also the opportunity
to display goods and to interact with potential customers.
§ 4-3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MERCANTILE
REGISTRATION.22
§ 4-3.1. Registration. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
It shall be the duty of the Township Registration Officer to review
applications and approve or deny registrations under this chapter for every
22.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1576.
§ 4-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-3.1
1:132
person, firm, corporation or other business entity required to pay a
registration hereunder. The registration shall set forth the fee and the
calendar dates for which such shall be effective. The registration shall also
state the name of the person, firm, corporation or other business entity
to whom the registration was issued; the categorization of the occupation;
and the address, location or place of business where such occupation is
permitted.
§ 4-3.2. Registration Not Transferable. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
Unless otherwise specifically provided for herein or written in the
registration, no registration granted or issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be transferred or assigned to any other person, firm,
corporation or other business entity, other than as set forth in the
registration. It is a violation of this chapter if any other person, firm,
corporation or other business entity conducts the same or different
occupation at the same or any other address without first obtaining a
registration required under this chapter.
§ 4-3.3. Transfer of Registration to New Place of Business. [Ord. No.
04-50 § 1]
A registration may, with approval from the Township Registration Official,
be transferred by the person, firm, corporation or other business entity
named therein to a different location in the event of removal from the place
designated on said registration. A fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars shall
be paid for any request to transfer the registration from one (1) location
to another. Transfers shall only be valid if approved and signed by the
Township Registration Officer.
§ 4-3.4. Registration Exhibition. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
Registration shall be posted and exhibited in a conspicuous part of the place
of business, and readily visible by consumers and Township officials. Every
person, firm, corporation or other business entity who has a registration,
without having a fixed place of business, shall carry such registration with
him at all times while conducting the business for which the same was
granted. Every person, firm, corporation or other business entity with a
registration under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit
the same whenever requested to do so by any Township Police Officer, the
Township Registration Officer or by any other Township official authorized
to inspect registrations.
§ 4-3.5. Registration Duplicates; Fee Errors. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
An applicant shall pay a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars for each duplicate
registration requested to replace any registration issued under the
provisions of this chapter. In no case shall any error made by the Township
Registration Officer in calculating the amount of a registration fee prevent
or prejudice the collection by the Township of Neptune of the amount which
§ 4-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.5
1:133
shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a
registration under this chapter.
§ 4-3.6. Registration Fees Not Refunded. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
No refund shall be made for a mercantile registration application fee as a
result of denial or withdrawal of any registration application.
§ 4-3.7. Registration of Unlawful Business. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
The payment of a registration fee required by this section, it's acceptance
by the said Township, and the issuance of a mercantile registration shall
not entitle or authorize the holder thereof to carry on any business in
the Township of Neptune if such business would violate any ordinance
of the Township of Neptune, or any statute, rule, regulation or otherwise
promulgated by the United States of America, the State of New Jersey,
County of Monmouth, Township of Neptune or other governmental entity.
§ 4-3.8. Compliance with Laws and Ordinances; Inspections. [Ord.
No. 04-50 § 1]
Every person, firm, corporation or other business entity required to register
under this chapter shall comply with all laws of the State of New Jersey
and ordinances of the Township of Neptune relating and pertaining to the
preservation and protection of the lives, health, morals and general welfare
of the citizens and visitors of the Township. For that purpose, the person,
firm, corporation or other business entity hereby authorizes the Township
Registration Officer, Code Enforcement Supervisor, Health Officer, Fire
Inspector, Police Officer or any of their designated representatives to
conduct inspections of any structure, building or premises at reasonable
hours to ensure compliance with this chapter. Upon completing such
inspections, it shall be the duty of those Township officials or their
designated representatives to report to the Township Committee any
violation of any laws of the State of New Jersey or of the Ordinances of
the Township of Neptune, relating to the preservation and protection of
the lives, health, morals and general welfare of the citizens and visitors in
the Township. The Township Committee shall order and direct said officers
forenamed to take such actions as they deem necessary and lawful to
remedy and correct any violation.
§ 4-3.9. Registration of New Business. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
When any person, firm, corporation or other business entity applies for a
registration to conduct any business which is not then being conducted
at the building, land or premises for which the registration is sought, the
Township Registration Officer shall first require the applicant to apply for
a zoning permit with the Township Zoning Officer, to determine if the use
is a permitted use in accordance with all applicable zoning ordinances or
a continuation of a preexisting, nonconforming use at the building, land
or premises, which has been grandfathered as a continuous use. If it is
§ 4-3.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-3.9
1:134
determined by the Zoning Officer that the proposed use does not comply
with the zoning ordinance or it jeopardizes or constitutes a menace to the
lives, health, morals, safety or general welfare of the citizens and visitors
of the Township of Neptune, the Township Registration Officer shall refuse
to issue the mercantile registration. Any denial or other action taken by
the Township Registration Officer may be appealed within fifteen (15) days
from the date of denial or action by the Township Registration Officer.
Appeals may be made to the Township Committee who shall, after notice
and hearing, determine whether the action of the Township Registration
Officer shall be affirmed or reversed.
§ 4-3.10. Registration Fees; How and When Payable. [Ord. No. 04-50
§ 1; Ord. No. 10-29 § 1]
All registration fees shall be paid in advance of any determination by the
Township Registration Officer, and shall be tendered in lawful money of
the United States at the office of the Mercantile Registration Officer of
the Township of Neptune. All annual registrations shall date from the first
day of January and expire on the last day of December of each year. The
registration fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the registration fees contained
herein for any new registration applied for after September 1st of the
current licensing year. No greater or lesser amount of money shall be
received for any registration than is provided in the section, and no
registration shall be issued for any period of time other than as provided
herein. There will be a late fee penalty of ten ($10.00) dollars for each
registration not received by January 31 of the current registration year.
§ 4-3.11. Registrations for Home Occupations. [Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
Home occupations are permitted occupations set forth in the Neptune
Township Zoning Ordinance or other applicable Township Ordinances that
are incidental to residential use of the premises and are conducted in
the main building by a resident of the premises without assistance from
nonresidents. Such occupations may not occupy more than thirty (30%)
percent of the floor area of one (1) floor of the main building.
Registration for home occupations shall prohibit the following:
a. Client appointments shall not be conducted at the home.
b. Frequent deliveries of merchandise shall not be accepted at the home.
c. Nonresident employees shall not work at the home.
d. Displaying goods or signs on the residence or grounds to identify the
occupation shall not be permitted.
e. Storing hazardous materials in the home or on the grounds shall be
prohibited.
f. Storing large equipment or supplies on the grounds of the residence
shall be prohibited.
§ 4-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.11
1:135
§ 4-4. SOLICITOR, CANVASSER, PEDDLER, HAWKER, ITINERANT
MERCHANT OR TRANSIENT VENDOR.
§ 4-4.1. Situs of Business Established. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [1]]
Any person residing within the boundaries of the Township, soliciting orders
for the sale of any goods, printed matter or merchandising and causing
said goods, printed matter or merchandise to be delivered from any point
within or outside the limits of the State of New Jersey to the solicitor's
place of residence for distribution; or if in the residence, all or part of the
records or monies pertaining to the goods, printed matter or merchandise,
are maintained for any period of time, that person shall, for the purposes of
this section, be deemed as having established, in effect, a situs of business,
upon the premises or buildings of which it shall be unlawful to place any
sign advertising same, if in a residential zone; and the solicitor, therefore,
shall be considered as not engaged in interstate commerce and thus subject
to the provisions of this section.
§ 4-4.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [2]]
It shall be unlawful for any hawkers, peddlers, canvassers, solicitors or
junk dealers, as defined in this section, to engage in any such business or
operations in the Township without having first obtained a license therefor,
in compliance with the provisions of this section and in any event, only in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this section and only in parts
or locations of the Township as permitted herein.
§ 4-4.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [3]]
The terms of this section shall not be held to include the acts of persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, and
nothing contained herein shall be held to prohibit any sale required by
Statute or by order of any Court.
§ 4-4.4. Information for License. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [4]]
Applicants for a license under this section must file with the Township
License Officer a sworn application in writing which shall give the following
information:
Any behavior or activity related to operating the home occupation that
disturbs the quiet demeanor of the residential area will be cause for the
Mercantile Registration Officer to give notification, in writing, to the Township
Committee to schedule a hearing for review of compliance or noncompliance
with the regulations for operating a home occupation as cited in this chapter
or any related ordinance.
a. Name and physical description of applicant.
b. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant.
§ 4-3.11 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-4.4
1:136
c. Birth date of applicant.
d. Social Security Number.
e. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, services or
wares to be sold.
f. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
g. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and the
days of the week and the hours of the day within which the business will
be conducted.
h. The source of supply of the goods or property or services proposed to be
sold, where such goods, services or products are located and the
method of delivery.
i. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly
evaluate such character and business responsibility.
j. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any Municipal ordinance other than
traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor.
k. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Neptune Township Police
Department who shall determine whether the fingerprints are
necessary for proper identification, which fingerprint records shall be
immediately processed for classification and identification. The
applicant shall also have two (2) photographs taken by the Neptune
Township Police Department providing one (1) photograph to the
License Officer and attaching one (1) photograph to the original
application. The applicant shall provide a twelve ($12.00) dollar money
order payable to "NJ State Police" for the fingerprinting process and
pay four ($4.00) dollars to Neptune Township Police Department for the
photographs. These fees are in addition to any other fees set forth
herein.
l. At the time of filing the application, a fee of two hundred ($200.00)
dollars shall be paid to the License Officer to cover the cost of
investigation of the facts stated therein as to the original applicant.
There shall be an additional charge of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for
each and every additional solicitor, canvasser, peddler, hawker,
itinerant merchant or transient vendor requiring such investigation
under one general application.
m. No license shall be issued until the application shall have been
approved by the Police Department, allowing adequate time for
investigation of the facts set forth in the application.
§ 4-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.4
1:137
§ 4-4.5. Charitable, Religious, Patriotic or Philanthropic
Organizations. [Ord. No. 1576 § 1 [5, 6]]
n. An application by a partnership shall be signed by all partners with
foregoing provisions of this section, answered in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached thereto
individual statements in accordance with all of the provisions of this
section relating to every employee, agent, or servant who shall act as a
solicitor and signed by each such agent, servant or employee and full
compliance herewith by each of the individuals.
a. Any person, organization, society or association desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property, or
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item
of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from
persons other than members of such organization at any place or places
within the Township for a charitable, religious, patriotic or
philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from provisions of subsections
4-4.4 and 4-4.7, provided there is filed a sworn application in writing
with the License Officer which shall give the following information:
1. Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
2. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
3. Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
4. Whether or not any commission, fees or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount
thereof.
5. Name and address of each agent or representative employed or
affiliated with such organization, society, association or
corporation.
6. Name of owner of property where solicitation is to be held.
b. Upon being satisfied that such person, organization, society or
association is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic
organization and that the agents or representatives who shall conduct
the solicitations are of good moral character and reputation, the
License Officer shall issue a permit without charge to such
organization, association or corporation to solicit in the Township. Such
organization, association, society or corporation shall furnish all its
members, guests or representatives conducting solicitation, credentials
in writing stating the name of the organization, name of the agent and
purpose of solicitation.
1. Each application shall be referred to the License Officer who shall
immediately institute such investigation of applicant's business and
moral character as he/she deems necessary for the protection of
§ 4-4.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-4.5
1:138
§ 4-4.6. License Fee. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [7]]
Every applicant for a license under this section shall pay a license fee of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
§ 4-4.7. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [8]]
Every person, society, association or organization to which a license is
issued under the terms of this section shall be governed by the following
rules and regulations:
the public good and shall endorse the application in the manner
prescribed in this section, within a reasonable period of time after
it has been filed by the applicant.
2. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the product
or services are not free from fraud, the License Officer shall
endorse on such application his/her disapproval and his/her
reasons for the same and no license shall be issued.
a. Any veteran who holds a special State license issued under the laws of
the State of New Jersey, shall be exempt from securing a license as
provided herein for hawking and peddling, but shall be required to
comply with, all other provisions of this section applicable and shall be
required to procure from the License Officer a special Veteran's Permit
which shall be issued by the License Officer upon proper identification.
b. Any person to whom a valid mercantile license shall have been issued
under provisions of laws other than the within section shall be exempt
from securing a license as provided in this section, but said person or
said person's employees, agents or servants shall be required to comply
with all other provisions of this section and shall be required to procure
from the License Officer a permit upon proper identification and
compliance herewith.
a. All circulars, samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property and not left on or about the same.
b. No person subject to the provisions of this section shall canvass, solicit
or distribute circulars or other matters or call from house to house
except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday from May 1 to September 30 and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday, from October 1 through April 30. No
commercial solicitation, distribution or canvassing is permitted on
Sunday in the Township.
c. No person subject to the terms of this section shall enter or attempt to
enter the lands of any resident in the Township without an express
invitation from the occupant of the house.
§ 4-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.7
1:139
d. No person subject to the terms of this section shall conduct themselves
in such a manner as to become objectionable to or annoy an occupant of
any house.
e. Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the
request of any citizen or member of Police Department.
f. All vending units shall not be permitted to be in use and shall be off the
streets and sidewalks of the Township during the period from 9:00 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m. daily.
g. All vending units must be on wheels and mobile.
h. No vending unit or motor vehicle shall be left unattended for any reason
on the streets or sidewalks of the Township.
i. There shall be no sale of food or beverage for immediate consumption
unless the vendor has made available for the public use a litter
receptacle which is available for use by his patrons.
j. No vendor shall leave any location without first picking up, removing or
disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from the sales made by him/
her. He/she shall not sweep into or deposit any accumulation of litter
into any gutter or street.
k. No vendor shall allow any items relating to the operation of the vending
business to be placed anywhere other than in or on the vending unit.
l. No vendor shall set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate,
carton or rack or other device to increase the selling or display capacity
of his unit or motor vehicle. There shall be no stacking of items to be
sold upon any sidewalk or street. All materials and/or merchandise
must be located solely on the vending unit.
m. No vendor shall solicit or conduct business with persons in motor
vehicles. All sales are to be conducted from the curbside of the vehicle
and only to pedestrians.
n. No person shall sell anything other than such commodities described in
his/her application.
o. No vendor shall use any device which produces a loud or raucous noise
or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound
amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public.
p. No hawker, peddler or vendor shall have any exclusive right to any
location in the public streets, nor shall be/she be permitted to operate
in any congested area where his/her operation might unreasonably
impede the public. A license to hawk, peddle or vend granted under this
chapter does not authorize the display or sale of merchandise from a
fixed location. The display or sale is hereby prohibited.
§ 4-4.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-4.7
1:140
§ 4-4.8. Record of Violations. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [9]]
The Chief of Police shall report to the License Officer all convictions for
violation of this section and the License Officer shall maintain a record for
each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
§ 4-4.9. Causes of Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [10]]
q. No person shall hawk, peddle or vend unless he/she has in his/her
possession a valid State license, issued pursuant to Title 45, New Jersey
Statutes Annotated, and his/her registration card.
r. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall conduct his/her business
in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of
the abutting property owner or tenant or create or become a public
nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay or constitute a hazard to
traffic, life or property or an obstruction to an adequate access for fire,
police or sanitation vehicles. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle
shall stop, stand or park his/her vehicle on any street for the purpose of
selling or sell on any street under any circumstances during the hours
when parking, stopping or standing has been prohibited by signs or
curb markings or is prohibited by Statute or ordinance. No vendor
vending from a motor vehicle shall remain in any one place for a period
longer than necessary to make his/her sale as defined herein after
having approached or stopped for that purpose.
s. All vending units must be thoroughly covered with proper material to
assure that no portion that is heated is exposed where the public is able
to come in contact with it.
t. No vendor shall use any conveyance, device or thing whatsoever which,
when fully loaded with merchandise, cannot be easily moved and
maintained under control by the licensee.
u. No vendor shall stop, stand, park, place nor allow his/her conveyance
closer than fifty (50') feet to any other location being used by any other
vendor.
v. There shall be no mixing of food and non-food items for sale.
w. Any vending unit shall not park, even temporarily, in any no-parking
area or yellow curbed area within this municipality.
x. Any vending unit operating within the municipality shall not remain in
any fixed location for more than five (5) minutes from its last sale to any
patron. When operating within the Township, such mobile vending unit
shall park only in areas where automobiles are permitted to park and
shall begin the sale of foodstuffs within five (5) minutes of the time it so
parks and shall leave that location within five (5) minutes of its last sale
to pedestrian patrons using the food service.
§ 4-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.9
1:141
§ 4-4.10. Sale of Fruit or Vegetables. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [11]]
All licensees who shall offer to sell, display for sale or sell or deliver fruits
and vegetables and farm products from any vehicles which are wholly or
in part open on any of sides thereof, shall, at all times, keep all fruits,
vegetables and produce of any kind and nature completely screened and
covered with satisfactory materials in order to avoid and eliminate the
accumulation of flies or any other insects from alighting around or upon any
and all merchandise.
§ 4-4.11. Sale of Seafood, Meat or Poultry. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [12]]
All licensees offering for sale, displaying for sale, selling or delivering
seafood, meats, poultry or dairy products, shall transport the same solely
in refrigerator portion of the vehicle at all times to the time of sale or
delivery, and the refrigerated portion, during the uses thereof in accordance
herewith, shall be maintained at a properly low temperature to completely
safeguard all the products from a health and sanitary standpoint to the
fullest reasonable extent possible for safety and welfare of the public.
a. Licenses issued under provisions of this section may be revoked by the
Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, in the County of
Monmouth after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement
contained in the application for license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on his/her business as solicitor, canvasser
or peddler.
3. Any violation of this section.
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
5. Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as the
case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
b. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given by
the Township Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address listed on the
license application or amendment thereto, at least five (5) days prior to
the date set for hearing or shall be delivered by a police officer in the
same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set
for hearing.
§ 4-4.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-4.12
1:142
§ 4-4.12. Vehicles; Conditions. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [13]]
No licensee shall at anytime permit any debris, waste material, rotting
produce or merchandise of any kind or any unfit produce, to remain in
or upon their vehicle, unless the same is contained in a metal, leakproof
container having a metal, properly-fitted cover on the container.
§ 4-4.13. Conducting Business from Vehicle. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13
[14]]
No licensee shall canvass or solicit orders for any articles from pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, other than when his/her vehicle shall be properly parked
immediately adjacent to the curb of a public street in a permitted locality,
and the licensee shall at no time double park when dealing with any of his/
her trade, and in no event shall transact any of his/her business operations,
other than on the curb side of his vehicle.
§ 4-4.14. Removal of Debris. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [15]]
No licensee shall at any time permit any waste materials or parts of produce
or any other merchandise to remain in or upon any street, roadway, curbs
or walks, and shall at all times remove any such debris that may have
fallen from his vehicle, so that the same is immediately placed in the metal
containers, as hereinabove provided.
§ 4-4.15. Merchandise in Bags or Containers. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13
[16]]
All sales of merchandise by any licensee shall at the time of said sale, be
placed in bags or other like suitable containers, when the same shall be
handed to customers of the said licensee.
§ 4-4.16. To Prohibit Eating from Vehicle. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [17]]
The licensee shall prohibit, as reasonably as possible, the eating of any
merchandise directly from his/her vehicle.
§ 4-4.17. Compliance Required. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [18]]
All licensees and their respective vehicles or modes of transportation in
carrying on their permitted business shall, at all times, fully comply with
all terms, covenants and conditions of this section and all other applicable
municipal ordinances and all other applicable State laws, regulations or
provisions pertaining thereto and particularly, but not in limitation thereof,
that may deal with provisions of health, safety and general welfare.
§ 4-4.18. Inspection of Vehicle. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [19]]
a. Before a licensee shall use a vehicle or mode of transportation in
furtherance of his/her permitted business, said license shall submit said
vehicle to the Neptune Township Health Officer for inspection and
§ 4-4.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.18
1:143
§ 4-4.19. Expiration of License. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13 [20]]
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire
at midnight of December 31 in the year when issued. Other than annual
licenses shall expire at midnight on the date specified in the license.
§ 4-4.20. Nonapplicability to Delivery of Goods. [Ord. No. 1576 § 13
[21]]
This chapter shall not affect any person engaged in delivering wares, goods
or merchandise or other articles or things in the regular course of business,
to the premises of the person ordering or entitled to receive the same.
§ 4-5. (RESERVED)23
§ 4-6. HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES. [Ord. No. 1576 § 15; New]
approval relative to compliance with the within Ordinance and shall,
whenever requested during the term of said license, submit the vehicle
for reasonable reinspections for said purpose.
b. No vehicle or mode of transportation shall be used by any licensee
unless it has been approved for use by the aforesaid Health Officer, and
the written approval shall remain in and upon the vehicle at all times
and shall be shown by the operation thereof to any member of the
Neptune Township Police Department, any official of the Township or
any member of the public who may request to be shown the same.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall hire out, keep or use for hire or pay,
or cause to be kept for use or hire or pay, any horse-drawn vehicle,
hereinafter called vehicle, within the territorial limits of the Township
without first having obtained a license for that purpose.
b. Applications for a license to operate vehicle or vehicles shall be made
by the owner, lessee or bailee upon a form to be furnished by the
Township Mercantile License Officer. Such application shall contain the
full name and address of the applicant, the year, type and model of the
vehicle for which the license is desired, and the number of persons the
vehicle will accommodate, which in no case shall exceed eight (8)
passengers, to be determined by the Township License Officer at the
time of the initial inspection.
c. No license shall be granted unless the number of licenses issued and
outstanding shall be less than five (5).
d. The license fees for each vehicle and stand, shall be determined by the
Chapter 4 Business and Licensing Regulations.24
23.Editor's Note: Former Section 4-5, Special Events, Flea Markets and Related Activities,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1576, was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 10-29.
24.Editor's Note: Chapter 4 codifies Ord. No. 1576 in its entirety.
§ 4-4.18 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-6
1:144
e. No license shall be issued for a vehicle until it has been inspected and
examined by the Township Mercantile License Officer, or his duly
designated deputy, and determined to be in a safe condition for the
transportation of passengers.
f. Upon approval and granting of a license to operate a vehicle, the
Township Mercantile License Officer shall provide a license containing
the name of the licensee, a straight front view photograph of the
licensee and the number of the license.
g. No owner, licensee or bailee of a licensed vehicle shall sell, lease, rent,
assign, transfer or, in any manner whatsoever, dispose of a vehicle
license without first receiving written permission from the Township
Mercantile License Officer.
h. No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have complied with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16A-1 et seq., and the acts amendatory
thereof and supplemental thereto.
i. In the event that the insurance provided for in N.J.S.A. 48:16A-1 et seq.,
is canceled or revoked for any reason whatsoever, the license shall
forthwith be revoked by the Township Mercantile License Officer, or
his/her duly designated deputy.
j. The Township Mercantile License Officer shall keep a register of the
name of each person owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed
under this section.
k. No driver of a vehicle under the terms of this section, shall operate a
vehicle unless the driver:
1. Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or older.
2. Present a certificate of a duly licensed and qualified physician
certifying that the applicant has been examined and that he is of
sound physical condition.
3. Is a citizen of the United States.
4. Has not been convicted of a crime within the last five (5) years prior
to the issuance of the license.
5. Submit two (2) letters of his/her good character.
6. Submit four (4) photographs, front view, 2" x 2", provided by the
Police Department of the Township at a fee of four ($4.00) dollars to
be paid to the Police Department.
7. Submit proof that the applicant has been finger-printed by the
Police Department of the Township.
l. Vehicle stands shall be designated by the Township Mercantile License
Officer, subject to the approval of the Township Committee.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:145
m. No vehicle, while waiting for employment by passengers, shall stand on
any public street or space other than upon a vehicle stand designated or
established in accordance with this section, nor shall any vehicle driver
seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his/her vehicle
to and fro in a short space before or otherwise interfering with proper
and orderly access or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort,
railway station or other place of public gathering and no driver shall
solicit passengers for a vehicle.
n. The horse used in drawing the vehicle shall be attended at all times
while in the Township.
o. Every driver of a vehicle who shall discover any property lost or left in
the vehicle must report in writing to the Police Department with brief
particulars and description of the property within twenty-four (24)
hours after their finding thereof unless sooner claimed or delivered to
the owner.
p. Every vehicle shall have a permanent, illuminated vehicle sign and be
plainly marked as a horse-drawn vehicle, slow moving, approved by the
Township Mercantile License Officer and shall be in operation when the
vehicle is commercially employed. In addition, the vehicle shall have
front and rear lights.
q. Owners and vehicles shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-15
through N.J.S.A. 39:4-25-1.
r. No horse or horse-drawn vehicle shall be housed inside the
geographical limits of the Township.
s. All horses drawing vehicles shall wear a sack-type apparatus designed
to catch any droppings so that horse manure will not litter streets. Any
accidental droppings in the streets shall be immediately removed and
disposed of by the driver or owner.
t. All horses used in drawing vehicles shall be healthy, fed, housed and
treated in accordance with standards established by The Society of the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
u. Every vehicle shall conveniently display a valid license for the vehicle
and a front-view photograph of the driver and a valid insurance card
issued in compliance with the State of New Jersey Revised Statutes,
N.J.S.A. 48:16A-1 et seq., and the maximum rate schedule of fares
issued by the Township.
v. All signs shall be professionally prepared, neat and attractive, and
whenever possible, promote the business and activities of the
Township.
w. In the event that the licensee shall be convicted in a Municipal Court, or
is held for the action of the grand jury, the license shall be suspended
§ 4-6 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-6
1:146
§ 4-7. EXEMPTIONS; WHO ENTITLED. [Ord. No. 1576 § 16; Ord. No.
04-50 § 1; Ord. No. 10-29 § 2]
The registration provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed
to require the payment of a registration fee to conduct, manage or operate
any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization
which is conducted, managed or operated wholly for charitable purposes,
or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any
individual, firm, corporation or other business entity based within the
Township of Neptune.
§ 4-8. INSPECTIONS BY REGISTRATION OFFICER, POLICE
OFFICERS OR OTHER DULY AUTHORIZED TOWNSHIP
EMPLOYEES; ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 1576 § 17; Ord. No. 04-50
§ 1]
The Registration Officer, all Township Police Officers and any Township
employee authorized by the Registration Officer, are hereby appointed
inspectors of registrations required in this chapter. Such individuals are
required to examine all places of business, and persons, firms, corporations
or other business entities conducting business in the Township, to ascertain
whether or not registrations have been approved. These Township
employees/officials are authorized to do the following:
until the licensee is either convicted or acquitted and upon conviction,
the license shall be revoked.
x. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
a. To enter any place or business for which a registration is required, and
request the manager, employees or any other individual to exhibit the
registration for the business for the current term. Failure of the
individual to exhibit a current registration constitutes a violation of this
chapter and shall subject the person, firm, corporation or other
business entity to penalties as herein provided.
b. To cause complaints to be filed against all persons, firms, corporations
or other business entities violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
c. To report to the Township Registration Officer all persons, firms,
corporations or other business entities operating a business without a
registration required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Upon report of any violation of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the
Registration Officer of the Township of Neptune to carry into effect all of the
provisions of the chapter, and to file complaints in the Neptune Township
Municipal Court, or other appropriate forum, for any violations of any
provisions of this chapter.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:147
§ 4-9. POWER TO REVOKE OR SUSPEND REGISTRATIONS. [Ord.
No. 1576 § 18; Ord. No. 1629 § 1; Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
Any registration issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be revoked or suspended for any violation of any provision of this chapter
when it shall appear that the occupation conducted by any person, firm,
corporation or other business entity to whom such registration was issued
is conducted in a manner that is:
a. Disorderly or improper;
b. In violation of any law, rule, regulation, statute or ordinance of the
United States of America; the State of New Jersey; the Township of
Neptune or any other governmental entity;
c. Improperly conducted by a person or persons who is/are unfit to
conduct the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation;
d. Abusive and against the purpose for which the registration had been
issued, detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, or
for a different purpose than stated in the application.
A registration issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been held by the
Township Committee. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be served upon the person, firm, corporation or other business entity at
least three (3) days prior to the date set for such hearing. The notice shall also
contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or
suspending such registration. Notice may be given either by personal delivery
thereof to the person to be notified, or by delivery via the United States Post
Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the aggrieved party,
and mailed by both regular and certified mail return receipt requested. It shall
be presumed to have been received by the aggrieved party if the notice was
mailed to the aggrieved party at the last known address as indicated in the
registration application or any update thereto.
At the hearing before the Township Committee, the aggrieved person, firm,
corporation or other business entity shall have any opportunity to answer
questions and may thereafter be heard on the issues surrounding the
revocation or suspension. Upon due consideration and deliberation by the
Township Committee, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Township
Committee concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated,
it may revoke, cancel or suspend the registration held by the registrar. The
aggrieved party shall be entitled to any appeals from the Township
Committee's decision provided that such appeal is taken within the minimum
statutory time frames as may be permitted for any action taken by a
municipality.
§ 4-9 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-9
1:148
§ 4-10. INTERSTATE COMMERCE. [Ord. No. 1576 § 19; Ord. No.
04-50 § 1]
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any harmful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the State or Federal
Government.
§ 4-11. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 1576 § 20; Ord. No. 04-50 § 1]
Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by imprisonment in the County
jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. Each violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and each day the violation continues to persist shall also be considered a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 4-12. REGISTRATION FEES, AMOUNT OF. [Ord. No. 1576 § 23;
Ord. No. 04-50 § 1; Ord. No. 05-04 § 1; Ord. No. 06-03 § 1; Ord. No.
10-29]
The annual fee under this section shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars for the first
two thousand (2,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of improved floor
area occupied by the applicant to conduct the occupation. If the occupied
square footage is greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet, the annual
fee shall be increased by twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for each additional
one thousand (1,000) square feet or fraction thereof. This fee shall be paid
annually to the Township of Neptune, and shall be paid separately for each
noncontiguous location in which the business is conducted.
For inspections requested to be scheduled outside of the Township's regular
business hours, in addition to the regular registration fee set forth above,
the following fee schedule shall be in addition to the minimum fees:
If any such registration shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof,
nor any person acting for him directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another
registration to carry on the same business within the Township of Neptune,
unless the application for such registration shall be approved by the Township
Committee.
a. A minimum fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
b. For each man-hour in excess of two (2) man-hours, an additional fifty
($50.00) dollars per man-hour.
Regular business hours shall mean the hours the Mercantile
Registration Office is open.
Man-hour shall mean the time up to one (1) hour for one (1) inspector.
Any fraction of a man-hour shall be considered one (1) man-hour.
§ 4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:149
As indicated, the following fee schedule may be in addition to the fees
designated above:
Schedule of Additional Fees
"A"
Automobile Sales - New/
Used
As per Section 4-12 plus
1—200 Vehicles $100.00
201—500 Vehicles $200.00
501 or more Vehicles $300.00
"B"
Bathing Beaches
As per Section 4-12, plus
(if applicable)
$200.00
Boat Sales - New/Used
As per Section 4-12 plus
1— 50 $100.00
51—100 $200.00
More than 100 $300.00
Boat Slips and Docks
As per Section 4-12 plus
1-5 slips $50.00
Over 5 slips $5.00 per additional slip
Boat Storage (outside) $100.00 per lot
"C"
Coin Operated Machines
(excluding laundromats)
(All types and uses) per
machine
$15.00 for each machine
"H"
Home Occupation
In lieu of Section 4-12 $35.00
"J"
Junk and/or Salvage Yard $300.00
"P"
Precious Metals and
Previously Owned Jewelry
§ 4-12 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-12
1:150
§ 4-13. through § 4-16. (RESERVED)
Schedule of Additional Fees
a. Initial application $250.00
b. After a registration is
issued, the annual
renewal fee shall be as
indicated in Section 4-12.
"R"
Rental Offices and
Residential and/or
Commercial Rental
Units
Rental Office $50.00
Number of Residential
and/or Commercial
Units
1 $25.00
2 $50.00
3 to 12 $100.00
13 to 24 $150.00
25 to 50 $200.00
51 to 75 $250.00
76 to 100 $300.00
101+ $3.00 per each additional unit
"S"
Self-Storage Facilities $300.00
"T"
Trailer Park
As per Section 4-12 plus $100.00
"V"
Vendors, Transient Vendors
or Itinerant Merchants
First registration request
in any one calendar year
$200.00
Each additional
registration request in
any one calendar year
$25.00
§ 4-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17
1:151
§ 4-17. TAXICABS.25
§ 4-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
DECAL — Shall mean the device issued by the Township which shall be
placed on every taxicab, identifying the cab as a taxicab licensed to operate
in the Township of Neptune.
DRIVER — Shall mean a person who drives a vehicle for hire and who is
required to be licensed by Neptune Township to drive said vehicle.
MEDALLION — Is the official number issued by the Township of Neptune to
each taxicab.
OPERATOR — Shall mean cab owner, person operating the cab business
or lease holder. Operator must obtain a mercantile license to operate.
Operator must obtain a taxi license to operate and must be eighteen (18)
years of age or older and have a valid New Jersey Basic Driver's License
as defined by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission. Vehicle must be
registered and insured to the operator.
OWNER — Shall mean a person, corporation or firm that is the holder of the
ownership license. The owner must be eighteen (18) years of age or older
and have a valid New Jersey Basic Driver's License as defined by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission. The owner may lease out the rights of
operation.
PUBLIC TAXICAB — Stand shall mean a section of a public street or public
place set apart for the exclusive use of a limited number of taxicabs when
such section is distinctly marked as such by a metal sign attached to a
stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place or by clearly visible marks
upon the surface of the street or public place.
TAXICAB — Shall mean a motor vehicle used in the business of transporting
passengers for hire within the Township.
TAXI COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person designated by the Chief of
Police to oversee licensing, enforcement and inspections.
§ 4-17.2. Licensing and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
a. The licensing of taxicabs shall be by the Township Mercantile Officer or
designee. All fees to be paid hereunder shall be paid to the Township
Mercantile Licensing Officer made payable to the Township of Neptune.
b. The regulating and inspection of taxicabs, the examination of applicants
for license to own and operate taxicabs, the licensing of drivers and the
enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be under the control
of the Chief of Police.
c. The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs and
25.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1450, 96-32,
98-8 and 06-32.
§ 4-17 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-17.2
1:152
§ 4-17.3. Owners License. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
requirements for construction and condition of fitness for the safe and
adequate transportation of passengers and the general cleanliness of
taxicabs.
a. Required. No person, firm or corporation shall hire out, keep or use for
hire or pay, or cause to be kept for use or hire or pay, any vehicle
commonly known as a taxicab, within the territorial limits of the
Township of Neptune, in the County of Monmouth without first having
obtained an annual license. The operator is responsible to apply for and
obtain a mercantile license annually. If an operator's license lapses
more than ninety (90) days beyond April 30th of each year, his
operator's license shall be revoked and returned to the Township and
sold at a public sale held by the Township. The owner and the operator
must be notified.
b. Application. Applications for a license to operate a taxicab or taxicabs
shall be made by the operator of the cab. This will be upon a form that is
to be furnished by the Township Mercantile License Officer. The
operator is the person or corporation or lessee that the vehicle is
registered and insured by which may be the owner, lessee or bailee.
Such application shall contain the full name and address of the
applicant, the year, type and model of the vehicle for which the license
is desired, and the number of persons the vehicle will accommodate, to
a maximum of eight (8) passengers.
c. Number. No taxicab license shall be granted unless the number of
licenses used and outstanding shall be less than fifty (50).
d. Fees. The license fee for each taxicab shall be the sum of one hundred
($100.00) dollars for each year beginning the first day of April thereof,
which fee shall not be apportioned and is imposed for the purpose of
regulation.
e. Inspection of Vehicles. No taxicab shall be issued until it has been
thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by the Police
Department and determined to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers.
f. Issuance. Upon approval and granting of a license for the operation of a
taxicab by the Township Committee, the Taxi Coordinator shall provide
the licensee with a card containing the name of the applicant, the
Township license number; in addition, the Taxi Coordinator shall issue a
decal to be affixed to the vehicle by a representative of the Township.
This decal is to be affixed to the left rear window.
g. Transfer of Ownership License.
1. No owner, licensee or bailee of a licensed taxicab shall sell, lease,
rent, assign, transfer, or, in any manner whatsoever, dispose of a
taxicab owner's license without first notifying the Township in
§ 4-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.3
1:153
§ 4-17.4. Taxicab Driver's License. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1; Ord. No.
09-13 § 1]
writing. This notification must be in writing by the prospective new
owner and the current owner, shall be notarized, and shall provide
all necessary information. It shall be required that the Township
Committee pass a resolution to affect the sale. This applies only to
the sale of ownership.
2. There shall be a one time charge of one hundred ($100.00) dollars
at the time of a sale or lease of an ownership license payable to the
Township of Neptune.
h. Change of Vehicle. If a taxicab is taken out of service and is replaced by
another taxicab, a form shall be furnished by the Taxi Coordinator,
which shall be completed by the application. There shall be a charge of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars payable to the Township of Neptune.
i. Registration. New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission Registrations shall
be provided to the Taxi Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of
submitting an application.
a. Required. No person shall drive a taxicab in the Township without a
Neptune Taxicab Driver's license.
b. Fee. The license fee for a first time driver of a taxicab shall be fifty
($50.00) dollars for each year, or part thereof. Thereafter, the renewal
application fee shall be thirty-five ($35.00) dollars.
c. Conditions. For first time applicants, no application for a taxicab
driver's license, under the terms of this section, shall be issued unless
the applicant:
1. Be of the eighteen (18) years or older and have a valid New Jersey
Basic Driver's License as defined by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission.
2. All applicants, both new and renewals, shall annually present a
certificate of a duly licensed and qualified physician certifying that
the applicant has been examined within thirty (30) days of the date
of the application and is of sound physical condition and healthy
enough for the safe operation of a taxicab.
3. Shall have an acceptable understanding of the English language.
4. Produce affidavits of his/her good character from at least three (3)
reputable citizens who have known him/her personally.
5. Shall not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
6. Shall be a citizen of the United States and present a Social Security
Card as proof thereof or present a temporary or permanent Alien
§ 4-17.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-17.4
1:154
Registration Card, a work visa or a Federally approved work
permit.
7. Fill out upon a form provided by the Township Mercantile Licensing
Office his full name, residence, places of residence for the
preceding five (5) years, age, color, height, color of eyes and hair,
place of birth, previous employment, whether married or single, a
photograph, whether he has ever been convicted of a crime or a
violation of this section, and whether his license has ever been
revoked or suspended and for what cause, in this or any other state,
which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and
filed with the Township Taxi Coordinator as a permanent record.
8. Shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Police Department.
The Police Department Identification Bureau shall collect any fees
necessary from the applicant to cover the cost of any State or
Federal fingerprint criminal background checks and photographs
and forward them to the proper agency.
9. Never have been convicted of a crime in New Jersey or engaged in
conduct in any other state or jurisdiction, which if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute a crime. For purposes of this section,
a "crime" shall be any offense that is a violation of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes, excluding disorderly persons and petty
disorderly persons offenses. The Police Chief shall have the ability
to exempt an individual from this section by determining the
affirmative demonstration of rehabilitation from any person who
has been convicted of a crime. The determination would on the
basis of the following: (1) nature and seriousness; (2)
circumstances under which occurred; (3) the date; (4) the age at
the time at which the crime occurred; (5) whether the crime was
repeated; (6) social conditions which may have contributed to the
crime; and (7) evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
the community, counseling, psychological or psychiatric treatment,
additional academic or vocational training or personal
recommendations.
d. Issuance of License. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing
requirements, there shall be issued by the Township's Taxi Coordinator
to the applicant, after the approval of the Chief of Police, a taxi license
identification card, which shall contain the photograph, name, address,
taxi stand and any other information that shall be deemed necessary by
the Taxi Coordinator. Upon receipt of the criminal and motor vehicle
background checks, the Taxi Coordinator shall be authorized to issue a
taxi license. A temporary license valid for thirty (30) days may be issued
for renewals only, at the discretion of the Taxi Coordinator. If the
taxicab driver requests a replacement of the annual or temporary
license, there shall be a charge of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
e. Revocation or Suspension of License.
§ 4-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.4
1:155
§ 4-17.5. Insurance. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
§ 4-17.6. Supervision. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
1. If at any time within the licensed year a taxicab driver is convicted
of a crime, or has permitted his cab to be used for any illegal or
immoral purpose, the Township Committee shall immediately
suspend or revoke the taxicab driver's license.
2. The Township Committee, after a hearing, may suspend or revoke
the taxicab license of any taxicab driver who loiters within any
space prohibited by law or ordinance, or who stands in a prohibited
place soliciting or waiting for new passengers, or who violates any
provision of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission Laws or of
this ordinance, or any of the rules or regulations made by the
Township Committee or Chief of Police regulating taxicabs.
f. License Renewals. Taxicab driver's licenses must be renewed annually.
The annual renewal application fee shall be thirty-five ($35.00) dollars.
No renewal shall be granted until such time as the applicant has been
fingerprinted by the Neptune Township Police Department.
Fingerprints will be taken by the Police Department on Tuesdays and
Thursdays, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The Police Department Identification
Bureau shall collect any fees necessary from the applicant to cover the
cost of any State or Federal fingerprint criminal background checks and
forward them to the proper agency.
a. Required. No license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued until
the applicant shall have complied with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1
et seq. and the acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. All
taxicabs in the Township of Neptune shall carry a minimum of fifty
thousand ($50,000.00) dollars insurance. A permanent Certificate of
Insurance shall also be placed on file with the Township Clerk.
b. Temporary Certificate of Insurance. In the event a temporary
Certificate of Insurance is provided for which the total annual premium
has not been paid, the applicant shall be required to submit additional
Certificates upon expiration of the temporary Certificate. If an
additional certificate is not received by the Clerk by the expiration date
of the temporary certificate, there shall be a charge of a twenty
($20.00) dollars for administrative fee to the Township of Neptune each
time a temporary certificate is filed with the Township as required
hereinabove.
c. Revocation of License. In the event that the insurance provided for in
paragraph a is canceled or revoked for any reason whatsoever, the
operator's license shall forthwith be revoked by the Mercantile License
Officer, or his duly designated deputy, subject to a hearing before the
Township Committee, if requested by the licensee in writing to the
Mercantile License Officer, to contest the cancellation and/or
revocation.
§ 4-17.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-17.6
1:156
§ 4-17.7. Taxicab Stands. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
Public taxicab stands shall be designated by the Township Mercantile
License Officer subject to the approval of the Township Committee.
§ 4-17.8. Rates. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
A schedule of rates shall be maintained on file in the Office of the Municipal
Clerk and the Taxi Coordinator.
§ 4-17.9. Regulations of Operators [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1; Ord. No.
09-13 § 2]
a. Record of Vehicle. The Taxi Coordinator shall keep a register of the
name of each person owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed
under this section.
b. Right of Inspection.
1. Before any vehicle is used as a taxicab, it shall have a valid
inspection sticker indicating that the vehicle has passed inspection
as required under Title 39 of the Statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
2. The Police Department shall maintain constant vigilance over all
taxicabs to see that they are kept clean and in a condition of safety
for the transportation of passengers and to this end shall have the
right at any and all times to inspect any and all licensed vehicles.
a. Waiting for Employment. No taxicab while waiting for employment by
passengers shall stand on any public street or space other than upon a
taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this section,
nor shall any taxicab driver seek employment by repeatedly and
persistently driving his taxicab to and from in a short space before or
otherwise interfering with proper and orderly access or egress from
any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railway station or other place of
public gathering, and no driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab.
b. Lost Property. Every driver of a taxicab who shall discover any property
lost or left in said taxicab must report in writing to the cab stand with
brief particulars and description of the property within twenty-four (24)
hours after their finding thereof unless sooner claimed or delivered to
the owner.
c. Soliciting Hotel Business. Any licensed driver or operator of a taxicab in
the Township shall not enter into any agreement or arrangement with
the proprietor of any hotel, motel or boarding house in the Township, or
with any person connected with such hotel, motel or boarding house,
whereby such licensed driver or operator received any fee, commission
or money consideration in return for soliciting patronage from any
hotel, motel or boarding house or for inducing persons to patronize
same. A licensed driver shall not receive any fee, commission or money
§ 4-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.9
1:157
§ 4-17.10. Advertising. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
consideration for securing patronage from any hotel, motel or boarding
house.
d. Signs. Each licensed taxicab shall have the following items displayed,
with prior approval from the Taxi Coordinator:
1. A permanent, illuminated taxicab sign plainly marked as a taxicab
or taxi and clearly visible. Said illuminated taxicab sign shall be in
operation when said taxicab is commercially employed.
2. The taxicab number plainly marked and clearly visible. The taxicab
number shall match the medallion number.
3. The name, trade name or corporate name of the owner clearly
displayed.
e. Place of Business. Every taxicab operator shall operate his business
from an established place or designated taxi stand.
f. Display of License and Rates. Every taxicab shall conveniently display a
valid license for the vehicle, a valid license for the driver with a front
view photograph, and the valid insurance card issued in compliance
with the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, Section 48:16-1 et
seq. and the maximum rate schedule of fares on file at the Township of
Neptune.
a. Holders. All advertising carried by taxicabs shall be placed in standard
holders presently acceptable and used throughout the taxicab industry
and affixed in such a manner so as not to violate any motor vehicle
regulations of the State of New Jersey.
b. Professional Preparation Required. All signs shall be professionally
prepared, neat and attractive.
c. Prohibited Advertising. Advertising in the following categories shall not
be permitted:
1. Promotion of rival resort communities and their activities;
2. Highway shopping centers and amusement centers whose
promotion would tend to affect the economic development of the
Township.
d. Questions Regarding Suitability. Questions arising as to the suitability
of the advertising material should be first directed to the Township
Mercantile License Officer for approval.
e. Additional Regulations. The provisions of this section are in addition to
the provisions entitled "Business Licenses."
§ 4-17.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-17.11
1:158
§ 4-17.11. Revocation and Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 08-16
§ 1]
A license to operate a taxicab may be revoked or suspended at any time
after hearing by the Township Committee, if the vehicle is not in a clean and
safe condition for the transportation of passengers, and kept in conformity
with the terms of this section or any of the rules and regulations adopted by
the Township Committee.
§ 4-17.12. Penalties. [Ord. No. 08-16 § 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not less than one hundred ($100.00)
dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or ninety (90) days
in the County jail or both.
§ 4-18. MUNICIPAL TOWING SERVICES.26
§ 4-18.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean private property towing and other
non-consensual towing as defined in this section and other ancillary
services that include the following: arriving at the site from which a motor
vehicle will be towed; fifteen (15) minutes daytime and twenty-five (25)
minutes nighttime waiting time; hooking a motor vehicle to, or loading a
motor vehicle onto, a tow truck; transporting a motor vehicle to a storage
facility; unhooking or unloading a motor vehicle from the tow truck; and
situating the motor vehicle in the space in which it will be stored. "Basic
tow" also includes the clean up of glass and debris as well as the issuing
of the documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner or other
person authorized to take the motor vehicle; issuing an itemized bill; three
trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which, if applicable, include making
a vehicle available to an insurance appraiser or adjuster; and retrieving a
motor vehicle from storage during the hours in which the storage facility
is open, see subsection 4-18.10 for required hours of operation. The basic
tow fee incorporates all anticipated administrative costs. Additional
administrative costs are unauthorized unless extraordinary circumstances
exist. Any additional administrative costs must be pre-authorized with the
customer, and a detailed explanation included in the itemized bill.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Shall mean the Chief of the Neptune Township Police
Department or his/her designee.
DECOUPLING — Shall mean releasing a motor vehicle to its owner or
operator when the motor vehicle has been, or is about to be, hooked to or
lifted by a tow truck, but prior to the motor vehicle actually having been
moved or removed from the property.
26.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 1418, 95-38, 99-52, 03-40, 05-08.
§ 4-17.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.1
1:159
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall include all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and
motorized skateboards.
NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING — Shall mean the towing of a motor vehicle
without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. "Nonconsensual
towing" includes towing a motor vehicle when law enforcement
orders the vehicle to be towed whether or not the owner or operator
consents.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, a sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, Limited Liability Company or any other business entity.
RECOVERY — Shall mean the winching of any vehicle off the roadway.
SNOW EMERGENCY — Shall mean anytime the Township declares a snow
emergency and vehicles are to be removed from roadway in accordance
with subsection 7-7.3.
STORAGE FACILITY — Means a space at which motor vehicles that have
been towed are stored. Said facility is to be surrounded by a fence, wall, or
other physical barrier that is at least six (6') feet high and is lighted from
dusk to dawn.
TOWING — Shall mean the moving or removing from public or private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
motor vehicle that is damaged as a result of an accident or otherwise
disabled, is recovered after being stolen, or is parked illegally or otherwise
without authorization, parked during a time at which such parking is not
permitted, or otherwise parked without authorization, or the immobilization
of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor vehicle, for which a
service charge is made, either directly or indirectly. Dues or other charges
of clubs or associations which provide towing services to club or association
members shall not be considered a service charge for purposes of this
definition.
TOWING LIST — Shall mean the list maintained by the Neptune Township
Police Department containing the names of those active towing operators
whom are licensed with the Township to provide municipal towing services
for the Township.
TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who owns a tow/recovery
vehicle and is in the business of offering towing services whereby motor
vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one place to
another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designated for that
purpose.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported upon a roadway.
YARD FEE — Shall mean any fee charges to move a stored vehicle within
the tow yard. The vehicle shall be stored in a manner to facilitate access and
removal from the tow yard. Yard fees are unauthorized under this section.
§ 4-18.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-18.1
1:160
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune, Monmouth County,
New Jersey.
§ 4-18.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
It is the purpose of this section to establish a non-discriminatory method
of rotating calls between all licensed operators requesting to provide
municipal towing services at the request of, on behalf of, or for the Township
or its Police Department.
§ 4-18.3. Municipal Towing Services; License. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
§ 4-18.4. Municipal Towing Services; Application. [Ord. No.
2014-42]
a. Any towing operator desiring to provide municipal towing services for
the Township must file an application with the Township, meeting the
requirements of this section, and obtain a license from the Township for
such services. Said license will be a supplemental use to the annual
Mercantile Registration.
b. The Township shall issue a license to those towing operators who file
applications with the Township and desire to provide municipal towing
services for the Township. The license shall provide for an annual
review of the towing operator's services and compliance with this
section. The license shall prohibit subcontracting or transfer by the
towing operator.
c. In order to continue to provide municipal towing services for the
Township, the towing operator shall file a new application, with the
required submissions, and obtain a new license from the Township.
d. Applications must be submitted annually by November 30 to the
Township Mercantile Officer. The license shall not be exclusive, with the
Township being able to award licenses to multiple towing operators at
any time.
e. The Township shall have the sole discretion to deny a license to any
towing operator failing to file the requisite application or to meet the
requirements of this section. All applications for a license for the
provision of municipal towing services filed with the Township shall be
granted or denied by the Mercantile Officer, based upon the approval of
the Chief of Police, upon review of the applications.
a. No person shall be eligible to provide municipal towing services for the
Township until it submits an application with the Township.
b. An application for municipal towing shall be made in writing to the
Mercantile Officer, in the form prescribed by the Mercantile Officer, and
shall be accompanied by a fee of $150.00 which is inclusive of the
annual mercantile registration fee.
§ 4-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.4
1:161
§ 4-18.5. Suspension, Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
c. The applicant shall state the complete street address of the location or
locations from which the business of towing shall be conducted,
indicating which the principal location is and which is the storage
facility, which shall meet the requirements of subsection 4-18.10 of this
section. The applicant shall also provide a lease agreement for any and
all land areas being used as a storage location that they do not own.
d. The applicant shall identify and provide a description of its towing
vehicles, including vehicle registration number, gross vehicle weight,
and purpose, with which the applicant intends to provide towing
services.
e. The applicant shall provide the name, address and driver's license
number of the applicant and all employees of the applicant that are
expected to be involved in the operation of the applicant's vehicular
equipment for the towing of motor vehicles. All drivers for the applicant
shall be at least 18 years of age and possess a valid New Jersey driver's
license for the operation of the towing equipment.
f. The application shall include a valid certificate of insurance from an
insurer authorized to do business in the State, at the minimum amounts
set forth in subsection 4-18.7 of this section.
g. The applicant shall furnish any additional information concerning the
personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage facilities of the applicant as
may be required by the Chief of Police during the review of the
application.
h. If any of the information required in the application changes, or if
additional information should be added after the filing of the
application, the applicant shall provide that information to the
Mercantile Officer, in writing, within fifteen (15) calendar days of the
change or addition. Any application to add an additional driver during
the contract term shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00.
i. The applicant shall provide a certified statement of compliance with the
minimum requirements of subsection 4-18.5 of this section.
a. The Township may deny, suspend or revoke any license for municipal
towing services upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, or
upon other proof that the towing operator, or any of its employees or
agents:
1. Has obtained a registration through fraud, deception, or
misrepresentation;
2. Has engaged in the use or employment of dishonesty, fraud,
deception, misrepresentation, false promise, or false pretense;
3. Has engaged in gross negligence or gross incompetence;
§ 4-18.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-18.5
1:162
§ 4-18.6. Rotating List. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
The Chief of Police is authorized to establish a system of rotation for
the assignment of licensed towing operators to provide municipal towing
services required pursuant to this section. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)
(w), the rotation system shall be established on a non-discriminatory and
non-exclusionary basis. Only licensed towing operators with the Township
shall be assigned to the rotation list. The rotation list shall be composed
so as to permit a reasonable rotation of licensed towing operators. If the
towing operator currently on-call under the rotation list cannot respond and
provide the required municipal towing service, the Township shall move to
the next towing operator on the rotation list. If no towing operator on the
rotation list is able to respond and provide the required municipal towing
service, the Chief of Police may deviate from the rotation list and arrange
for another towing operator to provide such service. Notwithstanding the
above rotation list, in the interests of public safety, the Chief of Police, at
his/her discretion, taking into account the emergency, safety and location
of the situation, may part from the rotation list and call for the closest
available towing operator to respond.
§ 4-18.7. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
In addition to the insurance requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 45A-31.3, as
may be amended from time to time, all licensed towing operators providing
4. Has engaged in repeated acts of negligence or incompetence;
5. Has had a towing operation registration or license revoked or
suspended by any other state, agency, or authority for reasons
consistent with this section;
6. Has violated or failed to comply on more than three occasions with
the schedule of tariff or fee regulations herein; or
7. Has violated any municipal ordinance;
8. Has been convicted of:
(a) A crime under Chapter 11, 12, 13, 14 or 15 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes;
(b) Motor vehicle theft or any crime involving a motor vehicle
under Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes; or
(c) Any other crime under Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes
relating adversely to the performance of towing services or the
storage of motor vehicles as determined by the Chief of Police.
b. A final refusal to license, or the suspension or revocation of a license by
the Township shall not be made except upon reasonable notice to the
applicant, and an opportunity for the applicant to be heard by the
Township Committee.
§ 4-18.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.7
1:163
municipal towing services must maintain the following insurance policies,
naming the Township as an additional insured:
§ 4-18.8. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
Any license issued by the Township to a towing operator pursuant to this
section shall include a provision whereupon the licensed towing operator
assumes all liability and shall indemnify and save the Township, its
committees, boards, departments, agents, and employees, harmless from
damages or losses sustained by vehicles while being towed, stored or
released from towing operator's possession, and from all personal injuries
and property damage occurring to any persons, or property, as a result of
the performance of the towing operator's services, including, but not limited
to, towing, storage, or other such activities relating to the municipal towing
services. All responsibility for the release of a stored vehicle shall be on the
towing operator only.
§ 4-18.9. Schedule of Services Eligible for Charging a Fee;
Reasonable Fees. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
a. Garage Keeper's Policy. A garage keeper's liability policy in the
minimum amount of fifty thousand ($50,000.00) dollars, and "on-hook"
coverage, for each vehicle damaged on a separate claim.
b. Garage Liability Policy. A garage liability policy covering applicant's
business, equipment and vehicles in the minimum amount of five
hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars for any one person injured or
killed, and a minimum of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for more
than one person killed or injured in any accident and an additional one
hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars for any damage arising from
injury or destruction to property, and/or a combined single limit of one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars. In addition to each policy containing an
endorsement showing the Township as an additional insured, such
policy shall also provide an endorsement entitling the Township to 30
days' prior written notice to the Mercantile Officer in the event of any
change in coverage under the policy, or in the event of the cancellation
of the policy.
a. A towing operator may only charge a fee for those towing and storage
services set forth as follows unless otherwise provided for in N.J.A.C.
13:45A-31.4:
Service Provided Fees (Not to Exceed)
Light Duty Rate
(Less than 10,000 G.V.W.)
Tow $100.00 (Basic Tow is a Flat Rate)
Recovery $110.00 (Recovery is billed per hour,
per truck, with 1 hour minimum and
30 minute increments thereafter)
§ 4-18.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-18.9
1:164
Service Provided Fees (Not to Exceed)
Medium Duty Rate
(10,000 to 32,000 G.V.W.)
Tow $110.00 (Basic Tow is a Flat Rate)
Recovery $120.00 (Recovery is billed per hour,
per truck, with 1 hour minimum and
30 minute increments thereafter)
Heavy Duty Rate
(Greater than 32,000 G.V.W.)
Tow $400.00 (Basic Tow is a Flat Rate)
Recovery $425.00 (Recovery is billed per hour,
per truck, with 1 hour minimum and
30 minute increments thereafter)
Mileage $3.00 per mile from scene or site of
tow to locations outside of the
boundary of Neptune
Storage, per day
Light Duty $35.00
Medium Duty $50.00
Heavy Duty $75.00
Snow Emergency
Snow Emergency Tow $90.00
Snow Emergency Storage,
per day
$20.00
Other
Road Service $60.00 — per call
Decoupling Fee $25.00 — per call
Clean-up charge (the bagging
and proper disposal of less
then 1 gallon of Antifreeze or
oil or any other vehicle fluids)
$35.00 — per call
Police Investigations
Criminal Investigations
Impound
No fee
b. A towing operator may not charge a service fee for towing and storage
services, which are ancillary to and shall be included as part of basic
towing services, and is not included in the schedule approved by the
Township.
§ 4-18.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.9
1:165
§ 4-18.10. Storage Facilities. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
§ 4-18.11. Standards of Towing Operator Performance. [Ord. No.
2014-42]
All towing operators who have been licensed with the Township to provide
municipal towing services shall be obligated to comply with the following
duties and regulations:
c. A towing operator that engages in private property towing or other nonconsensual
towing shall calculate storage fees based upon full 24-hour
periods a motor vehicle is in the storage facility. For example, if a motor
vehicle is towed to a storage facility at 7:00 p.m. on one day and the
owner of the motor vehicle picks up the motor vehicle on or before 7:00
p.m. the next day, the towing operator shall only charge the owner of
the motor vehicle for one day of storage. If a motor vehicle is stored for
more than twenty-four (24) hours, but less than forty-eight (48) hours,
the towing operator may only charge for two (2) days of storage.
d. A bill for private property tow or other non-consensual tow shall include
the time at which a towed motor vehicle was delivered to a towing
company's storage facility.
e. The Township Committee may annually change the fees set forth herein
by duly adopted resolution.
a. The towing operator providing municipal towing services must tow all
vehicles to a storage facility meeting the following requirements:
1. Have the ability to store a minimum of ten vehicles;
2. Is safe and secure such with a physical barrier that is at least six
(6') feet high such as a wall or fence;
3. Is lighted from dusk to dawn;
4. Is located within the Township border;
5. Is open for release of vehicles Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. and Saturday and Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.; and
6. All vehicles are to be released from the storage facility, unless other
arrangements are made with the owner of the vehicle.
a. Remove and tow to the designated storage facility all vehicles directed
by the Chief of Police to be removed and towed because such vehicles
are, in the Chief of Police's sole discretion designated as abandoned,
illegally parked, disabled, involved in an accident, or to be impounded
because of criminal or other investigation. At the sole discretion of the
Chief of Police, taking into consideration safety concerns, the owner or
operator of a disabled vehicle may be permitted to arrange for the
vehicle to be towed by a towing operator of his/her choice.
§ 4-18.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-18.11
1:166
b. Store such vehicles and move such vehicles as directed by Chief of
Police. When not otherwise directed or required by the Chief of Police,
the owner or operator of a disabled vehicle may request that the vehicle
be towed to a location other than the designated storage facility. Upon
direction of the Chief of Police, the towing operator shall not release a
vehicle towed which is subject to a criminal investigation, including,
without limitation, compliance with "John's Law," without prior
authorization by the Chief of Police.
c. Provide twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days a week service to the
Township during the term of the contract.
d. Not utilize answering machines or answering services when on-call
under the rotation list.
e. Respond promptly to all requests for municipal towing services by the
Chief of Police. In any event, the towing operator shall respond and be
present at the location (all locations within the Township) for municipal
towing services within fifteen (15) minutes of receipt of notice of same
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (hereinafter "daytime"),
and within twenty-five (25) minutes of receipt of notice between the
hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m. (hereinafter "nighttime"). In the event
a towing operator does not arrive at the tow location within the above
time periods, the Police Officer on the scene shall have the right to have
a substitute towing operator called to the location who will have the
right to perform the municipal towing services; and the originally called
towing operator shall have no right to payment from any party.
f. Not charge any fee for replacement of equipment or materials provided
at the scene of the tow.
g. Tow any and all disabled Township owned or operated vehicle upon
request by the Chief of Police to a location within the Township. The
towing operator will not charge the Township for the towing of
Township owned passenger vehicles or pick-up trucks within two miles
of the Township border to a location within the Township. All other
towing of Township owned or operated vehicles shall be charged
pursuant to subsection 4-18.10 at a twenty (20%) percent discount.
Nothing herein shall limit the Township from utilizing the towing
services provided for in any public bid contract.
h. Clean up all broken glass and debris at the scene of accidents (all
towing operators must be equipped with a broom and a shovel).
i. Ensure that all drivers and operators of the towing operator must wear
ANSI Class II reflective safety vests at all times when responding to a
request by the Township.
j. Furnish additional towing equipment and services during storm
periods, periods of snow emergencies, traffic emergencies, natural, or
other disasters, any acts of God, and for any other reason when so
designated by the Chief of Police. Such standby service shall begin and
§ 4-18.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.11
1:167
§ 4-18.12. Solicitation. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
No towing operator, whether or not licensed with the Township, shall
respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the purposes of
towing a vehicle unless specifically notified by the Chief of Police or his/
her designee, or the individual involved in the accident or emergency. All
persons, towing operators, and owners of towing equipment are hereby
prohibited from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents and
emergencies within the Township.
§ 4-18.13. Complaint and Dispute Resolution. [Ord. No. 2014-42]
Any person having a dispute or complaint arising from a specific act of
towing services or storage of motor vehicles which is regulated by this
section shall present that complaint or dispute to the Chief of Police for
resolution. The Chief of Police shall render his/her decision as to how the
said complaint or dispute is to be resolved within fifteen (15) business days
of his/her conducting a hearing as to the same. Such hearing can be in
person, by telephone or on written presentation at the election of the Chief
of Police. In the event of an adverse decision against a licensed towing
operator, said license may be revoked. Any appeal of the Chief of Police's
decision may be appealed to the Governing Body of the Township.
end when the Chief of Police notifies the towing operator. The Township
reserves the right, during any such emergency, to designate temporary
areas owned or leased by the Township and/or the towing operator for
the storage of disabled vehicles, and to direct the towing operator to
remove such disabled vehicles to said areas.
k. A record of all vehicles towed and/or stored must be retained for a
period of seven years. Such records shall include a report of all
personal property found within a towed vehicle that can be observed by
the towing operator at the time the vehicle came into the towing
operator's possession, an accounting of all monies received for fees for
towing, and a separate accounting of all monies received for fees for
storage services pursuant to this section. The Chief of Police shall have
access upon demand, to any and all records required to be kept by this
section.
l. In all of the towing operator's dealings with the public, the towing
operator shall act in a professional manner, courteous at all times, and
respectful to members of the public, as well as representatives of the
Township. Reports of discourteous behavior by the towing operator or
his/her drivers which may be substantiated and documented, shall be
considered by the Township as sufficient cause for revocation and
termination of the towing operator's license, and be considered as
material default under any license entered into with a towing operator
pursuant to this section.
§ 4-18.11 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-18.14
1:168
§ 4-18.14. Violations; Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. No.
2014-42]
§ 4-19. SPECIAL EVENTS AND TEMPORARY DISPLAYS.
§ 4-19.1. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 09-30]
On application to the Zoning Officer, or his or her designee, the Township
Zoning Officer may permit, at his or her discretion, a special event, outdoor
display and/or sale in parking lots, sidewalks or other premises adjacent
to an applicant's commercial premises subject to the conditions contained
herein.
§ 4-19.2. Special Events Defined. [Ord. No. 09-30]
Special events shall include outdoor displays and/or sales of a commercial
nature other than those sales covered by Section 4-20 and 4-21 of the
Neptune Township Code.
§ 4-19.3. Conditions for Issuance of Permits. [Ord. No. 09-30]
A permit for an outdoor special event, display and/or sale shall only be given
if the applicant satisfies all of the following criteria:
a. This section shall be enforced by the Neptune Township Police
Department.
b. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall subject such violator,
upon issuance of a summons and conviction in Municipal Court, and at
the court's discretion, to the fines and penalties set forth in Township's
General Penalty Ordinance (Section 1-5) for each such violation.
c. Any violation of the provisions of this section may also subject the
violator to a revocation or non-issuance of the license with the
Township. If a towing operator's license is revoked pursuant to this
provision, such towing operator is barred from reapplying with the
Township for a period of three (3) years from the date of the revocation.
d. In addition to any penalties or other remedies provided herein, the
towing operator that has billed a person an amount in excess of the fee
specified in this section for the service provided shall reimburse such
person for the excess cost.
a. A special event shall not extend beyond two (2) weeks and there shall
be no more than two (2) permits for such activities issued per calendar
year with each permitted activity not occurring closer than thirty (30)
days from the end of the last permitted activity.
b. No food or foodstuffs shall be displayed or offered for sale except by a
merchant whose normal business includes the sale of such items; said
merchant must also maintain a valid permit for the food or foodstuffs
displayed if the same area of the type which otherwise require a permit;
§ 4-18.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-19.3
1:169
§ 4-19.4. Permit Fee and Display. [Ord. No. 09-30]
The applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each
permit for special event and shall display the permit at the site of the special
event in a conspicuous location that can be seen by the public.
§ 4-19.5. Waiver. [Ord. No. 09-30; Ord. No. 10-29 § 4]
Permits for outdoor displays, sales and special events are not required for
Township-endorsed festivities or activities.
said merchant shall also provide a trash receptacle of at least twentyfive
(25) gallons capacity within five (5) feet of his/her display area.
c. The outdoor display and sale shall be restricted to areas zoned for
commercial business and shall otherwise be in accord with all zoning
regulations pertaining thereto.
d. The outdoor display sale shall not block pedestrian or motor vehicle
traffic. Specifically, it shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic,
including the handicapped, and said display shall in no way threaten the
safety of the public. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring that
motorists are not visually or physically obstructed in an unsafe manner.
e. All signage and special effects must be limited to placement on the
actual site of the special event, outdoor sale or display with detailed
description set forth on the application concerning the number of signs,
size and types. Said signage and special effects cannot adversely affect
the health, safety or welfare of the public and are further subject to the
Temporary Sign Ordinance found in the Land Development Ordinance
of Neptune Township, Article IV, Section 416.05 and related ordinances.
f. The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor display and the sale
serves the public purpose of furthering the commercial and mercantile
growth and stability and/or aesthetics of the Township at large.
g. The permit shall not adversely affect the public welfare.
h. The applicant must complete a form prepared by the Township showing
the applicant's name and location to be used for sale and display and a
list of the goods or services to be displayed and offered for sale, with a
diagram or narrative explaining exactly where the special event is to
take place, the size and diameter of the event, the use of tents, signs
and other advertising devices and the exact location of all displays. The
application must be reviewed and approved for fire safety by the Fire
Official of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, pedestrian and traffic safety
by the Police Department and in the discretion of the Zoning Officer,
any other official due to the unique nature of the special event. The
Township can restrict any aspect of the special event if in its opinion
any aspect of the event affects the safety, health and welfare of the
public.
§ 4-19.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-19.6
1:170
§ 4-19.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 09-30]
This section shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer or his or her designee.
§ 4-19.7. Special Events and Food Vendors. [Ord. No. 09-30; Ord.
No. 10-29 § 5]
If the special event includes the sale of food by vendors, the coordinator
of the special event shall indicate such on the Township application form.
The Zoning Officer, or his designee, will notify the County Board of Health
that foodstuffs are being sold at the special event. The coordinator of the
special event shall be responsible for contacting the County Board of Health
with a list of food vendors and any other information that the County Board
of Health may require. There will be no additional fee collected by the
Township for food vendors.
§ 4-19.8. Repealer, Severability; When Effective. [Ord. No. 09-30]
§ 4-20. GARAGE SALES.27
§ 4-20.1. Garage Sales Defined. [Ord. No. 14-16]
§ 4-20.2. Licensing. [Ord. No. 14-16]
a. Repealer. In the event that any clause, section or paragraph of this
section is deemed to be invalid for any reason, then it is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Governing Body that the balance of the
section shall remain in full force and effect, the Governing Body hereby
declaring that it would have adopted the remainder of the section even
without the offending provision.
b. Severability. Any and all ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this section shall be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of
any such inconsistencies.
c. Effective Date. This section shall become effective upon proper passage
in accordance with the law.
a. Individual garage sale shall include lawn sale, yard sale, basement sale,
or any occasion whereby used items owned by the resident of the
premises are offered for sale on the premises.
b. Neighborhood/regional garage sale shall include lawn sale, yard sale,
basement sale, or any occasion whereby used items owned by the
resident of the premises are offered for sale on the premises owned by
the collective residents of a neighborhood offered for the sale
throughout the neighborhood. This may include a property owner's
organization or group of property owners.
27.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 866, 97-46, 10-20, 10-29.
§ 4-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20.2
1:171
§ 4-20.3. Fee. [Ord. No. 14-16]
§ 4-20.4. Regulations. [Ord. No. 14-16]
a. No person or persons shall be permitted to conduct a garage sale
without first obtaining a license from the Code Enforcement Officer. For
neighborhood/regional garage sale, the Code Enforcement Officer must
be notified thirty (30) days in advance of the sales date.
b. An application for a license shall be made on a form furnished by the
Code Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by the required
fee.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the license provided that the
following conditions are met:
1. The application is complete in all respects with the provisions of
this section and all applicable State and municipal requirements.
2. Any premises on which a licensed garage sale is to be conducted
conforms to all requirements of this section and all applicable State
and municipal requirements and will be free of fire and other safety
hazards.
3. The date(s) on which the proposed garage sale will be held has
been clearly determined.
a. The fee for the issuance of an individual garage sale license shall be ten
($10.00) dollars.
b. The fee for the issuance of a garage sale license for participants in a
neighborhood/regional garage sale shall be five ($5.00) dollars.
a. Any license for a garage sale shall be valid and remain in force for a
maximum of three (3) days and shall apply only to the person to whom
granted and shall not be transferable.
b. A license shall be valid for a single premises only. Participants in
neighborhood/regional garage sale must each obtain a license.
c. Items must be displayed on the licensed premises only.
d. A garage sale may not be conducted earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later
than 5:00 p.m.
e. Posting of signs shall be in accordance with the Township's Sign
Ordinance.
f. No person shall be issued more than two (2) licenses within twelve (12)
months for the purpose of conducting a garage sale. Participation in a
neighborhood/regional garage sale shall not be counted towards the
two (2) annual individual licenses.
§ 4-20.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-20.4
1:172
§ 4-20.5. Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 14-16]
Any license under this section shall be deemed null and void at the
discretion of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer of the Township or his/her
authorized representative for any of the following reasons:
§ 4-21. CLOSE OUT AND OTHER SPECIAL SALES.
§ 4-21.1. License Required to Conduct Special Sales; Fee. [Ord. No.
214 § 1]
§ 4-21.2. Inventory. [Ord. No. 214 § 2]
g. No more than two (2) licenses for a neighborhood/ regional garage sale
shall be issued within a twelve (12) month period.
h. Any person to whom a license is granted shall be required to exhibit
such license in a conspicuous location.
a. Creating a nuisance or other public disturbance.
b. Creating traffic or other safety hazard.
c. Impeding pedestrian traffic.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any sale of
goods, wares or merchandise, at retail, that is represented as a
bankrupt, insolvent, assignees, adjusters, trustees, executors,
administrators, receivers, wholesalers, jobbers, manufacturers, closing
out, liquidation, closing stock, fire or water damage sale, or any other
sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the
public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or
closing out the goods, wares or merchandise, of any business for less
than the current or going retail price thereof in the Township, without
first filing with the License Collector the inventory hereinafter provided
for and obtaining from him license so to do, to be known as a "Closing
Out Sale License."
b. The fee for such a license shall be as follows: For a period not exceeding
ten (10) days, one hundred ($100.00) dollars; for a period not exceeding
twenty (20) days, two hundred ($200.00) dollars; for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days, three hundred ($300.00) dollars, provided,
that only one (1) such license shall be issued to any one (1) person
within a twelve (12) month period, and no such license shall be issued
for more than thirty (30) days.
a. The inventory required by subsection 4-21.1 shall contain a complete
and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise to be
sold at any sale for which a license is hereby required together with the
wholesale price thereof, which inventory or list shall be signed by the
person seeking the license, or by a resident agent thereunto authorized,
and by affidavit he/she or such agent shall swear or affirm that the
§ 4-20.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-21.2
1:173
§ 4-21.3. Verification of Inventory. [Ord. No. 214 § 3]
The License Collector may, in his or her discretion, verify the details of any
inventory filed for the purpose of obtaining a "Closing Out Sale License," or
he or she may make a check and verify the items of merchandise sold during
the sale, and it shall be unlawful for any person to whom a "Closing Out
Sale License" has been issued to fail or refuse to give the License Collector
all the facts connected with the stock on hand or the proper information of
goods sold, or any other information that he or she may require in order to
make a thorough investigation of all phases connected with the sale.
§ 4-21.4. Applicability. [Ord. No. 214 § 4]
The provisions of subsections 4-21.1, 4-21.2, and 4-21.3 shall not be
applicable to trustees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers,
or public officers acting under judicial process.
§ 4-21.5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 214 § 5]
As used in this section:
ANY BUSINESS — Shall mean and include the business formerly carried on
or conducted by any other person other than the person so conducting such
sale. The provisions of this section shall apply, though the sale is conducted
or run in conjunction with or in addition to regular or ordinary business of
the person operating or conducting such sale.
PERSON — Shall mean and be deemed to include any individual,
partnership, firm or corporation.
§ 4-21.6. Penalty. [Ord. No. 214 § 6; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 4-21.7. Additional Provisions. [Ord. No. 214 § 7]
The provisions of this section are in addition to any other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
information therein given is full and true, and known by him/her or such
agent to be so.
b. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale, or to
list on such inventory any goods, wares or merchandise which are not
the regular stock of the store or other place, the business of which is to
be closed out by such sale, or to make any replacements or additions to
such stock for the purposes of such sale, or during the time thereof, or
to fail, neglect or refuse to keep accurate records of the articles or
things sold, from which records the License Collector of the Township
may ascertain the kind and quantity or number sold.
§ 4-21.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-22
1:174
§ 4-22. POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS.
§ 4-22.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 696 § 1]
As used in this section:
POOL OR BILLIARD HALL OR PARLOR AND LICENSED PREMISES — Shall
mean any place of public assemblage in which the games commonly known
as pool or billiards or games of a similar nature are played.
§ 4-22.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 696 § 2]
No person shall operate or conduct a pool or billiard hall or parlor without
having first obtained from the Township a license to do so and upon
payment to the Township of an annual license fee as provided in the
Mercantile License Ordinance of the Township.28
§ 4-22.3. Application for License.
Any person desiring to obtain a license shall make application for the same
in writing to the Township License Officer, as provided in Section 4-2 of this
chapter.
§ 4-22.4. Regulations for Operation; Prohibit. [Ord. No. 696 § 4]
No licensee, nor any agent, servant, or employee of a licensee, shall allow,
suffer, or permit, or cause to be allowed, suffered or permitted, the
following:
a. The licensed premises to be or remain open for business between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday.
b. A minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by a parent
or guardian, to play in or at the licensed premises the games commonly
known as pool or billiards or games of a similar nature, or to frequent or
lounge or congregate or gather therein or in or about the front of the
premises.
c. A minor over the age of sixteen (16) years and under the age of eighteen
(18) years to play in or at the licensed premises, after the hour of 7:00
p.m. the games commonly known as pool or billiards or games of a
similar nature, or to frequent or lounge or congregate therein.
d. Any gambling in any form in or at the licensed premises.
e. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be employed in
any capacity in or at the licensed premises.
f. Any intoxicated or disorderly person to be admitted to the licensed
premises or to remain therein or to loiter in front of the premises.
28.Editor's Note: Fees are codified in Section 4-12 of this chapter.
§ 4-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22.5
1:175
§ 4-22.5. Penalty. [Ord. No. 696 § 5; New]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-23. MOTELS, HOTELS AND TOURIST LODGES.
§ 4-23.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1556 § II; Ord. No. 95-6 § 1]
As used in this section:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean a hotel which
serves a continental breakfast, but does not serve regular meals, and:
GUEST HOUSE — Shall mean a facility providing sleeping or dwelling
accommodations to transient guests;
HOTEL — Shall mean any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms
intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out
to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. This
definition shall also mean and include any motor lodge, motor court, motel,
tourist lodge or tourist court.
HOUSING OR LODGING UNIT — Shall mean any room, cabin, or quarters,
whether or not physically attached to or connected with any other building
or structure, used for the sleeping or housing accommodations in the
business of conducting tourist lodges, hotels, or motels.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, individual, firm, association,
partnership or corporation.
§ 4-23.2. Cooking Facilities Prohibited; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1556
§ III; Ord. No. 95-6 § II]
Is comprised of a structure that was originally constructed for the
purpose of a private residence.
a.
Is comprised of a structure that was originally constructed for the
purpose of a private residence;
a.
Includes individual sleeping accommodations for twenty-five (25) or
fewer guests;
b.
Has at least one (1) dwelling unit occupied by the owner of the facility
as his place of residence during the time that the facility is being used
for the lodging of a guest;
c.
Conforms to the requirements of a guest house under the Uniform Fire
Code - 5:18-1.5.
d.
a. No cooking facilities of any kind shall be constructed, installed, placed
or used in any tourist cabin, hotel, lodge, or motel within the confines of
Neptune Township; nor shall any food be prepared, cooked, or made
§ 4-22.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-23.2
1:176
§ 4-23.3. Register and Signature Logs to Be Maintained;
Regulations. [Ord. No. 1556 § IV; Ord. No. 462 § I; Ord. No. 95-6
§ III; Ord. No. 95-9 § I; Ord. No. 2016-26]
suitable for consumption on or about any tourist cabin, hotel, lodge,
motel, nor shall the preparation, cooking or making suitable for human
consumption of food on or about, or in such tourist cabin, hotel, lodge,
or motel be permitted by the owners, managers, lessees, operators, or
licensees thereof, except for a restaurant operating as such exclusively
for the preparation and serving of food and except for one (1)
superintendent's or manager's apartment.
b. This shall not prohibit any bed and breakfast establishment from
serving a continental breakfast.
a. Each operator shall at all times cause to be maintained on the premises
a register, which shall constitute the register of the premises, and an
operator log, consisting of a bound book with consecutively numbered
pages, which shall constitute the operator log of the premises. The
register and operator log shall be preserved for seven (7) years upon
the premises.
b. No person shall occupy and no operator shall permit any person to
occupy any housing or lodging unit on the premises, unless each person
or head of the party who is to occupy such housing unit shall first
display to a duly authorized agent or employee of the hotel, motor
lodge, in charge of the register at least one (1) form of identification
which shall serve as written evidence of his or her identification and
permanent address. The form of identification that was produced shall
be recorded as well as any information from the identification that
differs from the identification supplied by the person renting the room.
c. The operator shall cause to be written into the register, in ink, the
number or name of the housing or lodging unit assigned to each
registrant, the date of the registration, the signature of the person
taking or accepting the registration and the date when the occupants of
each housing or lodging unit quit and surrender the same.
d. In addition to the foregoing information, the operator shall cause to be
written into the operator log, in ink, the number or name of the housing
or lodging unit assigned to each registrant, the date of the registration,
the initials of the person taking or accepting the registration and the
date when the occupants of each housing or lodging unit quit and
surrender the same.
e. The register and operator log shall be kept and preserved by the
operator, and local police authorities or any duly authorized agent of
the Governing Body of Neptune Township may seek authorization to
inspect said register and operator log through an appropriately issued
Subpoena or Court Issued Warrant, unless the hotel operator
§ 4-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-23.3
1:177
§ 4-23.4. Duty of Police Department and Authorized Agent. [Ord.
No. 1556 § V; Ord. No. 95-6 § IV]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Township of Neptune,
and any duly authorized agent of the Township to inspect the premises
from time to time, at any hour of the day or night, to determine that the
provisions of this section are complied with.
§ 4-23.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-6 § V]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by imprisonment in the County
jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion
of the Court. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 4-24. ROOMING HOUSES, BOARDING HOUSES AND BOARDING
HOMES FOR SHELTERED CARE.
§ 4-24.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1445 preamble]
The Township Committee is responsible for the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Township.
Ocean Grove is an integral part of the Township.
The Township Committee has found that it is unable to adequately meet the
needs of an increasing sheltered care population.
§ 4-24.2. Licensed Beds Limited. [Ord. No. 1445 § 1; Ord. No. 1628
§ 1; Ord. No. 1644]
The number of beds in rooming houses, boarding homes for sheltered care,
regardless of referral sources or statutory classification of clientele, in the
Ocean Grove section of Neptune Township, shall be limited to two hundred
seventy-nine (279) beds.
§ 4-25. (RESERVED)29
voluntarily and legally consents to the inspection, said consent of which
can legally be withheld.
f. The Township's Director of Code/Construction shall be authorized to
grant written approval to an automated system of record keeping
proposed by the owner/ operator provided that said system contains all
of the information as required herein. Any changes to an approved
system will void said approval and require the owner/operator to
contact the Director of Code/ Construction for review and approval.
§ 4-23.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-26
1:178
§ 4-26. ROLLING CHAIRS.
§ 4-26.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person, firm, company, association or
corporation applying for a license to operate rolling chairs on the boardwalk
and permitted areas in the Township.
BOARDWALK — Shall mean elevated walk or promenade along the ocean
front.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person or corporation in whose name the
license is issued by the Mercantile Officer of the Township of Neptune.
OPERATOR — Shall mean the driver or person at the controls of a rolling
chair.
OWNER — Shall mean the person or corporation actually owning or leasing
the rolling chairs.
ROLLING CHAIR — Shall mean a wheeled vehicle for the transportation of
two (2) or three (3) persons for hire.
RUN — Shall mean the interval consumed between the time a passenger
hires a rolling chair and the time the passenger leaves the rolling chair.
STREET — Shall mean the public streets in the Township of Neptune.
§ 4-26.2. License Requirement. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
No person shall operate, conduct or maintain a rolling chair, without written
approval from the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association and a license
for so doing from the Mercantile Officer of the Township of Neptune. Such
license shall be effective for the period of April 1st to October 31st of the
current year.
§ 4-26.3. Annual License Fee. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
The annual license fee for each rolling chair shall be thirty ($30.00) dollars.
§ 4-26.4. Number of Licensees. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
Upon providing written approval from the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting
Association, payment of the license fee for a rolling chair as specified in
this section and upon the full and complete compliance with all the terms
and provisions of this section by an applicant, the Mercantile Officer of
the Township of Neptune or other duly authorized agent for the Township
of Neptune shall issue to the applicant a license therefor, for the rolling
chairs proposed to be operated by such applicant, not exceeding ten (10) in
29.Editor's Note: Former Section 4-25, Rooming and Boarding House Site Licensing Board;
Licensure of Rooming and Boarding Houses, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. 1661, 95-37, 96-15, 97-9, 98-52, 99-14 and 08-05 was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 13-37.
§ 4-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.4
1:179
number, copies of which license shall be securely fastened on the back of
the chair at the left-hand side on a line with the seat, so that the same may
be readily seen and inspected by the agents of Neptune and the public.
The maximum number of rolling chairs which may be licensed at any one
(1) time for operations in the Township of Neptune shall be limited to ten
(10).
Once an applicant has been issued a license and has become a licensee, and
for so long as said license has not been revoked for cause, or the Township
has decided to repeal this section and prohibit the use of rolling chairs,
then said licensee shall be entitled to renew his license annually upon the
payment of the required fees and upon compliance with this section. In the
event that the applications for rolling chairs exceed ten (10) in any year,
priority will be given to existing licensees who have complied with the terms
of this section.
§ 4-26.5. Record of Licensees. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
The Mercantile Officer of the Township of Neptune or other duly authorized
agents of the Township of Neptune shall keep a record of each license
issued for rolling chairs, and shall in said record designate the person to
whom such license is issued, and the number of rolling chairs for which the
license has been issued.
§ 4-26.6. Licenses Nontransferable. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
Any license issued to any one (1) person or persons under this section shall
not be transferable to any other person or persons.
§ 4-26.7. Rates and License Display. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
Before the issuance of a license to an applicant, that applicant by April 1 of
each year, shall file with the Mercantile Officer of the Township of Neptune,
a statement which shall list the rates to be charged for hire of the rolling
chairs described in the license and operated from the rolling chair station.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, operator or pusher to
charge more than the price fixed in said schedule, at any time or under any
circumstances. No change in any existing rate schedule filed, as aforesaid,
shall become effective until ten (10) days after said new rate schedule shall
have been filed in the office of the Mercantile Officer of the Township of
Neptune.
The owner or licensee of each rolling chair shall place on the inside of
the front of each rolling chair, open to the view of the passengers, a
reproduction of the sign or rate card posted in the rolling chair station, in
miniature form, not smaller than two and one-fourth inches by six and onehalf
(2-1/4" x 6-1/2") inches. It shall be unlawful for any owner, licensee or
manager to operate any rolling chair unless the rate sign referred to in this
section shall be affixed thereto.
§ 4-26.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-26.7
1:180
The owner of each rolling chair shall place on either side and on the front
thereof in line with the seat board of said chair, sign not exceeding three
(3") inches in width and nine (9") inches in length, containing the name
of the licensee of said chair, which chair shall also exhibit a copy of the
Township of Neptune license and the rolling chair station number, if any.
§ 4-26.8. Regulations Governing Operation of Rolling Chair. [Ord.
No. 99-18 § 1]
Rolling chairs shall be permitted to be operated on the boardwalk and on
the sidewalk in the center of Ocean Pathway. It shall be unlawful for rolling
chairs to operate anywhere in the Township except in areas as described
above. Rolling chairs shall not be permitted on any street, avenue, way or
road except to cross Ocean Avenue at the crosswalk between the pavilion
at Ocean Pathway and Ocean Avenue and the sidewalk in the center of
Ocean Pathway and the crosswalk on Beach Avenue at the center of Ocean
Pathway. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or operator as
heretofore defined, to establish a stand, concession or depot for the storage
or hire of rolling chairs on or in any of the permitted operation areas as
described herein.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or operator as heretofore
defined, to be under the influence of illegal drugs, alcohol, or smoking or
chewing any tobacco product at any time while in the actual performance of
his business or duty.
All operators, while in the performance of their business or duty, shall act in
a kind, courteous and polite manner to customers or patrons of the rolling
chair, and to all other persons. It shall be unlawful for any operator to shout,
bounce the rolling chair, or operate the rolling chair in any fashion which
would endanger the occupants thereof, or any other persons.
It shall be lawful for any operator to stop his rolling chair briefly for the
convenience of a passenger. In such case, the chair shall be moved off the
lane, and, if requested by the passenger to wait for a short interval, the
operator may park the chair for a short interval.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, licensee, manager or operator to solicit
the hiring of rolling chairs by use of any mechanical means.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner or manager to operate or permit
to be operated, any mechanically operated rolling chairs.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager or operator to permit
or allow more than three (3) adults to ride in or occupy any rolling chair at
any one (1) time. Children under eight (8) shall not be construed as adults.
Rolling chairs may be operated from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight),
seven (7) days per week.
It shall be unlawful for chairs to be operated in the same direction abreast
of or alongside each other, except when passing each other, and not more
§ 4-26.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.8
1:181
than one (1) rolling chair shall pass another rolling chair at the same
time and place. No rolling chair shall pass another rolling chair except by
passing towards the center. No rolling chair shall pass more than three (3)
preceding chairs at one time.
It shall be unlawful to operate any rolling chairs at a speed in excess of four
(4) miles per hour.
No rolling chair shall be equipped with any horn, bell or other warning or
signaling device, nor shall the use of any horn, bell or other warning or
signaling device be permitted in its operation. No rolling chair shall have
affixed to it any sign, display or advertising other than the name of the
owner and operator of the rolling chair, and the schedule of rates.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a rolling chair to impede or interfere
with vehicles or traffic on public streets and the operator shall obey all
traffic laws when operating a rolling chair on a public street.
Operators of rolling chairs shall be required to dress in a neat and
appropriate fashion. All operators are required to wear shoes, pants and
shirts. Each licensee shall establish a standard uniform or dress for its
employees operating rolling chairs.
§ 4-26.9. Maintenance of Rolling Chairs and Storage Areas. [Ord.
No. 99-18 § 1]
All rolling chairs shall be properly maintained and neatly painted at all
times. Rolling chairs shall not remain on the boardwalk during the hours
of 12:00 a.m. (Midnight) to 10:00 a.m. In the event that the rolling chairs
are stored during the hours of non-operation, the storage facility shall
be maintained in an orderly and neat fashion and shall comply with all
applicable zoning regulations.
§ 4-26.10. Insurance and Indemnification. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
Before being granted a license, every applicant for a license shall file with
the Mercantile License Officer of the Township of Neptune a Certificate of
Insurance issued and duly countersigned by a duly licensed and authorized
New Jersey insurance agent, evidencing the issuance and actual existence
of a policy of insurance of a safe, reputable casualty insurance company
duly licensed and authorized to transact business under the laws of the
State of New Jersey. By such policy of insurance said insurance company
shall agree, for and on behalf of such licensee and his, her, their or its
servants, agents, employees, successors and assigns, to pay all sums, to
the limits specified, which the licensee shall become legally obliged to
pay as damages because of bodily injury, sickness or disease including
death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons
(other than any operator or person employed or under contract by said
licensee), or damage to property, caused by accident and arising out of
the ownership, maintenance, use of operation of rolling chairs, owned,
leased to or rented by such licensee and arising or resulting from and out
§ 4-26.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-26.10
1:182
of any and all operation incidental to or connected with the conduct and
operation of such rolling chair business by such licensee. Said policy shall
indemnify and save harmless the Township of Neptune, its agents, servants
and employees, from any liability to persons or property, including the
payment of all attorneys fees and costs incurred to defend any suit, demand,
presentation or action arising out of the licensee's ownership, maintenance,
use or operation of rolling chairs within the Township of Neptune and said
policy shall name the Township as an additional insured.
Such policy of insurance shall provide a minimum limit of liability on the
part of the insurance company in the amount of five hundred thousand
($500,000.00) dollars for one (1) person for all damages, including damages
for care and loss of service, arising out of bodily injury, sickness or disease,
including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person in
any one (1) accident and five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars for
each accident, which latter limit, subject to the above provisions respecting
each person, is the limit of the insurance company's liability for all damages,
including damages for care and loss of services, arising out of bodily injury,
sickness or disease, including death at any time resulting therefrom,
sustained by two (2) or more persons in any one accident. Said policy of
insurance shall further provide a minimum limit of liability on the part of the
insurance company in the amount of five hundred thousand ($500,000.00)
dollars for all damage to property, arising out of any one (1) accident.
§ 4-26.11. Violations. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
If any licensee shall fail to fully and promptly comply with the provisions of
this section and with all other laws, ordinances and regulations pertaining
to the business of such licensee, or in the event of the failure to maintain
insurance in full force and effect without lapse, as required under this
section, then and in either or any of such events, the rolling chair license
issued to such licensee shall immediately cease, terminate and become null
and void and of no effect and licensee shall forthwith and without delay of
any kind surrender such license to the Mercantile License Officer of the
Township of Neptune for cancellation and shall forthwith and immediately
cease, terminate, discontinue and end all operations and business
conducted by licensee under said license. All fees and costs shall be
forfeited.
§ 4-26.12. Nouns. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
The use of the word "person" shall, for the purpose of this section, be
deemed to include persons, firms, associates, copartnerships and
corporations.
§ 4-26.13. Penalties. [Ord. No. 99-18 § 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township of Neptune be punished
for each offense by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars and/
§ 4-26.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.13
1:183
or imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Each time a chair shall be operated in violation of the foregoing section or
any part thereof, it shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 4-27. LEGALIZED GAMES OF CHANCE.
§ 4-27.1. License Requirements. [Ord. No. 03-16 § 1]
Applicants for a license to operate and conduct a legalized game of chance
within the boundaries of the Township of Neptune shall be subject to the
rules and regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission and all applicable State statutes.
§ 4-27.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 03-16 § 1]
The fees payable to the Township of Neptune to operate and conduct a
legalized game of chance shall be the amount equal to the amount charged
by the Control Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9. However, the
amount of the fees payable to the Township shall not exceed fifty ($50.00)
dollars for any game of chance.
§ 4-28. CLOTHING DONATION BINS.
§ 4-28.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 09-09; Ord. No. 11-20]
APPROPRIATE MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Shall mean the Zoning Officer or
Code Enforcement Department of Neptune Township who shall be
responsible to enforce compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and
issue notices and violations for non-compliance with this section.
BINS — Shall mean canisters, cards, receptacles or other similar devices
for the collection of money, personal property or other things of value.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, company, organization or entity of any kind.
SOLICITATION OR SOLICIT — Shall mean the request, directly or
indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing
of any kind or value. Solicitation shall include but not be limited to, the
use or employment of canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for
the collection of money, property or other things of value. Solicitation shall
take place whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any
contribution.
§ 4-28.2. Requirements for Placement, Use of Clothing Bins for
Solicitation Purposes. [Ord. No. 09-09; Ord. No. 11-20]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no persons shall place,
use or employ a clothing donation bin for solicitation purposes, unless all
the following requirements are satisfied:
§ 4-26.13 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-28.2
1:184
a. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a period of one (1) year from
the Mercantile Officer or other designated officer within the
municipality in which the clothing donation bin will be placed in
accordance with the following:
1. In applying for such permit, the person's application shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin will be used, sold or
disbursed, and the method by which the proceeds of the
collected donations will be allocated or spent;
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to paragraph b of this subsection, of any
entity that may share or profit from any clothing or other
donation collected via the bin;
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on its
property.
2. The appropriate municipal agency or office shall review the
application filed with the Mercantile Officer or other designated
officer and the Mercantile Officer or other designated officer shall
not grant an application for a permit to place, use or employ a
clothing donation bin if the appropriate municipal agency
determines that the placement of the bin constitutes a safety
hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(a) Placement of a clothing donation bin within one hundred (100')
feet of any place that stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or
other flammable liquids or gases.
(b) Placement that in the opinion of the appropriate municipal
agency endangers the safety of persons or property.
(c) Placement that in the opinion of the appropriate municipal
agency would unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked
or stopped vehicles.
(d) Placement that in the opinion of the appropriate municipal
agency would unreasonably interfere with the ingress to or
egress from any residence or place of business.
(e) Placement that unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic
signs or signals, fire hydrants or mailboxes located or
permitted at or near said location.
§ 4-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-28.2
1:185
(f) Placement that is within fifteen (15') feet of any fire hydrant,
fire call box, police box or other emergency facility.
(g) Placement that is within ten (10') feet of any building,
showroom or residence unless written permission from the
owner is secured and the same is submitted with the
application.
(h) Placement within five (5') feet of or any public area improved
with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or landscaping.
(i) Placement within three hundred (300') feet of any residential
property.
(j) Placement in the front or side yard of property unless the
appropriate municipal agency or office provides an exception
wherein the best interests of the Township is served and where
appropriate screening and access is provided.
3. The Mercantile Officer or other designated officer may impose a fee
for such application, in the amount of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
for a permit of one (1) year. An expiring permit for a clothing
donation bin may be renewed upon application for renewal and
payment of a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars annually.
4. Renewal applications shall include the following:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
and if the person intends to move it, the new location where
the bin would be situated after the renewal is granted and the
written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold or disbursed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of the collected donations have
been allocated or spent and any changes the person
anticipates may make in these processes during period
covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name and telephone of the bona fide office required
pursuant to paragraph b of this subsection of any entity that
shared or profited from any clothing or any other donations
collected by the bin, and any entities that may do so during the
period covered by the renewal.
5. A sticker with the permit number and the date of expiration shall be
clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the clothing
donation bin with additional information required pursuant to
paragraph c of this subsection.
b. The person and any other entity that may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected by the bin, maintains a bona fide
§ 4-28.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-28.2
1:186
§ 4-28.3. Maintenance of Bins. [Ord. No. 09-09]
All bins placed in the Township of Neptune shall be subject to the following
maintenance requirements:
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of obtaining information concerning the person
or other entity. For purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
c. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the clothing donation bin:
1. The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and any other entity that may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected by the bin;
2. The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity that may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected by the bin;
3. In cases when an entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
by the bin, a notice written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities that may share or profit from such donations; and
4. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
appropriate municipal agency or office in the most recent permit or
renewal application pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 4 of paragraph a
of this subsection indicating the manner in which the person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will
be used, sold or disbursed, and the method by which the proceeds
of the collected donations would be allocated or spent.
d. Clothing bins on any property shall be limited to a maximum of one (1)
clothing bin per every fifty (50) marked parking stalls, or part thereof.
In no instance shall the number of clothing bins exceed three (3)
clothing bins per property.
a. Bins may not be left with personal property beyond the confines of the
bin and/or lying on property surrounding the bin for more than twentyfour
(24) hours from the time of notification by the appropriate
municipal agency or office.
§ 4-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-28.3
1:187
§ 4-28.4. Receipt, Investigation of Complaints Relative to Donations
of Clothing Bin. [Ord. No. 09-09; Ord. No. 11-20]
§ 4-28.5. Additional Penalties and Remedies. [Ord. No. 09-09]
b. The bin shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, or receipt of donated
property.
c. Each bin shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good
repair at all times. Specifically, but without limitation to the foregoing,
each bin shall be serviced and maintained so that:
1. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
2. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereof.
3. The structural parts of the bin are not broken or unduly misshapen.
4. The bins are free from all graffiti.
a. The appropriate municipal agency or office shall receive and
investigate, within thirty (30) days, any complaints from the public
about an existing bin. Whenever it appears that a person has engaged
in, or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this section, the
person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the appropriate municipal
agency or office is not requested within fifteen (15) days, the bin will be
seized and removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin
and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at
public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means
used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be
affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
b. In the event the person who placed the bin does not rectify the violation
or request a hearing within fifteen (15) days of the posting of the
warning, the appropriate municipal agency or office may seize the bin
and remove it or have it removed at the expense of the person who
placed the bin and sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any
clothing or any other donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from
the sale of the donations collected by the bin shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer of Neptune Township.
c. In the event that the person who placed the bin cannot be contacted
after due diligence by the appropriate municipal agency and a violation
of this section mandates the removal of the clothing bin, the owner of
the property on which the clothing bin is located shall be responsible
for the removal of the clothing bin or the expense of the cost of removal
by the appropriate municipal agency.
§ 4-28.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-28.5
1:188
§ 4-29. DEALERS OF PRECIOUS METALS, JEWELRY AND
SECONDHAND GOODS.30
§ 4-29.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean a current valid New Jersey
driver's license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable U.S. government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department or request.
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, limited-liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes
of resale of precious metals, jewelry or secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this section, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
a. In addition to any of the other penalties or remedies authorized by the
law of this State any person who violates this section that results in a
seizure of the clothing donation bin shall be:
1. Subject to a penalty of up to twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars
for each violation. The appropriate municipal agency or office may
bring this action in the Municipal Court or the Superior Court as a
summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999"
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.) and any penalty monies collected shall
be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Neptune;
and
b. Deemed ineligible to place, use or employ a clothing donation bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61. A person
disqualified from placing, using or employing a clothing donation bin by
violating the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. may apply to the
appropriate municipal agency to have the person's eligibility restored.
The appropriate municipal agency may restore the eligibility of a
person who:
1. Acts within the public interest; and
2. Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and all other applicable
laws or regulations or had no fraudulent intentions.
30.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 11-21 and 2015-53.
§ 4-28.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29.1
1:189
EXEMPTIONS — Shall mean for the purposes of this section, goods subject
to this section shall not include goods transacted in the following manner:
i) judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators; ii) occasional or
auction sales of household goods sold from private homes; iii) auctions
of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or
stamps by a person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps and who
does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange of such coins or stamps to or
from the general public by billboard, sign, handbill, newspaper, magazine,
radio, television, or other form of printed or electronic advertising.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean a dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
JEWELRY — Shall mean personal ornaments, such as, but not limited to,
necklaces, rings or bracelets that are typically made from or contain jewels
and precious metals.
PAWNBROKER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Shall mean gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Shall mean individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Shall mean every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals or
jewelry, as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean used goods such as gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
word processors, GPS devices, computers, computer hardware and
software, television sets, telephones, cell phones, tools, electronic devices,
sporting goods, automotive equipment, collectables, game cartridges,
DVD's, CD's, other electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and
camera equipment, video equipment and other valuable articles. Specific
goods excluded include antiques, typewriters, records or stereo sets,
musical instruments, furniture or clothing.
SELLER — Shall mean a member of the public who sells or pawns used
goods such as precious metal, jewelry and/or secondhand goods as defined
above to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Shall mean a dealer, as defined herein, who has not
been in a registered retail business continuously for at least six (6) months
at any address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register
§ 4-29.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-29.1
1:190
or who intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six (6)
months.
§ 4-29.2. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
§ 4-29.3. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 2016-38]
a. No person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of
precious metals, jewelry or secondhand goods, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Township Mercantile Officer, which license
shall bear a number issued by the Township Mercantile Officer.
b. The application for a license to the Township Mercantile Officer shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons
offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
c. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those
articles referred to in subsection 4-29.1 above are being bought in any
location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as
a dealer for purposes of this section. No person, partnership, limitedliability
company, corporation or other entity shall place or cause to be
placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods without
stating in the advertising the license number issued to a person or
entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license
number shall appear in type no smaller than eight-point in the lowerright-
hand corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in
electronic media, the license number shall be visually or audibly stated.
Failure to state or indicate the license number shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties established in subsection
4-29.8.
d. Licensees may not operate at any location other than site specified in
the license. Licensees operating at multiple locations must have each
location separately licensed. Each location must be permanent.
Itinerant businesses and transient buyers, as defined in Subsection
4-29.1 above, are not eligible for licensure and are prohibited from
operating in the Township.
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Township Mercantile Officer shall refer such application to the Chief of
Police, who shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee,
pursuant to this section for the purpose of determining the suitability of
the applicant for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the following:
§ 4-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29.3
1:191
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in subsection 4-29.1
above, although nothing in this section shall be construed to
warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience.
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metals,
jewelry or secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether
the licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within thirty (30) days of the submission of the application to
the Township Mercantile Officer, fully completed by the applicant. If a
criminal record check has been requested within the thirty-day period
and has not been received by the Chief of Police within that period, the
Chief of Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a
conditional issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding
criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Township
Mercantile Officer, who shall grant or deny the license. Any
recommendation of the Chief of Police shall be in writing and, in the
case of a recommendation of denial, shall state fully and specifically the
reasons for said recommendation. If the Township Mercantile Officer
accepts the recommendation of the Chief of Police to deny any license,
the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such
denial and the Clerk shall forward to the applicant a statement of the
reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer as defined in subsection 4-29.1. A license may be
denied if the investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of
its principal officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons
offense(s) in which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any
conviction of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or
the receiving of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a
principal, accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator;
or any prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of
§ 4-29.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-29.3
1:192
§ 4-29.4. Identification of Seller; Record-keeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
its principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability
to satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in subsection 4-29.4, the retention and inspection
requirements of subsection 4-29.5, or any other portion of this chapter.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Township Mercantile Officer shall issue or deny the license accordingly,
contingent upon the receipt of a bond as required by subsection 4-29.6
of this section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Police Director or other designated
party by the Governing Body, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of receiving written notice
of denial of a license to act as a dealer of precious metals, jewelry or
secondhand goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals, jewelry or
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
subsection 4-29.1.
b. Require each seller to execute a "declaration of ownership," which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of
eighteen years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
§ 4-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29.4
1:193
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in subsection 4-29.1, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
6. The receipt number;
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
9. If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 and 51:6-1 et seq.;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in paragraph c above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in paragraph f below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in paragraph c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within twenty-four (24)
hours from the date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are
used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information set
§ 4-29.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-29.4
1:194
§ 4-29.5. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2016-38]
forth in paragraph c above into the database as soon as possible upon
the dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database
coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain
computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer
to replace faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being
cited for a violation of this section and subsequently being subject to
the penalties for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as
described in subsection 4-29.5.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals, jewelry or secondhand goods, as well
as the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in subsection 4-29.5, if the Police
Department seeking said examination has presented a Subpoena or
Warrant allowing challenge by the dealer or in cases where the dealer
has allowed inspection and examination by voluntary, legally and
informed consent.
a. All precious metals, jewelry and secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in subsection 4-29.4. All precious metals, jewelry or secondhand goods
subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as when
purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of,
changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the fifteen-day
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers
will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where
the purchased item(s) are being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
subsection 4-29.4b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
§ 4-29.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29.5
1:195
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain, for at least five (5) years, a paper record of all purchases of
precious metals, jewelry and secondhand goods in the form prescribed
in subsection 4-29.4c.
d. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of eighteen (18) or in the absence of providing
prior notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business
designee identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be
made and the item to be purchased.
e. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to subsection 4-29.8
of this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Township
Mercantile Officer, which shall set forth the grounds for the
suspension and notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal
pursuant to paragraph g. A temporary suspension shall issue
immediately, pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended
dealers must immediately cease engaging in the business of
purchasing for resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of
precious metals and/or jewelry and/or secondhand goods in the
municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Police Director to review the grounds for suspension, been
cured, corrected, or appropriately rectified.
f. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Township Mercantile Officer upon written recommendation from the
Chief of Police or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer
qualified, capable or competent to comply with the requirements of this
section. This penalty shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the
dealer may incur under subsection 4-29.8.
§ 4-29.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-29.5
1:196
§ 4-29.6. Bond. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Township
Mercantile Officer executed by the applicant as principal and executed by
a surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Township Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars, conditioned for the due and
proper observance of and compliance with the provisions and requirements
of all ordinances of the municipality in force or which may be adopted
respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned also that the bond
shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons who shall have
received judgment against the dealer licensed under this section, which
damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction.
Said bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation of this bond
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Township
Mercantile Officer in writing. A temporary suspension will
immediately and automatically issue, if one is not already in effect,
pending the outcome of the charge. The Police Director shall
review the stated grounds for revocation and shall issue an
appropriate disposition of either suspension, revocation, or
reinstatement. If it is determined that revocation is the appropriate
disposition, the grounds therefor shall be set forth in writing in the
form of a notice of revocation, which shall be provided to the
dealer. The notice shall advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If
determined that suspension is the appropriate disposition, the
dealer shall be so notified in writing and shall be advised of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals, jewelry or secondhand
goods within the municipality.
g. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal a suspension or revocation
shall be entitled to a hearing as provided in subsection 4-29.3e. Any
applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of
appeal within ten (10) days of receiving written notice of revocation or
suspension of license.
h. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Township Mercantile
Officer, in writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 4-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29.6
1:197
shall, in addition to the Township of Neptune, be and remain for the benefit
of any person who shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of
damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license granted under this
chapter." Said bond shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date
of issuance of license and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 4-29.7. Fees; License Term. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
§ 4-29.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service
not exceeding ninety (90) days in addition to a suspension or revocation
of operating license as provided in subsection 4-29.5e and f above. Each
and every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation
shall result in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found
guilty of violating the provisions of this section within one year of the
date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation
may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender
and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
subsection 4-29.5f. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this section.
§ 4-29.9. Implementation. [Ord. No. 2016-38]
Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 et
seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale of
secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other statutory
provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
§ 4-30. RENT CONTROL.
a. A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker
or a dealer in precious metals, jewelry or secondhand goods, as covered
under this section, is two hundred ($200.00) dollars. The annual
renewal fee for a license is one hundred ($100.00) dollars. These fees
are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in
relation to the mandatory electronic database system designated by the
Chief of Police, as provided by subsection 4-29.5d. Payments are to be
made in the manner directed by the Township Mercantile Officer.
b. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for one year, from
January 1 through December 31. Initial applications and applications
for renewal must be submitted no later than October 1.
§ 4-29.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-30.1
1:198
§ 4-30.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-26; Ord. No. 13-33]
As used in this section:
BED AND BREAKFAST — Shall mean a facility providing sleeping or
dwelling accommodations to transient guests as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5
or successor amended State Regulations and subsection 4-23.1 and
successor amended ordinances.
DATE THAT THE LEASE IS ENTERED INTO — In the case of the renewal
of leases, shall mean the starting date of the last renewal term. Anniversary
date shall mean the date that the lease is entered into or periodic tenancy
commenced (oral lease) and each yearly renewal date thereafter.
EXISTING LEGAL RENT — Shall mean the actual legal monthly rental a
tenant is paying for his apartment or mobile home unit or space. At the time
of the adoption of this section, if the present monthly rent being paid by a
tenant is five hundred eighty ($580.00) dollars and the tenant is also paying
a twenty ($20.00) dollar a month hardship surcharge, the existing legal rent
for the next permissible increase will be six hundred ($600.00) dollars and
the next permissible increase will be the increased percentage in CPI as set
forth in subsection 4-30.2b, x $600.00. Thereafter, the "existing rent" will
be this six hundred dollars ($600.00) plus any CPI increases. Any capital
improvement surcharge shall be separate from the rent and not be included
in the base rent. 31
GUESTHOUSE — Shall mean a facility providing sleeping or dwelling
accommodations for transient guests as defined by Neptune Township Code
subsection 4-23.1.
HOUSING SPACE, DWELLING, MOBILE HOME OR APARTMENT — Shall
mean and include the portion of a structure rented or offered for rent for
living and dwelling purposes to one (1) individual or family unit together
with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities,
parking and garage facilities (whether optional or mandatory), and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the
property. Included are any buildings, structures, mobile homes, or land used
as a mobile home park, rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or
family units. Exempt from this section are: motels, hotels and similar type
buildings; bed and breakfast facilities, guesthouses; commercial buildings
with regard to commercial rentals; owner-occupied with four (4) units or
less rental units; single-family structures and housing structures in general
with four (4) rental units or less. Housing units newly constructed and
rented for the first time are exempt, with regards to tenant's first year
rental. That is the initial rent may be determined by the landlord but all
subsequent rents will be subject to the provisions of this section, subject
further to any State Statute such as N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.2, which may provide
a temporary exemption for newly constructed multiple dwellings. Further
exemption may exist by the preemption by Federal and State Statutes
regulating residential rents such as, but not limited to, dwellings owned
31.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 13-26, codified herein as Section 4-30 was adopted August 12,
2013.
§ 4-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30.1
1:199
by HUD, financed under Federal programs and subject to regulations
promulgated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
housing regulated and provided under the New Jersey Housing Finance
Agency Law of 1967. (N.J.S.A. 55:14J). Condominiums and Cooperative units
in any particular complex where there are five (5) units or more owned by
the same owner, those five (5) units or more shall not be exempt from Rent
Control.
LEGAL RENT — Shall mean any consideration paid by tenant or mobile
home owner or tenant for the use and occupancy of the rental property. All
charges that are considered mandatory for all tenants, including but not
limited to refurbishment fees and administrative fees, shall be considered
"rent" and shall be illegal unless inclusive of all rents and meeting the
ceiling limitations of this section. Optional charges, which are chosen by
tenants such as pet fees, pool fees, recreation fees, and the like, shall not
be inclusive of the definition of "rent" as viewed by this section.
Enforcement fees or security fees such as late fees, bounced check fees,
legal fees and costs of court for enforcement of a breach of lease agreement
and increases in security deposit are also not considered "rent" for purposes
of this section.
NOTIFY OR NOTIFICATION — Shall mean either certified mail, or regular
mail or hand delivery acknowledged by written receipt; or if the party
refuses to claim or acknowledge delivery, by regular mail.
PRICE INDEX — Shall mean the "Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers" for the region of the United States, of which Neptune Township,
New Jersey, is a part (i.e. the New York-East-New Jersey region) published
periodically by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of
Labor.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE — Shall mean that the housing space and
dwelling are free from all heat, hot water, elevator and all health, safety
and fire violations as well as ninety (90%) percent qualitatively free of all
other violations of the Neptune Township Property Maintenance Ordinance,
Uniform Construction Code, Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, Mobile Home
Park Ordinance and Statute (mobile home units only).
§ 4-30.2. Establishment of Rent; Increase. [Ord. No. 13-26]
a. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant in any dwelling
shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this section. Any
rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this
section shall be void.
b. Upon proper notice at the expiration of a lease or periodic tenancy, no
landlord may request or receive an increase greater than the
percentage increase, if any, in the Price Index published in the fourth
month prior to the month in which the lease or periodic tenancy
terminates over the Price Index published in the sixteenth month prior
to the month of termination. The rent resulting from the imposition of
any increase provided hereunder may be rounded to the nearest dollar
§ 4-30.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-30.2
1:200
§ 4-30.3. Rent Increase; Notice Required. [Ord. No. 13-26; Ord. No.
2014-28]
with regard to the final step of calculation only. Calculation of the
CPI published shall be in the month it is published not the month of
designation, i.e.,
November CPI published in December is December's CPI. Calculation
of percentages shall be calculated out two (2) decimal points only and
then dropped not rounded. No landlord shall request or receive more
than one (1) rental increase per year per housing space or mobile home
space unless said housing space or mobile home space is decontrolled
by a vacancy. By way of example, a rent increase computed in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be computed as
follows:
EXAMPLE
Assuming a lease or periodic tenancy expires in April of 2005, use the
CPI published in the fourth preceding month, or December of 2004 (a
below). Take the CPI published in the sixteenth month preceding the
month of termination, or December of 2003 (b below) and subtract b
from a. To calculate the percentage change in the CPI, take c and divide
it by b (d below).
Next, multiply the current rent by the percentage change in the CPI (e
below) and add to the current rent to arrive at the new rent.
a. CPI published in December
2004
293.9
b. CPI published in December
2003
-283.6
c. Difference in CPI 10.3
d. Percentage change in CPI
10.3 divide by 283.6 =
.03
e. Permissible increase is $400
(Current rent) multiplied by .03
=
12.00
f. New rent is (rounded to nearest
dollar)
$412.00
a. Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall, at least sixty (60) days
prior to the effective date of the increase, notify the tenant of the
calculations involved in computing the increase, including the Price
Index at the respective dates as required in subsection 4-30.2 the
allowable percentage increase, the allowable rental increase, the
previous year's base rent, and a certification by the landlord that the
dwelling is in substantial compliance with the Municipal Property
§ 4-30.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30.3
1:201
§ 4-30.4. Appeal by Landlord. [Ord. No. 13-26; Ord. No. 2014-28;
Ord. No. 2016-43]
Maintenance Code, Uniform Construction Code, Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling law and Mobile Home Park Ordinance and Statute (for mobile
home units only). Failure to comply with this provision shall result in
the rental continuing at old rent until proper notice is given.
b. Any landlord seeking a rent increase, a lease renewal or an agreement
to extend or renew leases shall provide notice of said action in writing
to the tenant at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of
increase renewal, extension or other action and further that no tenant
shall be required to sign any such rent increase notice, renewal or
agreement to extend or renew lease until such tenant has had the
opportunity to review the documents for a period of five (5) business
days.
a. In the event that a landlord cannot receive a fair return after having
received the increase provided in subsection 4-30.2, he may appeal to
the Rent Leveling Board for increased rental. The Board may grant a
hardship rent increase to meet this requirement. The landlord must
provide evidence according to the standards recognized at law for
determining fair return. The Board will rely upon the recognized
standard that a landlord should receive a net operating income of at
least forty (40%) percent of the gross annual income after deducting
reasonable and necessary operating expenses, in the absence of an
adequate showing that utilization of this standard will result in an
unfair return to the landlord. Operating expenses shall not include
mortgage principal or interest payments, depreciation or amortization.
Any hardship increase granted by the Board will take the place of the
annual CPI increase and shall be equally prorated to all units within the
structure thirty (30) days after the decision of the Rent Leveling Board,
provide that no increase shall take effect with regard to any tenant who
has a written lease until the expiration of the lease unless the lease
provides otherwise.
b. Landlord may seek an additional surcharge for major capital
improvements or services. To qualify for a major improvement
surcharge, claimant must show a benefit to the tenant in the form of
improved lifestyle, convenience, ease and/or security, and compliance
with the definition of capital improvements found in the Internal
Revenue Code. The landlord must notify each tenant of the total cost of
the completed capital improvement or service, the number of years of
useful life of the improvement as claimed by the landlord for purposes
of depreciation for income tax purposes, the cost of the improvement,
the total number of square feet to the dwelling or garden apartment
complex, the total square feet occupied by the tenant and the capital
improvement surcharge he is seeking from each tenant. The landlord
seeking a capital improvement or service surcharge shall appeal for the
surcharge to the Rent Leveling Board who shall determine if the
§ 4-30.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-30.4
1:202
improvement is a major improvement and if so, may permit such
increase to take place and may direct that the increase shall be
collected in equal monthly payments spread over the useful life of
the capital improvement. If the increase is granted it shall not be
considered rental and calculated in the cost of living increases. In any
event, no increase authorized by this section shall exceed fifteen (15%)
percent of the tenant's rent.
c. Prior to any such appeal to the Board provided for in paragraphs a and
b of this subsection, a landlord must post in the lobby of each building
or if no lobby is present, in a conspicuous place in and about the
premises a notice of the appeal setting forth the basis for the appeal.
The notice must be posted for a least fifteen (15) days prior to the
proposed date of appeal. He shall also send a separate notice by regular
and certified mail return receipt requested to each tenant at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the proposed date of the appeal. Landlord
must also submit to the Board a certification from the Housing and
Construction Department of Neptune Township that the building and
grounds are in substantial compliance with the municipal Property
Maintenance Ordinance, Uniform Construction Code, Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Law and with regards to mobile homes the Mobile
Home Park Ordinance.
d. Definitions. As used in this section:
1. FAIR NET OPERATING INCOME – Shall mean the amount
determined by subtracting reasonable and necessary operating
expenses from gross annual income which amount should not be
less than forty (40%) percent of the gross annual income.
2. GROSS ANNUAL INCOME – Shall mean all income resulting
directly or indirectly from the operation of a property or building,
such as all rent received or collectable, including any rent from a
less than arms-length transaction, the landlord's share of interest
on security deposits, all earnings from commission, vending
machines, late fees, pet fees, parking fees, pool fees, key charges,
finder's fees, amount received from successful tax appeals, income
from rebates, tax surcharges, capital improvement surcharges,
computed in accordance with the provisions and limitations of this
section.
3. REASONABLE AND NECESSARY OPERATING EXPENSES –
Includes all expenses incurred and paid by a landlord necessary to
the operation and maintenance of the residential rental property
during the period reflected in the income computed in this section,
excluding mortgage, principal or interest payments, depreciation
or amortization, computed with these limitations:
(a) Taxes shall be limited to amounts actually paid, including those
in escrow for appeal;
§ 4-30.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30.4
1:203
(b) Repairs and maintenance shall be limited to arms-length
transactions and shall be reasonable and necessary. Cost of
service contracts shall be prorated over the period covered.
Painting shall be prorated at a period of three (3) years for the
interior of dwelling units or five (5) years for the exterior and
common areas;
(c) Purchase of new equipment shall be reflected and prorated
over the useful life of the item;
(d) Legal and auditing expenses shall be limited to reasonable and
necessary costs of the operation of the property;
(e) Management fees shall be limited to actual services
performed, such as the resident manager's salary, telephone
expenses, postage, office supplies, stationery, and the value of
the apartment provided if included in income. In no event shall
management fees exceed five (5%) percent of the first
$50,000.00 of gross maximized annual income; four and onehalf
(4 1/2%) percent of the next $25,000.00; four (4%) percent
of the next $100,000.00; three and one-half (3 1/2%) percent of
the next $100,000.00 and three (3%) percent of any amount
over $275,000.00;
(f) Salaries not included in management fees shall be limited to
actual services performed and reasonable for similar position
in the area, including rental value, if included in income and
expenses and wages and benefits paid;
(g) Advertising shall be actual costs that are reasonable to insure
occupancy only;
(h) Utilities such as gas, electric, water and oil, shall derive from
arms-length transactions and the landlord shall demonstrate
that all reasonable efforts to conserve energy and fuels have
been used;
(i) Insurance costs shall derive from all arms-length transactions
prorated over item of policies;
(j) The history of the income and expense shall be consistent with
the application or fully documented as to any changes.
e. In any such application for a hardship increase, the landlord shall
specifically submit adequate proof to demonstrate:
1. He/she is an efficient operator of the residential rental property;
2. The residential rental property is in a safe and sanitary condition
and in substantial compliance with State Health Codes and the
Property Maintenance Code;
§ 4-30.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-30.4
1:204
§ 4-30.5. Rent Leveling Board Established. [Ord. No. 13-26]
There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of
Neptune. The Board shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2)
alternate members. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Governing Body and their terms of office shall be for a period of one (1) year
each, with each member serving without compensation.
Except as provided herein, the powers herein granted to the Rent Leveling
Board are advisory powers and its actions shall be subject to review by the
Governing Body of the Township hereinafter provided.
The Board shall elect among themselves a Chairperson at the first annual
meeting of the Rent Leveling Board, which it is called. The Township
Committee shall appoint a paid Board Secretary and legal counsel when
needed. The Construction Official, Housing Inspector and/or Code
Enforcement Officer may be called for specific reasons when needed by
3. If, during consideration of a hardship increase, the Rent Leveling
Board shall determine that the landlord is not in substantial
compliance with any or all of the above, the Board may temporarily
withhold further consideration of the Hardship Increase
Application until the landlord has corrected any such deficiency.
f. If, after a full hearing, the Rent Leveling Board shall determine that the
landlord is in full compliance with the provisions of this section, it may
permit a rental increase sufficient to reestablish the sixty (60%) percent
relation of reasonable and necessary operating expenses to the forty
(40%) percent fair net operating income. Any increase shall be equally
prorated to all of the affected units within the structure or on the
property, upon thirty (30) days notification after the Board has
approved of the hardship increase.
g. In determining the rent increases under this section, the Rent Leveling
Board shall consider whether the rent increase permitted by this
section provides the landlord with a just and reasonable rate of return.
The Rent Leveling Board shall be guided in its determination by
whether the rental increase will result in a rate of return which is
sufficiently high so as to:
1. Encourage good management, including adequate maintenance of
services;
2. Furnish reasonable reward for efficiency to the landlord;
3. Enable landlords to maintain and support their credit.
h. If the Rent Leveling Board determines that the rental increase does not
provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable rate of return under
paragraph g1, 2 and 3, the Rent Leveling Board shall have the authority
to appropriately adjust the rental increase to provide the landlord with
a fair and reasonable rate of return.
§ 4-30.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30.5
1:205
the Board and in its discretion. The Board shall be subject to Open Public
Meeting Act.
§ 4-30.6. Rent Leveling Board: Powers. [Ord. No. 13-26]
The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted, and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this section, including
but not limited to the following:
§ 4-30.7. Appeal. [Ord. No. 13-26]
Both landlord and tenant may appeal in writing the findings of the Board
to the Governing Body within twenty (20) days from the date of the
determination. The Township Committee shall hold a hearing on the record
before the Board. Procedures for appeal and costs shall be determined in
the Rules and Regulations of the Board.
§ 4-30.8. (Reserved)32
§ 4-30.9. Standards of Service. [Ord. No. 13-26]
During the term of this section, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment
in the housing space, dwelling and common areas as it provided or was
required to do by law or lease or tenancy at the date the lease or tenancy
a. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this section, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended by the Board in the exercise of discretion, providing that such
rules are filed with the Township Clerk.
b. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this section.
c. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental and surcharges.
d. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications and complaints from
tenants for reduced or improper rentals. The Board shall give both
landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard before making
any determination.
e. Upon application the Board may in its discretion issue written advisory
opinions as to any issue of jurisdiction on any future potential matter.
The opinion shall not be binding but shall be advisory in nature and
provide guidance for future actions.
32.Editor's Note: Subsection 4-30.8, Tax Reduction; Tenant Credit, containing portions of
Ordinance No. 13-26, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2014-28.
§ 4-30.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-30.9
1:206
was entered into or started. In the event the landlord fails to provide such
services, tenants may petition the Board for a rent reduction.
§ 4-30.10. First Time Rental. [Ord. No. 13-26]
The owner of housing space or dwelling being rented for the first time
shall not be restricted in the initial rent he charges. Any subsequent rental
increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
§ 4-30.11. Precedence of a Rent Leveling Ordinance. [Ord. No.
13-26]
Should a lease entered into between the landlord and tenant prove to
be in conflict with a Rent Leveling Ordinance, the Ordinance shall take
precedence.
§ 4-30.12. Vacant Housing Decontrolled, Recontrolled. [Ord. No.
13-26; Ord. No. 2014-28]
Upon the voluntary, uncoerced or court authorized termination of a tenancy,
during or at the end of any lease, the rent shall be decontrolled and the rent
may be raised by the landlord without regard to the limitations imposed
by this section. The rent to be charged to a new tenant, as well as the
rent previously charged for the same space, shall be reported to the Rent
Leveling Board within fifteen (15) days of renting the space. Upon rerented,
the rental space shall be considered recontrolled to the same extent
and under the same conditions as any space originally controlled.
Failure to report the information required within the fifteen (15) days
specified shall result in the rental space remaining controlled to the same
extent and under the same conditions as if it had not been vacant and any
rental charged the new tenant in excess of that controlled rate shall be void.
§ 4-30.13. Complaint Against Landlord. [Ord. No. 13-26]
Any tenant filing a complaint with the Rent Leveling Board against the
landlord shall be required to sign a complaint and appear before the Board
to give testimony as requested by the Board. The landlord and/or his
representative upon due notice shall be required to appear and give
testimony. Any tenant appearing before the Board may select someone
to represent them who need not be an attorney provided the person
representing the tenant is authorized to do so in writing. Any person
representing a tenant except an attorney is not permitted to charge a fee
for his service. Any landlord who is incorporated or is an LLC must be with
legal counsel when appearing on a landlord instituted complaint.
§ 4-30.14. Request for Information. [Ord. No. 13-26]
When the Rent Leveling Board shall request of any landlord any information
with respect to any rental unit such information shall be provided to the
Rent Leveling Board within fifteen (15) days of such request. Failure to
§ 4-30.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30.14
1:207
report the information required within the fifteen (15) days specified shall
result in the rental space remaining controlled to the same extent and under
the same conditions as it had not been vacant and any rental charged the
new tenant in excess of that controlled rate shall be void.
§ 4-30.15. Posting Required. [Ord. No. 13-26]
All landlords shall be required to have at all times a copy of the Rent
Leveling Ordinance posted in the lobby or other conspicuous place in the
premises of the landlord and provide a copy to all tenants on the initial lease
or tenancy or all existing tenants written sixty (60) days of enactment of this
section.
§ 4-30.16. Purpose. [Ord. No. 13-26]
This section being necessary for the welfare of the Township of Neptune
and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
thereof.
§ 4-31. SENIOR CITIZENS AND DISABLED PROTECTED TENANCY
ACT.
§ 4-31.1. Established. [Ord. No. 13-26]
The Rent Leveling Board of the Township of Neptune has been authorized
and instructed to administer the provisions of the Senior Citizens and
Disabled Protected Tenancy Act, Chapter 226 of the Laws of New Jersey
1981. The Rent Leveling Board of the Township of Neptune has been
instructed to report to the Mayor and Township Committee within thirty
(30) days, its recommendations as to the fees which should be charged to
owners seeking to convert properties to condominiums or cooperatives as
provided in Section 16 of the Act. Until such time as the Rent Leveling
Board has submitted its recommendations and the Mayor and Township
Committee have had an opportunity to act thereon, it is necessary to
establish interim fees for the processing of notices and applications and
to otherwise administer the provisions of the Senior Citizens and Disabled
Protected Tenancy Act.
§ 4-31.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 13-26]
The following fee structure is provided to cover the costs of the services
to be provided by the Township of Neptune under the provisions of the
Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act and are to be paid
by the owners of properties sought to be converted to condominiums or
cooperatives at the time such owners take steps to invoke the services of the
Township under the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act:
a. Five hundred ($500.00) dollars for the application for conversion of
structures; and
b. Ten ($10.00) dollars for each unit.
§ 4-30.14 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-31.3
1:208
§ 4-31.3. Interim Fees to Remain in Effect. [Ord. No. 13-26]
This section shall take effect upon publication according to law and remain
in effect until such time as an ordinance establishing permanent fees for
the Township's services under the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected
Tenancy Act is adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Neptune.
§ 4-32. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 4-32.1. Penalties - Section 4-30, Rent Control and Section 4-31,
Protected Tenancy. [Ord. No. 13-26]
§ 4-32.2. Graduation of Penalties for Offenses. [Ord. No. 13-26]
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 4-30 and/or 4-31
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed one
thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars or be imprisoned for a
term not to exceed ninety (90) days, community service not exceeding
ninety (90) days or any combination thereof. Each day that any violation
continues shall be considered a new and separate violation of Sections
4-30 and/or 4-31.
b. Upon recommendation to the Township Committee by the Rent Leveling
Board that a violation be prosecuted, it shall be the duty of the
Township Housing Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer to sign the
complaint, within fifteen (15) days after the Township Committee has
authorized the same by resolution.
a. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 4-30 and/or 4-31
shall and upon conviction for the first offense pay a fine of not more
than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and for the second offense shall pay
a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars; and for the
third offense shall pay a fine of one thousand two hundred fifty
($1,250.00) dollars or be imprisoned for a period not more than ninety
(90) days or community service not to exceed ninety (90) days or any
combination thereof. Each and every offense shall be deemed to be and
constitute a separate and distinct violation of these sections.
b. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided in the case of
conviction under Sections 4-30 and/or 4-31, upon any four (4)
convictions for violations of these sections, the premises in or upon
which the violations occurred shall be deemed a nuisance and the
owners, tenants and occupants of such premises shall be liable for the
penalties and additional penalties provided for the maintenance of
nuisances and in accordance with such acts made and provided.
c. Any person who is not in willful violation of Sections 4-30 and/or 4-31,
but still violates these sections shall first be given twenty (20) days
written notice by the Neptune Township Housing Department or Code
Enforcement Department to cease the aforesaid violation before a
§ 4-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-32.2
1:209
§ 4-33. REVOCABLE LICENSES.
§ 4-33.1. Process of Approval. [Ord. No. 2015-55]
§ 4-33.2. Standards of Approval. [Ord. No. 2015-55]
complaint is filed against the landlord or owner of a mobile home
park. This does not include complaints filed by tenants before the Rent
Leveling Board claiming an illegal rent increase by the landlord or
requesting a reduction in rent for reduced services. In those cases, the
complaint filed by the tenant before the Rent Leveling Board and served
upon the landlord or mobile home park owner shall be sufficient notice
of violation. A willful violation is considered a direct violation of a Board
decision or Court order.
a. The Township, in its sole discretion, may grant a property owner of the
Township of Neptune a revocable license in writing, allowing for said
property owner to create or continue an existing encroachment upon
municipal property where such an encroachment is considered by the
governing body not to be a significant impairment to the Township's use
of the Township property, is not a safety hazard and satisfies the
standards set forth in Subsection 4-33.2 of this section and will be
removed at the sole cost and expense of the property owner should the
Township determine, in its sole discretion, that such encroachment
needs to be removed in order for the Township to make use of or enter
upon said Township property, subject to approval by the State of New
Jersey in those cases, and in those cases only, where state approval is
required either because of green acres funding of public property or
other state requirements.
b. Any revocable license granted by the Township must be granted by
resolution, be in written form of agreement, approved by the Township
Attorney and possess in the very least a Indemnification and hold
harmless clause protecting the municipality against injury or damages;
allow for the removal of the encroachment upon notice of termination in
the sole discretion of the Township and at the sole cost and expense of
the property owner and enforceability in case the property owner fails
to comply with the aforesaid license agreement, by allowing the
Township to remove said encroachment at the sole cost and expense of
the property owner.
c. All License agreements shall be recorded in the Clerk's Office of
Monmouth County at the sole cost and expense of the property owner.
d. Change in ownership of property subject to a revocable license
agreement shall require either termination of the license agreement or
an assignment to the new owner of the existing revocable license
agreement, and approval by the governing body by resolution. [Added
10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-35]
§ 4-32.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 4-33.2
1:210
§ 4-33.3. Procedure for Application for Revocable License. [Ord. No.
2015-55]
§ 4-33.4. Encroachment Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2015-55]
a. The Governing Body in considering the approval of said Revocable
License shall only grant by resolution such a license if the property
owner meets the following criteria:
1. The existing or proposed encroachment shall not create an
obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic as determined
by the Township Engineer.
2. The encroachment or proposed encroachment shall not infringe
upon any easements held by the Township or other public agencies
or utilities.
3. The encroachment or proposed encroachment shall not obstruct
the sight triangle.
4. The encroachment or proposed encroachment shall not create or
contribute to a safety hazard as determined by the Township
Engineer.
a. The governing body of Neptune Township shall review any written
request or application by letter or other written form of an owner of real
estate for a license to an existing encroachment or a proposed
encroachment by submitting said written request through the Township
Administrator with a general description of the existing or proposed
encroachment (height, length, width, materials, distance between
walking surface and bottom of encroachment, etc.) including plan or
drawing showing the location and elevation and end section.
b. Application for assignment of license agreements shall follow the same
procedure as for the initial revocable license agreement with reliance
on the original plans and description only. [Added 10-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-35]
a. The following encroachments shall be allowed without a License
Agreement; though they may be subject to other local, State or Federal
Regulations:
1. Mailboxes and mailbox pillars.
2. Temporary placement of trash or recycling containers for pickup.
3. Structures created by the Township or with Township
authorization, such as sidewalks, etc.
4. Vegetation, grass and plant beds not in violation of standards under
subsection 4-33.2 or other laws of the municipality, State or Federal
Government, or other third party legal rights.
§ 4-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-33.5
1:211
§ 4-33.5. Fees — License Agreement. [Ord. No. 2015-55]
§ 4-33.6. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-55]
MINOR ENCROACHMENT — Shall mean those encroachments whose
surface and aerial uses are easily removable from the right-of-way or
Township property as determined by the Township Engineer, including but
not limited to the following: fences, surface parking, awnings, overhangs,
aerial cables or small temporary structures without foundations as
determined by the Township Engineer.
MAJOR ENCROACHMENT — Shall mean all other encroachments not
identified as minor.
MIXED ENCROACHMENT — Shall mean should there be multiple
encroachments in the same municipal right-of-way or municipal property
area of which some are minor and some are major, the encroachment shall
cumulatively be treated as a major encroachment for purposes of the fee
with one fee for all encroachments in the same area.
SAME AREA — Shall mean in the same block and lot or immediate adjacent
lot owned by the same property owner.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
a. Minor Encroachment. Property owners with minor encroachments as
defined by Subsection 4-33.6 shall pay, in addition to the cost of
recording the revocable license agreement with the Clerk of Monmouth
County, a one-time fee for preparation of the agreement and for the
allowance of a license by the Township of $150.
b. Major Encroachment. Property owners, in addition to paying for the
cost of the recording of the revocable license agreement with the Clerk
of Monmouth County shall pay the Township an annual fee of $300,
which shall be inclusive of the cost of preparation of the revocable
license agreement and granting of the license, where the encroachment
or encroachments cover less than 70 square feet of municipal property
or right-of-way, and a $500 annual fee for encroachments which cover
70 or more square feet of municipal property or right-of-way, to be paid
annually on the anniversary date of the Revocable License Agreement.
c. Determination. The governing body shall make the determination of the
type of encroachment based on the application or request and/or
description provided of the encroachment and pursuant to Subsection
4-33.6.
d. Assignments. Property owners requesting assignment of an existing
revocable license agreement to a new owner of the subject property
shall pay a fee of $100 in addition to the cost of recording in the Clerk's
Office of Monmouth County. [Added 10-28-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-35]
§ 4-33.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-1
1:212
§ 5-1. LICENSING OF DOGS AND KENNELS.
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 264 § 1; Ord. No. 1142 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven (7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall mean and
include every person having a right of property in the dog and every person
who has the dog in his/her keeping.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
association of persons.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
RUN AT LARGE — Shall mean and include the running or standing of any
dog on any street, road or other public place, or on any private property
where permission has not been granted, unattended, or not under the
immediate control of some responsible person able to control the dog, or
not securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six
(6') feet long.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received,
housed and distributed without charge.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune, in the County of
Monmouth.
§ 5-1.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 264, § 2]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Township without first
obtaining a license issued by the Township Clerk upon application by the
owner and payment of the prescribed fee. No person shall keep or harbor
any dog in the Township except in compliance with the provisions of this
section.
§ 5-1.3. Application for License and Registration Tag. [Ord. No. 264
§ 3; Ord. No. 1186 § 1]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure from the Township Clerk a license and
official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored,
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1.3
1:213
and shall place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 5-1.4. Fees.33 [Ord. No. 264 § 4; Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 782 § 1;
Ord. No. 875 § 1; Ord. No. 1013 § 1; Ord. No. 1163 § 1; Ord. No.
1191 § 1; Ord. No. 07-17 § 1; Ord. No. 10-14 § 1]
§ 5-1.5. Time of Application for License. [Ord. No. 264 §§ 5, 7]
a. License and Registration; Fee and Renewal. The persons applying for
the dog license and registration tag for dogs shall pay a fee of fifteen
dollars and eighty ($15.80) cents for each dog licensed and also a fee of
one ($1.00) dollar for the State registration fee of each dog; the fee for
the annual renewal of the license and for the registration tag shall be
the same amount paid for the original license and tag; and renewal dog
licenses and registration tags shall expire on June 30th in the year
stated on the license.
b. Replacement Tag. If the current registration tag is lost, the owner may
secure a replacement tag upon payment of the fee of one ($1.00) dollar
and presentation of the current license certificate to the office of the
Township Clerk.
c. Exceptions from Fees. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs, or dogs used to assist deaf
persons and commonly known as "Hearing Ear" dogs, shall be licensed
and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the
owner or keeper of such dog, shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.
d. Spay-Neuter Clinic Surcharge. In addition to the present fee for the
registration tag for each dog a surcharge of twenty ($.20) cents on
every dog license sold is hereby fixed.
e. Nonspayed and Nonneutered Dogs; Surcharge. In addition to all other
license fees there is hereby fixed a three ($3.00) dollar surcharge on all
licenses issued for nonspayed and nonneutered dogs.
a. The owner of any newly-acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains licensing age, shall make application for license and
registration tag for such dog within ten (10) days after such acquisition
or age attainment.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another State for the current year, and bearing a
registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Township for a period of more than ninety (90) days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless the dog be licensed under subsection 5-1.8.
33.Editor's Note: For license fees for kennels, pounds, shelters and pet shops, see subsection
5-1.8 of this chapter.
§ 5-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-1.5
1:214
§ 5-1.6. Application; Information Required. [Ord. No. 264 § 6]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is
of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post-office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor the dog. The
information on the application and the registration number issued for the
dog shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years by the Township Clerk.
In addition he/she shall forward similar information to the State Department
of Health each month, on forms furnished by the Department. Registration
numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 5-1.7. Removal of Tag by Unauthorized Persons. [Ord. No. 264 § 8]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 5-1.8. Licensing and Regulations for Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters
and Pounds. [Ord. No. 264 §§ 9—11; Ord. No. 1186 § 3]
c. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than ten (10) days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless the dog be licensed under subsection 5-1.8.
a. License Required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the
Township Clerk for a license entitling him/her to keep or operate such
establishment.
b. Application Information; Expiration. The application shall describe the
premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to be
located, the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and
shall be accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer of
the Board of Health of the Township, showing compliance with the local
and State rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at
such establishments. Such licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop,
shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained and all such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year,
and be subject to revocation by the Township Committee on
recommendations of the State Department of Health or the Township
Board of Health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of
the State Department or the Board of Health governing the same after
the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department
or the Township Board of Health.
c. Licenses Not Transferable; Individual Dog Licenses Not Required. Any
person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual
§ 5-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1.8
1:215
§ 5-1.9. Disposition of Funds Collected. [Ord. No. 264 § 12; New]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this chapter except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Township
Treasurer within thirty (30) days after collection or receipt and shall be
placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of
the Township. The account shall be used for the following purposes only:
for collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this
chapter; for local prevention and control of rabies; for providing anti-rabid
treatment under the direction of the local Board of Health for any person
known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for all other purposes
prescribed by the Statutes of New Jersey governing the subject, and for
administering the provisions of this chapter. Any unexpended balance
remaining in the special account shall be retained therein until the end of
the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of the purposes set
forth in this subsection. At the end of the third fiscal year following, and at
the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from the
special account to the general funds of the Township any amount then in the
account which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account
during the last two (2) fiscal years next preceding.
The registration tag fee shall be forwarded within thirty (30) days after
collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
§ 5-1.10. Information for State Department of Health. [Ord. No. 264
§ 13]
The Township Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of
all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within thirty (30) days
after the licenses are issued. The list shall include the name and address of
the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 5-1.11. Annual Dog Canvass. [Ord. No. 264 § 14]
The Police Department shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township and shall report
to the Township Clerk, the Board of Health, and to the State Department
of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names
and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring dogs, the number
of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together
licenses for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at such
establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
d. License Fee. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be ten ($10.00)
dollars. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
e. Control of Dogs. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
shall be permitted off the premises, except on leash or in a crate or
other safe control.
§ 5-1.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-1.11
1:216
with the registration numbers of each of the dogs, and the number of
unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons together
with a complete description of each of the unlicensed dogs.
§ 5-2. DESIGNATION OF MUNICIPAL HUMANE LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND ENFORCEMENT OF ALL ANIMAL
WELFARE AND CRUELTY LAWS. [Ord. No. 264 §§ 15–18; Ord. No.
273 § 1; Ord. No. 314 §1; Ord. No. 07-34; amended 6-24-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-17]
§ 5-2.1. Designation of Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer.
The Township Committee shall submit a least one application for
designation as the Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 4:22-14.2, who shall be responsible for animal welfare within
the jurisdiction of the Township of Neptune and who shall enforce and
abide by the provisions of Chapter 22 of Title 4 of the Revised Statutes,
and shall be authorized to investigate and sign complaints, arrest violators
and otherwise act as an officer for detection, apprehension and arrest of
offenders against the animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state
and ordinances of Neptune Township.
§ 5-2.2. Impoundment of Dogs.
a. The Township Committee may designate a police officer who may serve
concurrently as the Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer, as
long as the police officer is able to effectively carry out the duties and
responsibilities required for each position held, and is qualified as the
Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer as set forth by state
statute. The Township Committee in using a full-time municipal police
officer as a Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer may authorize
the police officer to possess, carry and use a firearm while enforcing the
laws and ordinances enacted for the protection of animals, if the police
officer satisfies all of the conditions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-14.1 and 4:22-14.2.
a. The Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer or Animal Control
Officer or contractor may take into custody and impound or cause to be
taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or disposed
of as provided in this subsection:
1. Any dog for which the officer has reasonable cause to believe has
attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b);
2. Any dog causing bodily injury as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person enduring an unprovoked attack and possesses a serious
threat of harm to persons or domestic animals;
3. Any dog engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26;
§ 5-1.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.2
1:217
§ 5-2.3. Authority to Seize for Impounding.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he or she may lawfully seize and
impound when the officer is in immediate pursuit of the dog or dogs, except
upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and
forbids the same.
§ 5-2.4. Interference with Authorized Personnel.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized with the
power to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 5-2.5. Enforcement and Penalties.
All enforcement action with regard to this § 5-2 for violations of said section
brought by the Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer shall be in the
Municipal Court of Neptune Township and all fines, penalties and monies
collected shall be paid to the municipality in which the violation occurred
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22-55. Fines and penalties shall be in the amount to
the extent allowed by statute.
4. Any dog that has been trained, tormented, badgered, abated or
encouraged to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or
domestic animals;
5. Any dog off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the official or his or her agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog;
6. Any dog off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the dog without a current registration on his or her
collar; and
7. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or the
person keeping or harboring the dog.
b. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed therein
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or registration
tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring the dog is known
whose address is given on the collar or of the owner or the person or is
keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed
if not claimed within seven days after the service of notice.
c. A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it to
the person to whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's
usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar
or by forwarding it by mail addressed to that person at his or her usual
or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
§ 5-2.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-3
1:218
§ 5-3. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 5-3.1. Barking and Crying. [Ord. No. 264 § 19; Ord. No. 1142 § 2]
§ 5-3.2. Running at Large; Curbing of Dogs. [Ord. No. 264 § 20; Ord.
No. 1142 § 3; Ord. No. 1290 § 1]
a. No person owning or having care, custody or control of any dog shall
suffer or permit such dog to bark, whine, cry, howl, or otherwise disturb
the peace or quiet of the neighborhood or sleep of any person, for any
unreasonable length of time.
b. The habitual barking, howling, whining or crying of a dog or dogs in the
Township is hereby declared to be a disturbing noise within the
meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, and a nuisance.
a. No person shall keep or harbor any dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
b. No persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to run at large34 upon a public street, in any public park, in any public
building, or on any private property where permission has not been
granted, or in any other public place within the Township.
c. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog
shall suffer or permit such dog to:
1. Soil or defile or to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, street
or thoroughfare; in or upon any public park, playground or other
public place; or public property in or upon the property of persons
other than the owner or person having the care, custody or control
of the dog.
These restrictions shall not apply to that portion of the street lying
immediately adjacent to the curbline, which portion shall be used
to curb the dog.
2. Soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn, vegetable
garden, shrubbery, trees, flowers, driveway, ground or any property
of persons other than that of the owner or person having the care,
custody or control of such dog.
3. Cause any injury to any person.
4. Be or become a public nuisance or to create a condition hazardous
to safety and health.
d. No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any dog
shall cause, suffer, permit or allow the dog to soil, defile, defecate on or
commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk,
passageway, road by-pass, play area, park or any place where people
34.Editor's Note: For definition of run at large see subsection 5-1.1, Definitions.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.2
1:219
§ 5-3.3. Leashing Required. [Ord. No. 264 § 21]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it
to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township
unless the dog is accompanied by a person over the age of twelve (12) years
and is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than
six (6') feet long.
§ 5-3.4. Muzzle May Be Required. [Ord. No. 264 § 22]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog over the age of two (2)
months shall, during the months of July, August and September in each year,
permit it upon a public street or outside of the premises occupied by the
owner unless the dog wears a muzzle securely fastened over its jaws in such
a manner that it cannot bite.
The Township Committee may also designate any other times during which
dogs outside the premises shall be muzzled, such designation to be by
publication at least three (3) times in the newspaper in which legal notices
of the Township may be published, and after such publication, no person
owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it upon a public highway,
public place or outside the premises occupied by the owner, during the
period designated, unless such dog wears a muzzle securely fastened over
its jaws in such a manner that it cannot bite.
§ 5-3.5. Vicious Dogs. [Ord. No. 264 § 24; Ord. No. 07-34]
An Animal Control Officer, Contractor or Poundmaster shall seize and
impound a dog when said Officer or Contractor has reasonable cause to
believe that the dog:
congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon
any private property without the permission of the owner of the private
property. If any person shall permit such dog to soil, defile, defecate
on or commit any nuisance in the areas aforesaid, he or she shall
immediately remove and dispose of all feces and droppings deposited
by the dog, which removal shall be in a sanitary manner by shovel,
container, disposal bag or other sanitary means. In a multiple dwelling
complex, the tenant dog owner shall take his/her dog to only the
designated areas for walking of dogs or other animals which shall be
provided and maintained in a sanitary manner by the management of
the complex. On the dog owner's own property the dog owner shall
maintain the property in a sanitary manner in order to prevent any
noxious odors, attraction of vermin breeding, or any other public health
nuisance of neighbors.
1. No blind person in charge of a guide dog shall be subject to the
provisions of paragraph d above.
a. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as defined
by N.J.S. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
§ 5-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-3.5
1:220
b. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person during
an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to persons or
domestic animals;
c. Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in R.S. 4:22-24 and R.S.
4:22-26; or
d. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks on persons or domestic animals.
The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of
the Monmouth County Board of Health, the dog may be impounded in a
facility or other structure agreeable to the owner.
e. The Animal Control Officer, Contractor or Poundmaster shall notify the
municipal court and the Monmouth County Board of Health
immediately that he or she has seized or impounded a dog pursuant to
this Chapter or that he or she has reasonable cause to believe that a dog
has killed another domestic animal or that a hearing is required. The
Animal Control Officer, Contractor or Poundmaster shall through a
reasonable effort attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded. If its owner cannot be identified within
seven (7) days, the dog may be humanely destroyed. The Animal
Control Officer shall within three (3) working days of the determination
of the identity of the owner of the dog seized and impounded pursuant
to this chapter, notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the
owner concerning the seizure and impoundment and that, if the owner
wishes, a hearing will be held to determine whether the impounded dog
is vicious or potentially dangerous. This notice shall also require that
the owner return within seven (7) days, by certified mail or hand
delivery, a signed statement indicating whether he wishes a hearing to
be conducted or, if not, to relinquish ownership of the dog, in which
case the dog may be humanely destroyed. If the owner cannot be
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to sign
for the certified letter, or does not reply to the certified letter with a
signed statement within seven (7) days of receipt, the dog may be
humanely destroyed.
f. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined by N.J. S.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
2. Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described by R.S. 4:22-26.
§ 5-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.5
1:221
The dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate
that the dog was not provoked. If the Municipal Court declares the dog to
be vicious, and no appeal is made of this ruling pursuant to State statute,
the dog shall be destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except
that no dog may be destroyed during the pendency of any appeal.
g. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person; or
2. Killed another domestic animal and:
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
3. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
h. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1 (a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
2. Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor. For the purposes of paragraph h1 of this
subsection, the municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
i. If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it
shall issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
1. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(a) To apply at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other
official designated to license dogs for a special municipal
potentially dangerous dog license, municipal registration
number, and red identification tag issued pursuant to this
subsection. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent
location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until
the owner obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, a municipal registration number and a red
identification tag;
(b) Display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises.
The sign shall be visible and legible from fifty (50) feet of the
§ 5-3.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-3.5
1:222
enclosure required pursuant to paragraph i1(c) of this
subsection;
(c) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the
potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
potentially dangerous dog will be kept and maintained, which
has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the potentially
dangerous dog from escaping by climbing, jumping or digging
and within a fence of at least six (6') feet in height separated by
at least three (3') feet from the confined area. The owner of the
potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to
prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude any
release or escape of the potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous
dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the
enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a tether
approved by the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum
tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to
restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius
of no more than three (3') feet from the owner and under the
direct supervision of the owner;
(d) May require the owner to: maintain liability insurance in an
amount determined by the Municipal Court to cover any
damage or injury caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The
liability insurance, which may be separate from any other
homeowner's policy, shall contain a provision requiring the
municipality in which the owner resides to be named as an
additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or
expiration of the liability insurance policy.
j. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the municipality in which the dog is impounded for the cost and
expense of impounding and destroying the dog. The cost shall be
established by ordinance, if a municipal pound exists or actual cost if
handled by an outside contractor. The owner shall incur the expense of
impounding the dog in a facility other than a municipal pound
regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or
potentially dangerous. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within
ten (10) days previous to the time of euthanasia, its head shall be
transported to the Monmouth County Health Department Laboratory
for rabies testing. If the municipal court finds that the dog is not vicious
or potentially dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to
convene a hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or
potentially dangerous for subsequent actions of the dog.
k. The owner of a dog held to be a potentially dangerous dog shall:
§ 5-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.5
1:223
§ 5-4. PENALTIES.
1. Comply with the provisions of this subsection and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
et seq. In accordance with the schedule established by the
municipal court, but in no case more than sixty (60) days
subsequent to the date of determination;
2. Notify the licensing authority or local law enforcement agency, and
the Animal Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours of the
death, sale or donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
3. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
4. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, law enforcement agency of the municipality and Animal
Control Officer of the municipality of the transfer of the ownership
and the name, address and telephone number of the new owner;
and
5. In addition to any license fee required, pay a potentially dangerous
dog license fee to the municipality as provided by ordinance.
l. Neptune Township shall issue a potentially dangerous dog registration
number and red identification tag along with a municipal potentially
dangerous dog license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by
the owner to the Animal Control Officer, Contractor or Poundmaster
that he has complied with the court's orders. The last three (3) digits of
each potentially dangerous dog registration number issued by Neptune
Township will be the three (3) number code assigned to that
municipality in the regulations promulgated pursuant to State statute.
The Animal Control Officer, Contractor or Poundmaster shall verify, in
writing, compliance to the Municipal Clerk or official designated to
license dogs in the municipality. The Township shall also publicize the
telephone number for reporting violations to this Act. The telephone
number shall be forwarded to the Monmouth County Health
Department and any changes in this number shall be reported
immediately to the Monmouth County Health Department. Neptune
Township shall charge annually for a potentially dangerous dog license
and each renewal thereof the sum of two hundred fifty ($250.00)
dollars.
m. Notwithstanding any provision in this subsection the municipality and
owner of the dog may settle and dispose this matter at any time in such
manner and according to such terms and conditions as may be mutually
agreed. Neither the municipality nor its employees shall be liable by
virtue of any such settlement or any action or inaction related to the
settlement. The municipality may, as a condition of settlement require
the owner of the dog to hold the municipality harmless for any legal
expenses or fees the owner incurred in defending any such action.
§ 5-3.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-4.1
1:224
§ 5-4.1. Specific Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 264 § 26; Ord.
No. 1552; Ord. No. 07-34]
§ 5-5. (RESERVED)
§ 5-6. VACCINATION OF CATS.
§ 5-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1545 § 1]
As used in this section:
CAT — Shall mean any member of the feline species, male or female.
CERTIFICATE OF VACCINATION — Shall mean any certificate issued by
a veterinarian intended as proof of rabies vaccination, or a receipt for
payment to a veterinarian for a rabies vaccination. In either event, the
certificate of vaccination shall include the name of the veterinarian
administering the vaccination, the name of the owner, the name of the
animal and the date of vaccination.
OWNER — Shall mean and include the person or persons owning,
controlling, keeping or harboring a cat.
VETERINARIAN — Shall mean any individual licensed as a veterinarian
pursuant to the laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
a. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any part of any of the
following subsections, namely 5-1.2, 5-1.3, 5-1.5, 5-1.7, 5-1.8 or 5-2.4 of
this chapter, or with the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, to preserve sanitation therein
and prevent the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and
from such establishments, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for
each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the Township. A
person who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a
judgment rendered against him/her and the costs and charges incident
thereto shall be committed by the Court to the County Jail for a period
not exceeding ten (10) days in the case of a first conviction, and in the
case of a conviction for a second, subsequent or continuing violation,
for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
b. The owner of a dog who is found in violation of Section 5-3 of this
chapter or fails to comply with a court order shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per day
of the violation and each day's continuance of the violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall
have jurisdiction to enforce Section 5-3. The Animal Control Officer or
Poundmaster is authorized to seize and impound any potentially
dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with Section 5-3 or the
Court's order. The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized
and impounded be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 5-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6.2
1:225
§ 5-6.2. Vaccination Required. [Ord. No. 1545 § 2]
All cats over the age of six (6) months must receive a rabies vaccination.
The vaccination used must be of a type approved by the United States
Government agency responsible for approving rabies vaccinations. If the
animal receiving the vaccination is under one (1) year of age the vaccination
is only good for a period of one (1) year. If the animal is over one (1) year
of age the vaccination is good for three (3) years or thirty-six (36) months.
Every owner shall retain a copy of the certificate of vaccination.
§ 5-6.3. Certificate of Vaccination. [Ord. No. 1545 § 3]
Rabies vaccination certificates, issued by a veterinarian at the time of
vaccination, shall be carefully preserved by the owner or custodian of a
cat and shall be exhibited promptly upon request for inspection by a Police
Officer or other person duly authorized by law to enforce this section.
§ 5-6.4. Rabies and Animal Bites. [Ord. No. 1545 § 4]
§ 5-6.5. Vaccination Tags. [Ord. No. 1545 § 5; Ord. No. 1560 § 1]
Tags will be available for purchase for a fee of one ($1.00) dollar at the
Municipal Complex upon presentation of a valid vaccination certificate.
§ 5-6.6. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 1545 § 6]
The following cats are exempt from all provisions of this section:
§ 5-6.7. Warnings. [Ord. No. 1545 § 7]
a. Reporting. Anyone having knowledge that any cat in the municipality
has bitten a person shall report within twenty-four (24) hours, so far as
is known, the name and address of the owner and the circumstances of
the animal. Such report concerning bites shall be made to the Board of
Health.
b. Control. Whenever a cat has bitten a person, it shall be confined in such
place as the Board of Health may direct and for such period of
observation as may be necessary.
a. Any cat which has not attained the age of six (6) months;
b. Any cat which has been exempted by the Department of Health after
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
infirmity or other physical condition that the vaccination of such cat
shall be deemed inadvisable; or
c. Cats in veterinary hospitals, kennels, pet shops, pounds or shelters,
cats in transit or cats brought into the Township temporarily for the
purpose of showing in cat shows or exhibitions.
§ 5-6.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 5-6.7
1:226
§ 5-6.8. Separate Violations. [Ord. No. 1545 § 8]
Each and every day a cat shall remain unvaccinated or fail to produce a
vaccination certificate after the issuance of the first citation for ordinance
violation, shall be treated as a separate and distinct violation and shall
be punishable as a separate and distinct violation. A separate citation for
ordinance violation shall be issued each day the violation continues.
§ 5-6.9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1545 § 9]
Any owner who is convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each offense and may be
imprisoned in the County jail for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or
both. If within five (5) days of being issued a citation for violation of this
section the owner produces proof that the cat was vaccinated at the time
of the issuance of the citation or has since been vaccinated, the Judge may
dismiss the complaint.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 277 § 1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Neptune in accordance with the provisions of
an act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
a. Before issuing a citation for violation of this section any Police Officer of
the Township or other person duly authorized by law to enforce this
section may give an oral warning or issue a written warning ticket. If
the owner or owners receiving the oral warning tickets do not
discontinue the violation within five (5) days, a citation for ordinance
violation shall be issued to the violator.
b. This subsection shall not be construed so as to require an oral warning
or the issuance of a written warning ticket before a citation for
ordinance violation may be issued. If it appears necessary to make an
arrest to preserve the public's peace or safety, a Police Officer may
make an arrest for violation of this section with or without issuing a
previous oral warning or warning ticket.
§ 5-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:227
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [Ord. No. 277 § 2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number. [Ord. No. 277 § 3; Ord.
No. 282 § 1; Ord. No. 414 § 1; Ord. No. 451 § 1; Ord. No. 1478 § 1;
Ord. No. 1662 § 1; Ord. No. 96-6 § I; Ord. No. 97-10 § 1; Ord. No.
98-19 § 1; Ord. No. 99-16 § 1; Ord. No. 07-09 § 1; Ord. No. 10-15 § 1]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual Fee Number
Plenary Retail
Consumption License $2,400.00 18
Distribution License $1,620.00 5
Club License $170.00
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued. The license fees shall be payable in accordance with the
State law and rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 6-3.5
1:228
§ 6-3.5. New Licenses. [Ord. No. 560 § 1]
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the issuance of a new license to a
person who operates a hotel containing fifty (50) sleeping rooms, or who
may hereafter construct and establish a new hotel containing at least fifty
(50) sleeping rooms pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. No. 277 § 8; Ord. No. 302 § 1; Ord. No.
1215 § 1; Ord. No. 12-22; Ord. No. 2015-17]
§ 6-4.2. New Year's Day. [Ord. No. 277 § 8; Ord. No. 302 § 1; Ord. No.
1215 § 1; Ord. No. 12-22]
Subsections 6-4.1 and 6-4.5 shall not apply to New Year's Day in each year
when alcoholic beverages may be sold, delivered, or served after 2:00 a.m.
and the prohibition against any person being on the licensed premises after
2:30 a.m. shall not apply.
§ 6-4.3. Sales to Certain Persons. [Ord. No. 12-22]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 6-4.4. Closing Provisions. [Ord. No. 1215 § 1; Ord. No. 12-22]
No licensee shall permit, suffer or allow any person to be on or upon any
part of the licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. except regular employees of the licensee actually engaged in the
course of their employment; trademen with whom the licensee is actually
engaged in doing business or public officers or employees in the course of
their official duties.
a. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
services or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises on
any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of
any distilled or spirituous alcoholic beverage at retail in its original
container for consumption off the licensed premises, or the removal of
any of the aforesaid alcoholic beverages in its original container from
retail licensed premises before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day
of the week. This restriction in paragraph b does not apply to fermented
alcoholic beverages such as wine or beer.
§ 6-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4.5
1:229
§ 6-4.5. Plenary Retail Distribution License; Limitation. [Ord. No.
277 § 7; Ord. No. 414 § 1; Ord. No. 730 § 1; Ord. No. 12-22]
No plenary retail distribution license shall be granted for any premises in
which any mercantile business is carried on other than the sale of alcoholic
beverages, tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, potato chips, pop corn, pretzels,
nuts, candy, crackers, corn twists, Fritos, bacon rinds, gum, Pez, cherries,
olives, onions, bitters, soft drinks, milk, ice cubes, canned, packaged and
bottled goods usually served as hors d'oeuvres or with cocktails, which
specialty items are usually associated with the use of alcoholic beverages,
including but not limited to glasses, ceramics, bar supplies, implements and
sundry items.
§ 6-4.6. Fingerprinting of All Holders of Retail Liquor Licenses and
Their Employees. [Ord. No. 847; New; Ord. No. 12-22]
a. All applicants for retail liquor licenses to be located in the Township
must, before the transfer of the license, present themselves at the
Police Department on any weekday excluding holidays, between the
hours of 9:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., so that they may be fingerprinted by
the Police Department. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners
must so present themselves and be fingerprinted. If the applicant is a
corporation, all shareholders holding at least one (1%) percent of the
corporate stock of the corporation must so present themselves and be
fingerprinted.
b. All persons owning or holding a retail liquor license and all partners in a
partnership owning or holding a retail liquor license, and all
shareholders holding at least one (1%) percent of the stock of a
corporation owning or holding a retail liquor license must, each year, at
least thirty (30) days before the scheduled renewal date of their license,
present themselves at the Police Department on any weekday excluding
holidays, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., so that they
may be fingerprinted by the Police Department. Such fingerprinting is a
condition precedent to the renewal of the retail liquor license.
c. All persons to be employed by the holder of a retail liquor license must
on any weekday excluding holidays, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and
4:30 p.m., present themselves at the Police Department to be
fingerprinted by the Police Department before they may lawfully begin
employment for the holder of a retail liquor license.
d. All persons employed by the holder of a retail liquor license must each
year at least thirty (30) days before the scheduled renewal date of their
employer's retail liquor license present themselves at the Police
Department on any weekday excluding holidays, between the hours of
9:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., so that they may be fingerprinted by the Police
Department.
§ 6-4.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 6-4.6
1:230
§ 6-5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. No. 277 § 10; New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable Statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five (5) day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any
other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. [New]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age.
§ 6-6.2. Entering Premises. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her, any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 6-6.3. Consumption; Purchase. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-6.4. Misrepresentation of Age. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail license
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal
age.
§ 6-6.5. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, shall be punished by a
e. All persons, partnerships, firms or corporations violating any of the
provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 6-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6.5
1:231
fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars. In addition, the Court
shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six (6)
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor
vehicle in this State for six (6) months beginning on a date he/she becomes
eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
§ 6-7. POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION BY MINORS ON PRIVATE
PREMISES.
§ 6-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 07-22 § 1]
ADULT — Shall mean a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Shall mean and include wine, liquor and malt
or brewed beverages.
MINOR — Shall mean a person under the age of 21 years.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any noncommercial premises used for
either residential or recreational purposes.
§ 6-7.2. Restrictions; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 07-22 § 1]
§ 6-7.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 07-22 § 3]
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than two hundred ($200.00) dollars nor more
than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court, for each
violation.
a. It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly possess or knowingly
consume an alcoholic beverage in a private premises.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or serve any alcoholic
beverage to a minor in any private premises in the Township of Neptune
or to knowingly permit a minor to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage in any private premises in the Township of Neptune.
c. These restrictions shall not apply to an adult who furnishes or serves
alcoholic beverages to a minor or permits a minor to possess or
consume alcoholic beverages where such adult is related to the minor
by blood, marriage or adoption, provided that the relationship is as
close or closer than first cousins.
§ 6-6.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 6-8
1:232
§ 6-8. EMPLOYEE REGULATION IN FACILITIES HOLDING A
PLENARY RETAIL CONSUMPTION LICENSE, PLENARY RETAIL
DISTRIBUTION LICENSE, AND/OR CLUB LICENSE FOR
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
§ 6-8.1. Employee Regulations; Identification Card; Fees. [Ord. No.
2016-22; Ord. No. 2017-04]
a. Information of Employees to Police Department.
1. Every person, partnership or corporation holding any Plenary
Retail Consumption License, any Plenary Retail Distribution
License, or any Club License issued or to be issued in the Township
of Neptune shall furnish to the Police Department of Neptune
Township the name, address, date of birth and social security
number of each employee who is required to register with the
Police in Subsection B. The names, addresses, dates of birth and
social security numbers shall be furnished to the Police Department
prior to the commencement of such employment.
2. Every person, partnership or corporation holding any Plenary
Retail Consumption License, any Plenary Retail Distribution
License, or any Club License issued or to be issued in the Township
of Neptune shall be required to notify employees prior to their
employment of their requirement to register with the Police in
paragraph b.
3. Every person, partnership or corporation holding any Plenary
Retail Consumption License, any Plenary Retail Distribution
License, or any Club License issued or to be issued in the Township
of Neptune shall not employ any person who is required to register
with the police or Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control who has
failed, neglected or refused to do so.
b. Registration with Police. All persons who shall sell, solicit the sale of,
mix, process or prepare any alcoholic beverage at or from any bar or
establishment selling alcoholic beverages from the original package or
container under a Plenary Retail Consumption License, a Plenary Retail
Distribution License, or a Club License, shall register with the Police
Department; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to:
1. Bus boys or bus girls.
2. Entertainers.
3. Cooks.
4. Kitchen help.
5. Bouncers, identification and age checkers, doormen or any other
security personnel.
6. Other persons performing strictly restaurant-related functions.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8.1
1:233
7. Any person who individually or as a partnership or as an officer,
director or holder of more than 10% of the stock of a corporation
holding a Plenary Retail Consumption License or any Plenary Retail
Distribution License is required to execute a questionnaire in a
form provided by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control and maintain such form upon the licensed premises.
8. All persons who shall sell, solicit the sale of, process or prepare any
alcoholic beverage at or from the original package or container
under a club license unless such person's employment exceeds ten
(10) days in any one calendar year, and/or said person receives
regular recurring monetary remuneration in connection with said
employment, who then shall register with the Police Department.
For purposes of this section, Club Licenses shall maintain a log
indicating the days of work for each employee.
c. Application for Identification Card; Fingerprints and Photographs. Said
registration with the Police Department shall be accomplished by
completing or furnishing the following:
1. An application for an identification card, which application shall
contain such information as the usual specifics of personal
identification, date and place of birth, address and other
employment, and such other information as deemed necessary and
proper by the Chief of Police, or designee, to aid and assist in
proper enforcement of the law.
2. A photograph and a set of fingerprints are to be taken under the
direction of the Department of Public Safety. The fingerprint
records shall be submitted to the State of New Jersey Division of
State Police Bureau of Identification for a thorough and complete
criminal history check. An applicant shall pay a fee in accordance
with a fee schedule set by the New Jersey State Police. Upon
receipt of a report from the State, the Chief of Police, or designee,
shall prepare a report to the Director of Public Safety, or other
designee of the Township Committee, outlining any arrests or
convictions recorded pertaining to any crimes. The Director of
Public Safety, or other designee of the Township Committee shall
then prepare a report to the Township Committee outlining any
arrests or convictions recorded pertaining to any crime. A "crime"
for purposes of this section shall be a criminal offense defined as a
first degree crime, second degree crime, third degree crime and
fourth degree crime as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:1-4a.
3. No identification card will be issued to any person convicted of a
crime of moral turpitude. Such a crime is defined as an act of
baseness, vileness or depravity in the private and social duties
which a person owes to a fellow person, to society in general,
contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty. Black's
Law Dictionary.
§ 6-8.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 6-8.1
1:234
4. No licensee shall employ a person convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude.
5. If at any time within the licensed year a holder of an alcoholic
beverage control identification card is found guilty of a crime of
moral turpitude, the Township Committee shall immediately
suspend the alcoholic beverage control license.
6. No person shall be issued a renewal to his/her alcoholic beverage
card if he/she has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude.
d. Possession of Identification Card; Temporary Receipt.
1. Possession of identification card. All persons required to register
under paragraph b of this section shall be required to have in their
possession, at all times, when in or about the licensed premises, an
identification card on a form furnished by the Police Department,
which shall contain such information as deemed necessary and
proper by the Director of Public Safety to aid and assist in proper
enforcement of the law. An owner or licensee shall be required to
register and obtain an identification card, although such person
may not be personally engaged in the sale, mixing, processing or
preparation of alcoholic beverages.
2. Temporary receipt. Upon registering with the Township of Neptune
as required by paragraph b, a temporary receipt will be issued
which may be used as a temporary identification card for the
purpose of satisfying this section only. This temporary receipt shall
contain the applicant's name and expire sixty (60) days upon
application.
e. Term of Identification Card.
1. An original identification card shall be valid until December 31st of
the calendar in which it was obtained. All identification cards shall
be renewed each year by December 31st and will be valid through
December 31st of the subsequent year.
2. The following fees shall be imposed for the issuance of each
identification card:
(a) For each original card, the sum of that amount charged by any
State agency for a fingerprint inquiry, which such an inquiry is
permitted by law, which shall be paid by certified check or
money order payable to the agency and a $25.00 processing
fee.
(b) For each renewal of an original card, the sum of $10.00.
(c) For any owner or licensee, the original fee and renewal fee for
the identification card is waived.
f. Age Limits.
§ 6-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8.1
1:235
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [Ord. No. 1000 A. I.]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used therein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [New]
1. Bartender, waiter or sales clerk: 18 years.
2. Entertainer: 18 years.
3. Restaurant/hotel worker (must qualify as a restaurant as defined):
16 years.
4. Stock clerk in distribution license (permits for the employment of
minors under 18 years must first be obtained): 15 years.
5. Pinsetter (permits for the employment of minors under 18 years of
age must first be obtained): 15 years.
6. Worker (not selling alcohol) for consumption license, not a
restaurant or hotel (permits for the employment of minors under 18
years of age must first be obtained): 16 years.
g. Violations and Penalties
Violation of any provision of this section by any owner and/or employee
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of
the limitations of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days on both the owner
and employee in violation. Each and every violation shall be considered
a separate violation. Any person who is found guilty of violating the
provisions of this section within one year of the date of a previous
violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be sentenced
by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in addition,
will be subject to a hearing before the Neptune Township Committee
where additional penalties may be imposed in accordance with New
Jersey State Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations.
§ 6-8.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-2
1:236
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 1000 A. I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty
($50.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days
or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [Ord. No. 1000 A. I]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township are hereby repealed, and all
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior
to the taking effect of this chapter.
a. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the
Deputy Chief of Police, and in the event of his absence, disability or
inability to act, then the Shift Commander of the Police Department, is
hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street
or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing
is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:237
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. No. 1000 A. II]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord. No.
1000 A. VIII]
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal. [Ord. No. 1000 A. VIII, Sched. XVI; Ord. No. 1061 § 1; Ord.
No. 1200 § 57; Ord. No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 95-7 § 1; Ord. No. 01-2
§ 1; Ord. No. 2016-41]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road constructions, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, or whenever the Office of Emergency
Management Coordinator, or designee, so declares an emergency in
advance of an expected snowfall; a snow emergency shall exist and no
vehicle, dumpster or roll-off canister shall be parked on any street or
highway or portions thereof as follows:
1. Those streets designated as snow emergency streets herein.
2. On the side of any street or roadway adjacent to properties with
even numbered addresses.
3. Any street or highway posted as temporary no parking during a
snow emergency event.
b. During a snow emergency, if off-street parking is available, any vehicle
shall not be parked on any street or road, notwithstanding the
designation as a snow emergency street in subsection 7-7.3a above.
§ 7-7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.3
1:238
c. A snow emergency shall remain in full effect until canceled by the
Emergency Management Coordinator, or designee. Such cancellation to
be communicated to the public through various media outlets.
Name of Street Side Time Location
Abbott Avenue North Entire length
Atlantic Avenue North Entire length
Asbury Avenue South Entire length
Bath Avenue North Entire length
Beach Avenue West Entire length
Benson Avenue West Entire length
Broadway a. Both Entire length
b. South Entire length
a. West North of
Broadway
Central Avenue
[Ord. No. 2016-41]
b. East South of
Broadway
Clark Avenue North Entire length
Cookman Avenue North Entire length
Delaware Avenue West Entire length
Embury Avenue North Entire length
Fletcher Lake Drive
[Ord. No. 2016-41]
South Entire length
Franklin Avenue North Entire length
Heck Avenue North Entire length
Inskip Avenue North Entire length
Lawrence Avenue West Entire length
Main Avenue a. North Entire length
b. South Mon., Wed., Fri. Entire length
McClintock Street North Entire length
Mt. Carmel Way North Entire length
Mt. Hermon Way North Entire length
Mt. Tabor Way North Entire length
Mt. Zion Way North Entire length
New Jersey Avenue West Entire length
New York Avenue West Entire length
Ocean Avenue West Entire length
§ 7-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.3
1:239
§ 7-7.4. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Ord. No. 1000 A. II, Sched. III; Ord. No. 1004; Ord.
No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1308 § 1; Ord. No. 1554 § 1; Ord. No. 1603
§ 2; Ord. No. 95-3 § 1; Ord. No. 98-26 § 1; Ord. No. 99-20 § 1; Ord.
No. 00-29 § 1; Ord. No. 01-28 § 1; Ord. No. 01-37 § 1; Ord. No. 02-40
§ 1; Ord. No. 04-09 § 1; Ord. No. 10-21 § 3]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Ely Road [Ord.
No. 2017-38]
South 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Between the intersection
with Carton Avenue and
the Intersection with
Brighton Avenue.
Fortunato Place Both All Between the northerly
curbline of New Jersey
State Highway No. 33 and
a point 150 feet north of
said curbline.
Name of Street Side Time Location
Ocean Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-41]
East Entire length
Ocean Pathway North Entire length
Olin Avenue North Entire length
Pennsylvania Avenue West Entire length
Pilgrim Pathway West Entire length
Pitman Avenue North Entire length
Seaview Avenue North Entire length
Spray Avenue North Entire length
Stockton Avenue a. North Entire length
b. South Mon., Wed., Fri. Entire length
Surf Avenue North Entire length
Webb Avenue North Entire length
Whitefield Avenue West Entire length
§ 7-7.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.4
1:240
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Heck Avenue North All Between the northerly
curbline of Neptune
Boulevard and Doremus
Way.
Jumping Brook
Road
East All Between the intersection
with Country Club Drive
and the intersection with
State Highway 66.
Jumping Brook
Road
West All Beginning at the north
corner of the intersection
with Toomin Drive and
continuing north-ward for
840 feet.
Jumping Brook
Road, West
Both All Between the north
curbline of New Jersey
State Highway No. 33 and
a point 150 feet north of
said curbline.
Old Corlies Avenue North All Between the intersection
with West Bangs Avenue
and the intersection with
Gully Road.
Schoolhouse Road Both All Between the south
curbline of New Jersey
State Highway No. 33 and
a point 160 feet south of
said curbline.
Sixth Avenue North All From the west curbline of
Stanley Avenue to a point
440 feet westerly
therefrom.
Sixth Avenue South All From 140 feet west of
westerly curbline of
Stanley Avenue to a point
230 feet westerly
therefrom.
South Riverside
Drive
West All Between the southerly
curbline of Melrose
Avenue and the northerly
curbline of Highland
Avenue.
§ 7-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.4
1:241
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Trenton Avenue Both All From the westerly
curbline of Route No. 35
to a point 90 feet westerly
thereof.
West Bangs
Avenue
North All Between the intersection
with Dale Place and the
intersection with West
Lake Avenue.
West Bangs
Avenue
West All Between the intersection
with State Highway 33 to
the intersection with Old
Corlies Avenue.
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Asbury Avenue Northwest All Commencing at the point
of intersection of the
extension of the easterly
curbline of New Jersey
Avenue, extended
northerly, and running 35
feet northeast from said
intersection point (access
to Lake Avenue).
Beach Avenue
(Northern end)
Both All At intersection with Spray
Avenue (access to Lake
Avenue).
Beach Avenue Both All From intersection with
Spray Avenue north to
intersection with Lake
Avenue (access to Lake
Avenue)
Beach Avenue East All Between Ocean Pathway
(south) and Ocean Pathway
(north) (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
§ 7-7.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.4
1:242
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Benson Avenue West All From its intersection with
the northerly curbline of
Mt Tabor Way south to
northerly curbline of Mt.
Hermon Way (access to
Lake Avenue).
Broadway South All West from intersection with
Ocean Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the easterly
curbline of Broadway and
running 70 feet west
(access to Beach front).
Central Avenue
(Northern end)
Both All At Seaview Avenue.
Central Avenue West All At intersection with
Seaview Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the
northerly curbline of
Seaview Avenue with the
westerly curbline of
Central Avenue and
running 45 feet in a
southerly direction (access
to Lake Avenue).
Lawrence Avenue West All From the southerly side of
Main Avenue to the
northerly side of Embury
Avenue.
Mt. Carmel Way North All At intersection with Pilgrim
Pathway, commencing at
the point of intersection of
the northerly curbline of
Mt. Carmel Way with the
easterly curbline of Pilgrim
Pathway and running 45
feet west (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
§ 7-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.4
1:243
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
New York Avenue East All At intersection with Mt.
Zion Way, commencing at
the point of intersection of
the centerline of Mt. Zion
Way with the easterly
curbline of New York
Avenue and running 30
feet north and south
(access to Tent Colony and
Auditorium).
Ocean Avenue East All At intersection with Ocean
Pathway, commencing at
the point of intersection of
the centerline of the 20
foot wide sidewalk known
as Lot 2, Block 6.01,
Neptune Township Tax
Map, extended eastward,
with the easterly curbline
of Ocean Avenue and
running 35 feet north and
south from said
intersection point (access
to Beach front).
Ocean Avenue East All At intersection with
Embury Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the
centerline of Embury
Avenue, extended
eastward, with the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue
and running 35 feet north
and south from said
intersection point (access
to Beach front).
§ 7-7.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.4
1:244
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Ocean Avenue East All North from intersection
with Broadway
commencing at the point of
intersection of the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue
with the southerly curbline
of Broadway and running
70 feet north (access to
Beach front).
Ocean Avenue East All South from the intersection
of the northerly curbline of
Spray Avenue with the
easterly curbline of Ocean
Avenue and running 35
feet south (access to Beach
front).
Pilgrim Pathway East All At intersection with Mt.
Carmel Way, commencing
at the point of the
intersection of the
northerly curbline of Mt.
Carmel Way with the
easterly curbline of Pilgrim
Pathway and running 45
feet south (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
Pilgrim Pathway
(North end)
Both All At intersection with Lake
Avenue.
Pilgrim Pathway East All From Surf Avenue to end
(access to Lake Avenue).
§ 7-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.4
1:245
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Pilgrim Pathway West All South from Front Circle to
the northerly curbline of
McClintock Street adjacent
to east side of the
Auditorium, commencing
at a point 45 feet north of
the point of the
intersection of the westerly
curbline of Pilgrim
Pathway with the
centerline of the 20-foot
wide side-walk at Ocean
Pathway, extending
westward. Said sidewalk
also known as Lot 2, Block
6.01, Neptune Township
Tax Map and running south
to the northerly curbline of
McClintock (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
Spray Avenue North All West from intersection (20
feet) with Ocean Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the
northerly curbline of Spray
Avenue with the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue
and running 40 feet west
(access to Beach front).
§ 7-7.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.5
1:246
§ 7-7.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets.
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(Minutes) Day Location
Ambulance
Drive
East All 15 Between the
westerly
terminus of
Ambulance
Drive and a
point 72 feet
north of said
terminus.
Asbury
Avenue
Both All 15 Between the
Township of
Neptune–City
of Asbury
Park
boundary
line and
Whitesville
Road.
Boulevard Both All 60 Between
South Main
Street and
the boundary
line of City of
Asbury Park.
Corlies
Avenue
North All 60 Between
South Main
Street and
the right-ofway
of the
New York
and Long
Branch
Railroad.
§ 7-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.5
1:247
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(Minutes) Day Location
Davis
Avenue
East 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
120 mins. Mon.
thru Fri.
Between the
intersection
with
Washington
Avenue and
the entrance
to the
Municipal
Complex.
[Ord. No.
2014-40]
Embury
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
3 Mon.
thru Fri.
Beginning
598 feet
from the
intersection
with
Memorial
Drive and
extending
147 feet
west.
5th Avenue Both All 180 mins Beginning
with the
intersection
with Atkins
Avenue and
extending
151 feet
east. [Ord.
No.
2014-23]
Main Drive East All 15 Between a
point 40 feet
north of the
northerly
curbline of
New Jersey
State
Highway
Route No. 33
and a point
90 feet north
of said
curbline.
§ 7-7.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.5
1:248
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(Minutes) Day Location
a. Both All 120 Entire length
except west
side between
Corlies
Avenue and
the boundary
line of the
City of
Asbury Park.
Main Street,
South
b. West All 60 Between
Corlies
Avenue and
the boundary
line of the
City of
Asbury Park.
Main Street West All 60 All that
parking lot
opposite the
Main Avenue
entrance to
Ocean
Grove.
Milton
Avenue
North All 15 Between
New Jersey
State
Highway
Route No. 35
and Oak
Street.
Newgate
Lane [Ord.
No.
2017-45]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
2 hours Entire length
between
Oxford Way
and
Wakefield
Road.
§ 7-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.5
1:249
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(Minutes) Day Location
Seventh
Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-34]
North All 30 mins. Beginning at
a point 189
feet east of
Atkins
Avenue and
extending
eastward 36
feet.
Sixth Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
120 Beginning at
a point 375
feet east of
Atkins
Avenue and
extending
eastward to
Memorial
Drive.
Washington
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
120 mins. Mon.
thru Fri.
Between the
intersection
with Davis
Avenue and
the
intersection
with
Neptune
Boulevard.
[Ord. No.
2014-40]
West Lake
Avenue
a. South All 15 Beginning at
a point 166
feet east of
the
intersection
of State
Highway 35
and
extending 66
feet east.
§ 7-7.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.5
1:250
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(Minutes) Day Location
b. South All 30 Between the
intersection
with State
Highway 35
and the
intersection
with
Drummond
Avenue.
The 15 minute parking limitation with the location described in paragraph
a shall remain in full force and effect as authorized by Ordinance No.
10-25.
§ 7-7.6. Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning. [New]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
designated street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Side Hours & Day Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.7. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord.
No. 1000 A. II, Sched. I; Ord. No. 1004; Ord. No. 1038; Ord. No.
1161 § 1; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1308 § 1; Ord.
No. 1500 § 1; Ord. No. 1554 § 1; Ord. No. 1603 § 1; Ord. No. 1699
§ 1; Ord. No. 95-3 § 1; Ord. No. 95-29 § 1; Ord. No. 96-38 § 1; Ord.
No. 04-01 § 2; Ord. No. 06-37 § 1; Ord. No. 07-27 § 1; Ord. No. 07-52
§ 1; Ord. No. 08-36 § 2; Ord. No. 09-11 § 1; Ord. No. 10-21 § 2; Ord.
No. 10-43 § 3; Ord. No. 11-36 § 2; Ord. No. 13-09; Ord. No. 13-31
§ 3; Ord. No. 14-10; Ord. No. 2015-13]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
§ 7-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:251
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
a. Both Between the northerly terminus of
Ambulance Drive and a point 100 feet
south of said terminus.
b. East Between a point 126 feet north of the
northerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and a point 366
feet north of said curbline.
c. East Between a point 462 feet north of the
northerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and a point 524
feet north of said curbline.
d. North Between the easterly terminus of
Ambulance Drive and a point 280 feet
west of said terminus.
Ambulance Drive
e. South Between the easterly terminus of
Ambulance Drive and a point 565 feet
west of said terminus.
a. Both From the southerly curbline of State
Highway Route No. 33 to a point 80 feet
southerly therefrom.
b. Both From the northerly curbline of State
Highway Route No. 33 to a point 8 feet
northerly therefrom.
c. East Between a point 140 feet south of Sixth
Avenue and 100 feet north of Sixth
Avenue.
Atkins Avenue
d. West Between a point 100 feet south of Sixth
Avenue and a point 125 feet north of
Sixth Avenue.
Auxiliary Road Both Between the easterly curb of Wakefield
Road and the westerly curb of
Ambulance Drive.
Bangs Avenue a. North Between the boundary line of the City of
Asbury Park and 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35.
§ 7-7.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.7
1:252
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
b. South Between a point 200 feet west of the
westerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35 and a point 100
feet east of the easterly curbline of New
Jersey State Highway Route No. 35.
Bangs Avenue,
West
East and
South
Between Old Corlies Avenue and Green
Grove Road.
a. East Between the northerly curb of Main
Avenue and a point 100 feet north
therefrom.
Boulevard
b. West Between the easterly curb of South
Main Street and a point 100 feet north
therefrom.
Brighton Avenue West Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and the Township of
Neptune—Township of Wall boundary
line.
Davis Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-03]
Both Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Washington Avenue.
Division Street North Entire length.
Doctor's Drive Both Between a point 35 feet north of the
northerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and a point 55
feet north of said curbline.
a. Both Dead end east of Benson Avenue the
entire width of Embury Avenue and five
(5') feet back from the dead end.
b. Both Dead end west of Delaware Avenue the
entire width of Embury Avenue and five
(5') feet back from the dead end.
c. North 30 feet east and 30 feet west of the
driveway providing access 1130 Heck
Avenue. [Ord. No. 14-10]
Embury Avenue
d. South 30 feet east and 30 feet west of both
driveways providing access 30 Ridge
Court. [Ord. No. 14-10]
Fay Street East Entire length.
First Street East Entire length.
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:253
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
George Street East Entire length.
a. North Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Jumping Brook Road.
Green Grove
Road
b. West Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Jumping Brook Road.
Harding Avenue North Between Neptune Boulevard and Taylor
Avenue.
Harrison Street East Entire length.
a. (Reserved)
b. North Between Neptune Boulevard and New
Jersey State Highway Route No. 35.
c. South Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35 and Atkins Avenue.
d. South 30 feet east and 30 feet west of the
driveway providing access the William
Steele Apartments. [Ord. No. 14-10]
e. Both Between 100 feet east or west of the
center of the intersection with Route
35. [Ord. No. 14-10]
Heck Avenue
f. South 30 feet east and 30 feet west of the
driveway providing access 1130 Heck
Avenue. [Ord. No. 1410]
Huntington
Avenue
North Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35 and Fisher Avenue.
Jumping Brook
Road, West
East Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Jumping Brook Road.
a. East Between Main Avenue and Embury
Avenue.
Lawrence
Avenue
b. West Entire length.
Louisville
Avenue
East 506 feet South of West Bangs Avenue
extending 24 feet to 530 feet.
Main Avenue South Between South Main Street and the
westerly line of Lawrence Avenue.
Main Drive a. East Between a point 182 feet north of the
northerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and a point 282
feet north of said curbline.
§ 7-7.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.7
1:254
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
b. West Between a point 35 feet north of the
northerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and a point 495
feet north of said curbline.
Memorial Park East Between South Main Street and the
westerly termination of Broadway.
Milton Avenue North Between Neptune Boulevard and Taylor
Avenue.
Monroe Avenue South Between the boundary line of the City of
Asbury Park and New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35.
a. East Between the north side of New Jersey
State Highway Route No. 33 and the
south side of West Bangs Avenue.
b. East Between the north side of W. Lake
Avenue and the south side of Stratford
Avenue.
c. East Between a point 100 feet south of the
southerly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33 and the
northerly curbline of Alberta Avenue.
d. West Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Neptune Avenue.
Neptune
Boulevard
e. West Between the north side of New Jersey
State Highway Route No. 33 and West
Bangs Avenue.
Oak Terrace Southern end At the southern dead end stub of Oak
Terrace beginning at the intersection of
Block 1303, Lot 64 and Block 1303, Lot
41 and running 50 feet east. [Ord. No.
12-31]
Old Corlies
Avenue
South Between the easterly terminus and the
westerly terminus of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 33.
Pharo Avenue East Entire length.
a. East Between Embury Avenue and a point
100 feet south of Embury Avenue.
Pharo Street
b. West Entire length.
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:255
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
a. East Between the northerly line of Tenth
Avenue and the Township of Neptune
—Asbury Park boundary line.
b. West Between the northerly curbline of Ninth
Avenue and the southerly curbline of
Tenth Avenue.
Ridge Avenue
c. East 30 feet north and 30 feet south of the
driveway providing access 30 Ridge
Court. [Ord. No. 14-10]
a. East Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and the Township of
Neptune—Township of Wall boundary
line.
Schoolhouse
Road
b. West Between the Township of
Neptune—Township of Wall boundary
line and Cedar Brook Drive.
a. Both Between a point 100 feet east of the
easterly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35 and a point 100
feet west of the westerly curbline of
New Jersey State Highway Route No.
35.
b. North Between a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Atkins Avenue and
a point 125 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Atkins Avenue.
c. North From the west curbline of Stanley
Avenue to a point 440 feet westerly
therefrom.
d. South Between a point 125 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Atkins Avenue to a
point 100 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Atkins Avenue.
Sixth Avenue
e. South From 140 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Stanley Avenue to a point
230 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 7-7.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.7
1:256
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
South Riverside
Drive
Both Between the southerly side of the
intersection of South Riverside Drive
and the Plaza to the intersection of the
easterly side of the intersection of
South Riverside Way and Ridgewood
Avenue (an unimproved street).
a. West Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Harding Avenue.
b. West Between Heck Avenue and Stratford
Avenue.
Taylor Avenue
c. East Between a point 310 feet south of Heck
Avenue to a point 335 feet south of
Heck Avenue.
Twelfth Avenue Both Between Main Street and the right-ofway
of the New York and Long Branch
Railroad Co.
Wakefield Road Both Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and New Gate Lane.
a. South Between Davis Avenue and Union
Avenue.
b. North Between the Northeast intersection
with Grant Avenue and a point 100 feet
east of said curbline.
Washington
Avenue
c. North Between the northwest intersection
with Taylor Avenue and a point 150 feet
west of said curbline.
Washington
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-03]
South Between the southwest intersection
with Neptune Blvd. and the entrance/
exit to the Walgreens parking lot.
a. East Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Poplar Place.
Wayside Road
b. West Between New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 33 and Asbury Avenue.
Wells Avenue South Between Neptune Boulevard and Taylor
Avenue. [Ord. No. 2015-13]
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:257
Part I
Neptune Township Streets
Name of Street Side Location
West Lake
Avenue
(formerly
Springwood)
Both Between a point 100 feet east of the
easterly curbline of New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35 and 100 feet
west of the westerly curbline of New
Jersey State Highway Route No. 35.
a. North Between the northeast intersection with
Neptune Boulevard and continuing 175
feet east.
West Lake
Avenue
b. North East from the intersection of State
Highway 35, commencing at the point
of intersection of the easterly curbline
of State Highway 35 and the northerly
curbline of West Lake Avenue and
running 200 feet east. [Ord. No.
14-10]
Willow Drive Both Entire length.
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Location
Asbury Avenue North-west At intersection with New Jersey
Avenue, commencing at the point of
intersection of the extension of the
easterly curbline of New Jersey
Avenue, extended northerly, and
running 35 feet northeast from said
intersection point (access to Lake
Avenue).
Beach Avenue
(Northern end)
Both At intersection with Spray Avenue
(access to Lake Avenue).
Beach Avenue Both From intersection with Spray Avenue
North to intersection with Lake Avenue
(access to Lake Avenue).
Beach Avenue East Between Ocean Pathway (south) and
Ocean Pathway (north) (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
Benson Avenue West From its intersection with the northerly
curbline of Mt. Tabor Way south to the
northerly curbline of Mt. Herman Way
(access to Lake Avenue).
§ 7-7.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.7
1:258
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Location
Benson Avenue East Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Broadway South West from intersection with Ocean
Avenue, commencing at the point of
intersection of the easterly curbline of
Ocean Avenue with the southerly
curbline of Broadway and running 70
feet west (access to Beach front).
Central Avenue
(Northern end)
Both At Seaview Avenue.
Central Avenue West At intersection with Seaview Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the northerly curbline of
Seaview Avenue with the westerly
curbline of Central Avenue and running
45 feet in a southerly direction (access
to Lake Avenue).
Lawrence Avenue Both From the southerly side of Main
Avenue to the northerly side of Embury
Avenue (access to school).
Mt. Carmel Way North At intersection with Pilgrim Pathway,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the northerly curbline of
Mt. Carmel Way with the easterly
curbline of Pilgrim Pathway and
running 45 feet west (access to Tent
Colony and Auditorium).
New York Avenue East At intersection with Mt. Zion Way,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the centerline of Mt.
Zion Way with the easterly curbline of
New York Avenue and running 30 feet
north and south (access to Tent Colony
and Auditorium).
Ocean Avenue East Beginning at a point on the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue at the point
directly in the center of Embury
Avenue at the intersection of Embury
Avenue and extending 35 feet south
from that point and 35 feet north from
that point.
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:259
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Location
Ocean Avenue East At intersection with Ocean Pathway,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the centerline of the
20-foot wide sidewalk known as Lot 2,
Block 6.01, Neptune Township Tax
Map, extended eastward, with the
easterly curbline of Ocean Avenue and
running 35 feet north and south from
said intersection point (access to Beach
front).
Ocean Avenue East North from intersection with Broadway
commencing at the point of
intersection of the easterly curbline of
Ocean Avenue with the southerly
curbline of Broadway and running 70
feet north (access to Beach front).
Ocean Avenue East At intersection with Embury Avenue,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the centerline of
Embury Avenue, extended eastward,
with the easterly curbline of Ocean
Avenue and running 35 feet north and
south from said intersection point
(access to Beach front).
Ocean Avenue East South from the intersection with Spray
Avenue, commencing at the point of
intersection of the northerly curbline of
Spray Avenue with the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue and running
35 feet south (access to Beach front).
Pilgrim Pathway
(North end)
Both At intersection with Lake Avenue and
east side of Pilgrim Pathway from Surf
Avenue to end (access to Lake Avenue).
Pilgrim Pathway East At intersection with Pilgrim Pathway,
commencing at the point of
intersection of the northerly curbline of
Mt. Way with the easterly curbline of
Pilgrim Pathway and running 45 feet
south (access to Tent Colony and
Auditorium).
§ 7-7.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.7
1:260
Part II
Ocean Grove Streets
Name of Street Side Location
Pilgrim Pathway West South from Front Circle to the
northerly curb of McClintock Street
adjacent to east side of the Auditorium,
commencing at a point 45 feet north of
the point of intersection of the westerly
curbline of Pilgrim Pathway with the
centerline of the 20-foot wide sidewalk
at Ocean Pathway, extending westward.
Said sidewalk also known as Lot 2,
Block 6.01, Neptune Township Tax Map
and running south to the northerly
curbline of McClintock Street (access
to Tent Colony and Auditorium).
Pilgrim Pathway Between Olin Street and Asbury
Avenue.
Spray Avenue North West from intersection with Ocean
Avenue, commencing at the point of
intersection of the northerly curbline of
Spray Avenue with the easterly
curbline of Ocean Avenue and running
40 feet west (access to Beach front).
§ 7-7.8. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. No. 1000 A. II, Sched. II; Ord. No. 1004; Ord. No.
1038 § 43; Ord. No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1315 § 1; Ord. No. 1389 § 1;
Ord. No. 1428 § 1; Ord. No. 1463 § 1; Ord. No. 95-11 § 1; Ord. No.
99-15 § 1; Ord. No. 05-28 § 2; Ord. No. 06-37 § 2; Ord. No. 07-50 § 1;
Ord. No. 11-44; Ord. No. 2015-20; Ord. No. 2016-37]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All streets Both 3:00 a.m. — 6:00
a.m.
Entire length.
All streets east
of Neptune
Boulevard and
including
Lawrence
Avenue
Both 11:59 p.m. Sat. —
11:59 p.m. Sun.
Entire length.
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.8
1:261
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All streets west
of Neptune
Boulevard
Both 3:00 a.m. — 6:00
a.m.
Entire length.
Benson Avenue West 24 hours/day
Monday — Sunday
Between Block 126,
Lot 221 and Block
125, Lot 1371.
Delaware
Avenue
East 24 hours/day
Monday — Sunday
Between Block 115,
Lot 975, and Block
116, Lot 1392.
Embury Avenue South 7:00 a.m. — 3:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
Between Atkins
Avenue and
Memorial Drive.
Fisher Avenue West 6:00 a.m. — 1:00
p.m. on Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday
From a point 58 feet
north of the
northwest
intersection of West
Lake Avenue and
Fisher Avenue
continuing 47 feet
westward.
Main Avenue North 6:30 a.m. — 8:00
a.m. Thursdays
From April 15 —
October 15
Between New York
Avenue and Central
Avenue. [Ord. No.
2015-20]
Main Avenue South 6:30 a.m. — 8:00
a.m. Fridays From
April 15 — October
15
Between New York
Avenue And Central
Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-20]
Newgate Lane North 8:00 a.m. — 5:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
Entire length.
Ocean Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-20; deleted by Ord. No. 2016-37]
Ocean Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-20; deleted by Ord. No. 2016-37]
Ocean Grove:
All roadways
North and
East
7:00 a.m.— 5:00
p.m.; third full
week of March,
May, October
Entire length.
Ocean Grove:
All roadways
South and
West
7:00 a.m.— 5:00
p.m.; second full
week of March,
May, October
Entire length.
§ 7-7.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.8
1:262
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Wakefield Road East 8:00 a.m. — 5:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
Between State
Highway 33 and
Mayfair Lane.
Wakefield Road West 8:00 a.m. — 5:00
p.m. Monday —
Friday
Between Newgate
Lane and Mayfair
Lane.
§ 7-7.9. Angle Parking. [Ord. No. 1000 A. II, Sched. V; Ord. No.
1038; Ord. No. 1045 § 1; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 2017-11]
All parking on the streets or parts hereto described below shall be angle
parking as designated and only within the painted white stall lines.
Name of Street Side Angle Location
Broadway [Ord.
No. 2017-11]
South 45 degrees Central Avenue
to Ocean Avenue
West 60 degrees a. Broadway to
Main Avenue
Central Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-11; Ord. No.
2018-14] b. Olin Street to
Seaview Avenue
Central Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-14]
East 60 degrees Broadway to
Clark Avenue
a. North 45 degrees Lawrence
Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
Main Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-11]
b. South 45 degrees New Jersey
Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
a. East 45 degrees Broadway to
Seaview Avenue
b. East Head-on Seaview Avenue
to Spray Avenue
c. North Head-on Northern
terminus
Ocean Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-11]
d. Center Head-on Seaview Avenue
to Spray Avenue
§ 7-7.10. Parking of Certain Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1264 § 1;
Ord. No. 98-29 § 1; Ord. No. 01-47 § 1]
a. No person shall park or store any truck cabs, pick-up coaches, boats,
buses, mobile homes, recreational vehicles or any and all types of
§ 7-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.10
1:263
§ 7-7.11. Parking by Permit Only in Designated Areas. [Ord. No.
1574 § 1; Ord. No. 1598 § 1]
trailers (including but not limited to truck trailers, boat trailers, house
trailers, camp trailers, recreational trailers and equipment trailers) on
any street in any zone of the Township, except while actually loading
or unloading or making pick-ups or deliveries. This prohibition shall
also apply to any other vehicles which exceed any of the following
dimensions:
1. Nine feet, six inches in height.
2. Eight feet in width.
3. Twenty feet in length.
4. Twelve thousand pounds in registered weight.
b. Commercial vehicles, as permitted in Subsection a, shall be restricted
to no more than one per household. Parking of the commercial vehicle
shall be permitted and be limited to the area of the street directly in
front of the dwelling of the owner of said commercial vehicle. This
restriction shall apply to any street in any zone of the Township.
[Amended 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-25]
a. Permit Required. No vehicle shall be parked on the streets or parts of
streets designated in this subsection during any part of the day, unless:
1. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of
that street;
2. The vehicle has displayed on its left rear side window in such a
manner that it can be clearly visible by a Police Officer, a current
official Township of Neptune Residential Permanent Parking
Permit; or
3. The vehicle falls under one (1) of the exemptions to "Parking by
Permanent Permit" as listed below.
b. Exemptions. The following vehicles shall be exempt from this "Parking
for Permanent Permit" section in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
1. Visitors. A vehicle displaying a Current Parking Permit or
Temporary Parking Permit provided that the operator of the vehicle
is a bona fide guest of a resident within the Permit Parking Area.
The Visitors Permit shall be displayed on the vehicle in such a
manner as to be clearly visible by a Police Officer.
2. Contractors, Service and Delivery Vehicles. Contractors, service
and delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of commercial
business may park without a permit during the time they are
rendering service to a residence within the permit parking area.
§ 7-7.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.11
1:264
3. Emergency and Public Utility Vehicles. Emergency vehicles and
Public Utility vehicles may park within the permit parking area
during the time they are rendering service or repairs within the
permit parking area.
c. Administration. Application for parking permits under this section shall
be made in writing on forms available from the Township Clerk. Permits
shall be granted only under the following terms and conditions:
1. A Permanent Permit, valid for one (1) calendar year, shall be issued
for every vehicle owned or principally operated by a person who is
a resident on a street or portion thereof upon which parking is
restricted by this section upon the presentation of a valid vehicle
registration.
2. Two (2) Visitors Permits, if requested, valid for one (1) calendar
year, shall be issued to each residential unit on any street or portion
thereof upon which parking is restricted by this section for use only
in conformance with paragraph c1 herein by visitors to that
residential unit. Additional Visitors Permits may be issued by the
Township Clerk pursuant to guidelines to be established by him/
her.
3. Temporary Permits for a time not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours,
may be issued for persons who are bona fide guests of any resident
on any street upon which parking is restricted by this section.
4. The Township Clerk or his/her designee shall maintain appropriate
records for all parking permits and establish a registry of same.
[Ord. No. 1574 § 1; Ord. No. 1598 § 1]
Schedule For Parking By Permit Only In Designated Areas
In accordance with the provisions of this subsection, the
following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as "Parking by Permit Only" streets.
Name of
Street Side Location
a. South From New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35 to a point two
hundred (200) feet east of
Bloomfield Avenue.
Greenwood
Avenue
b. North From New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35 to Bloomfield
Avenue.
Rutherford
Avenue
Both From New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35 to Bloomfield
Avenue.
§ 7-7.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.12
1:265
§ 7-7.12. Parking by Emergency Vehicle Only in Designated Areas.
[Ord. No. 02-2 § 1]
The following streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as Emergency
Vehicle Parking Only. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets designated in this subsection during any part of the day
unless such vehicle is an emergency vehicle.
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue West Beginning 25 feet south of the intersection
with Pitman Avenue until 50 feet south of
the intersection with Pitman Avenue.
§ 7-7.13. Parking by School Bus Only in Designated Areas. [Ord. No.
02-6 § 2]
The following streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as School Bus
Parking Only. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets designated in this subsection during any part of the day unless
such vehicle is a school bus.
Name of
Street Side Hours Day Location
Embury
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Monday—FridayBeginning
398 feet west
from the
intersection
of Memorial
Drive and
extending
200 feet
west.
§ 7-7.14. Parking Prohibited at All Times Within Designated Yellow
Intersection Boxes. [Ord. No. 10-38 § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time on any street within a
designated painted yellow street box adjacent to an intersection.
§ 7-7.15. Parking in Front of Mailboxes. [Ord. No. 2014-34]
No person shall park any vehicle on a public street or roadway in front of
a mailbox or within ten (10') feet of the mailbox at any time in front of
residential, commercial or industrial properties, thereby providing access to
the residents and property owners and/or the United States Postal Service.
§ 7-7.16. Abandoned Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2017-40]
a. Definitions.
§ 7-7.12 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-7.16
1:266
1. ABANDON OR ABANDONMENT — Any motor vehicle, omnibus,
road tractor, trailer, truck, truck-tractor and vehicle which is
parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law; or has been continuously parked in any
public street or public land for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
2. MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRAILER,
TRUCK, TRUCK-TRACTOR and VEHICLE — Are intended to have
the meaning stated and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
3. JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE or JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE BODY — Any
motor vehicle which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or
which is wholly unfit, without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use
in highway transportation, or which has been discarded for use as a
motor vehicle or otherwise abandoned.
4. PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being
the owner or having any legal right in, of or to the motor vehicle or
other vehicle as herein defined.
5. VEHICLE — Wherever the term "vehicle" is used in this chapter it
shall also include boats, vessels and seagoing craft of every
description.
b. Abandonment on public street or public land prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to abandon or suffer or permit the abandoning
of any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck or trucktractor,
or other vehicle as defined herein, upon any public street or
public land in the Township of Neptune or within the right-of-way of any
public street or thoroughfare, or any easement area dedicated to and
for the use of the public.
c. Junk motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle body on public street or public
land prohibited. No person shall place, keep or store any junk motor
vehicle or junk motor vehicle body, as defined herein, upon any public
street or public land in the Township of Neptune or within the right-ofway
of any public street or thoroughfare, or any easement area
dedicated to and for the use of the public.
d. Presumption of abandonment. If any motor vehicle, omnibus, road
tractor, trailer, truck, truck-tractor or vehicle, as defined in this chapter,
shall be abandoned, it shall be presumed that the owner or tenant in
possession of said land has abandoned it there or permitted or suffered
it to be abandoned there.
e. Impoundment; notification.
1. Whenever any officer of the Neptune Township Police Department
finds any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck, trucktractor
or vehicle which has been abandoned, kept or stored
contrary to the provisions of this chapter on any public street or
public property, such member of the Police Department shall
§ 7-7.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.16
1:267
§ 7-8. VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED WEIGHT.
§ 7-8.1. Parking of Trucks Weighing in Excess of Four Tons
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1000 Sched. II]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of four (4) tons upon any street between
the hours specified.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All Both 10:00 p.m.— 6:00
a.m.
Entire length.
§ 7-8.2. Routes for Trucks Over Four (4) Tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as Route for Vehicles Over Four (4) Tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four (4) tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick-up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-8.3. Vehicles Over Four (4) Tons Excluded From Certain Streets.
[Ord. No. 1000 A. III, Sched. VI; Ord. No. 1004; Ord. No. 2015-32]
Vehicles over four (4) tons registered gross weight are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described except for the pick-up and
delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Arnold Avenue Entire length.
Audrey Place Entire length.
remove or secure the removal of this vehicle to such garage or
place as may be designated for the impounding of such vehicles,
and such vehicles shall be retained in impoundment until the
person owning the same shall first pay the established cost of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
2. Whenever any vehicle is impounded as provided in this section, the
Police Department shall, within five (5) days of the date of
impoundment, notify the registered owner in writing, by certified
mail at the last-known address of the owner, of the removal of such
vehicle, the reason for its removal and the location of the vehicle.
§ 7-7.16 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-8.3
1:268
Name of Street Location
Beverly Way Entire length.
Brookside Road Entire length.
Campbell Avenue Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Carton Avenue Entire length.
Center Street Entire length.
Chapman Avenue Entire length.
Clayton Avenue Entire length.
Colgate Avenue Entire length.
Coral Way Entire length.
Cornell Avenue Entire length.
Corporate Park Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Couse Road Entire length.
Cypress Street Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Diane Drive Entire length.
Doris Terrace Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Durand Road Entire length.
East Lawn Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Ely Road Entire length.
Fairview Avenue Between Route NJ 33 and Green Grove
Road. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Forest Drive Entire length.
Fortunato Place Entire length.
Glenmere Avenue Entire length.
Golfview Drive Entire length.
Green Grove Place Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Green Grove Road Between Route NJ 33 and Route NJ 66.
[Ord. No. 2015-32]
Green Lawn Place Entire length.
Helen Terrace Entire length.
Hillview Drive Entire length.
Jagger Avenue Entire length.
Jeanne Drive Entire length.
Jumping Brook Road Between Route NJ 33 and Route NJ 66.
[Ord. No. 2015-32]
Karen Avenue Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
§ 7-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.3
1:269
Name of Street Location
Kenneth Terrace Entire length.
Knox Boulevard Entire length.
Lakewood Road Entire length.
Lorraine Drive Entire length.
Manor Drive Entire length.
Maple Avenue Between Route NJ 33 and Wayside Road.
[Ord. No. 2015-32]
Marsha Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Moore Road Entire length.
Morrisey Road Entire length.
North Riverside Drive Entire length.
Oakdale Drive Entire length.
O'Hagen Terrace Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Olive Street Entire length.
Overlook Drive Entire length.
Oxford Way Entire length.
Palmer Avenue Entire length.
Park Avenue Entire length.
Poplar Place Entire length.
Poppy Avenue Entire length.
Princeton Avenue Entire length.
Prospect Avenue Entire length.
Rhodes Terrace Entire length.
Robbins Road Entire length.
Roberts Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Rutgers Terrace Entire length.
Ruth Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Sandra Lane Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Shadowlawn Drive Entire length.
Sherry Lane Entire length.
Shock Avenue Entire length.
Shorebrook Circle Entire length.
Slocum Avenue Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
South Riverside Drive Entire length.
§ 7-8.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-8.3
1:270
Name of Street Location
Squirrel Road Entire length.
Sunnyfield Terrace Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Sycamore Street Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Tilton Place Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Trident Boulevard Entire length.
Valley Road Entire length.
Victor Place Entire length.
Wakefield Road Entire length.
Walnut Street Entire length.
Wayside Road Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33
and West Bangs Avenue.
West Jumping Brook Road Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
West Lawn Drive Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Westwood Place Entire length.
Wilson Road Entire length.
Woodland Avenue Entire length. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Woodmere Avenue Entire length.
Worth Road Entire length.
Yale Road Entire length.
§ 7-9. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. IV, Sched. VII; Ord.
No. 1038; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 05-35 § 1; Ord. No. 06-23 § 1;
Ord. No. 2015-22; Ord. No. 2016-16]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Abbott Avenue Easterly Between Central Avenue and
Ocean Avenue.
a. Easterly Between Pennsylvania Avenue
and Pilgrim Pathway.
Asbury Avenue
b. Westerly Between Pennsylvania Avenue
and Mt. Tabor Way.
Atlantic Avenue Easterly Between Central Avenue and
Ocean Avenue.
Bath Avenue Easterly Between Pilgrim Pathway and
Ocean Avenue.
§ 7-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:271
Name of Street Direction Limits
Beach Avenue Northerly Between Broadway and Spray
Avenue.
a. Northerly Between Inskip Avenue and
Main Avenue.
Benson Avenue
b. Southerly Between Mt. Tabor Way and
Main Avenue.
Boulevard Northeast Between the northerly line of
Main Avenue and the northerly
line of the Township of
Neptune.
Bradley Avenue East Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Brighton Avenue Southbound (Northerly approach) between
North Riverside Drive and
Brighton Avenue (easterly
approach).
Central Avenue Southerly Between Seaview Avenue and
Atlantic Avenue.
Delaware Avenue Northerly Between Stockton Avenue and
Asbury Avenue.
Division Street Westerly Between Atkins Avenue and
Ridge Avenue. [Ord. No.
2015-22]
Embury Avenue Easterly Between Central Avenue and
Ocean Avenue.
First Street South Entire length.
Greenwood Avenue West Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Harding Avenue East Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Heck Avenue Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Inskip Avenue
[Ord. No.
2016-16]
Westerly Entire length.
Lawrence Avenue Southerly Between Main Avenue and
Stockton Avenue.
McClintock Street Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Pilgrim Pathway.
Milton Avenue East Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
§ 7-9 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-9
1:272
Name of Street Direction Limits
Mt. Carmel Way Easterly Entire length.
Mt. Hermon Way Easterly Entire length.
Mt. Tabor Way Westerly Entire length.
Mt. Zion Way Easterly Between Pennsylvania Avenue
and New York Avenue.
Mt. Zion Way Westerly Between Pennsylvania Avenue
to Asbury Avenue.
New Jersey Avenue Southerly Between Inskip Avenue and
Asbury Avenue.
New York Avenue Southerly Between Fletcher Lake Drive
and Asbury Avenue.
a. (East Leg)
Northerly
Between Seaview Avenue and
Spray Avenue.
Ocean Avenue
b. (West Leg)
Southerly
Between Spray Avenue and
Seaview Avenue.
Ocean Pathway,
South
Easterly Between Pilgrim Pathway and
Ocean Avenue.
Ocean Pathway,
North
Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Pilgrim Pathway.
Olin Street Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Northerly Between Stockton Avenue and
Asbury Avenue.
Pharo Street North From Division Street to
Embury Avenue.
a. Southerly Between Surf Avenue and
Pitman Avenue.
b. Southerly Between Mt. Carmel Way and
Mt. Tabor Way.
Pilgrim Pathway
c. Southerly Between Fletcher Lake Drive
and Main Avenue.
Pitman Avenue Easterly Between Pilgrim Pathway and
Ocean Avenue.
Rutherford Avenue East Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Seaview Avenue Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Spray Avenue Easterly Entire length.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:273
Name of Street Direction Limits
Surf Avenue Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Pilgrim Pathway.
a. North Between N.J. State Highway
Route 33 and Washington
Avenue.
Taylor Avenue
b. South Between N.J. State Highway
Route 33 and Sixth Avenue.
Webb Avenue Westerly Between Ocean Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Wells Avenue West Between Taylor Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Whitefield Avenue Southerly Between Inskip Avenue and
Main Avenue.
§ 7-10. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. V, Sched. VIII; Ord.
No. 1038; Ord. No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 1686 § 1; Ord.
No. 96-25 § 1; Ord. No. 97-32 § 1; Ord. No. 98-45 § 1; Ord. No. 99-31
§ 1; Ord. No. 01-32 § 1; Ord. No. 08-25 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-48 § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Asbury Park Boulevard Between Wayside Road and a point 50 feet east
of Monmouth Avenue.
Beach Avenue a. Between Seaview Avenue and Main Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Benson Avenue a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Berkeley Lane Entire length.
Bingham Street Between West Bangs Avenue and a point 50
feet north of Millbrook Avenue.
Bloomfield Avenue Between Bradley Avenue and West Lake
Avenue.
Brighton Avenue Between the Wall Township/ Neptune City
Corporate Line.
Broadway Entire length.
Carton Avenue Between Lakewood Road and Westwood Place.
§ 7-9 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-10
1:274
Name of Street Limits
Cedar Terrace Between Hemlock Drive and Old Corlies
Avenue.
Central Boulevard Between Wayside Road and Monmouth Avenue.
Cliffwood Drive Between Schoolhouse Road and Hemlock Drive.
a. Between the Bradley Beach/ Ocean Grove
corporate line and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Stockton Avenue and Broadway.
c. Between Broadway and Main Avenue.
Delaware Avenue
d. Between Main Avenue and Asbury Avenue
with a Yield sign on Delaware Avenue.
a. Between N.J. State Highway Route 35 and
West Lake Avenue.
Drummond Avenue
b. Between West Lake Avenue and Bangs
Avenue.
a. Between Hamilton Avenue and N.J. Highway
Route 35.
Eighth Avenue
b. Between N.J. Highway Route 35 and Atkins
Avenue.
Eton Way Entire length.
Fairfield Way Between Glenmere Avenue and Highland
Avenue.
a. Between Corlies Avenue (State Highway No.
33) and West Lake Avenue.
Fisher Avenue
b. Between West Lake Avenue and Bangs
Avenue.
a. Between Pennsylvania Avenue and Broadway.
b. Between Broadway and Main Avenue.
Fletcher Lake - Central
Avenue
c. Between Main Avenue and Atlantic Avenue.
Forest Drive Between South Riverside Drive and Lakewood
Road.
a. Between Old Corlies Avenue and N.J.
Highway No. 33.
b. Between N.J. Highway No. 33 and West
Bangs Avenue.
c. Between West Bangs Avenue and N.J.
Highway No. 66.
Green Grove Road
d. Between N.J. Highway No. 66 and Jumping
Brook Road.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:275
Name of Street Limits
Gully Road Between Old Corlies Avenue and the boundary
line of Wall Township.
Hamilton Avenue Between Sixth Avenue and N.J. State Highway
No. 33.
Hemlock Drive Between Oak Terrace and a point 50 feet east
of Cedar Terrace. A Yield sign to be installed on
Cliffwood Drive.
Highland Avenue Between Forest Drive and South Riverside
Drive.
Hillside Drive Between Wilson Road and Overlook Drive.
Jumping Brook Road Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33 and
N.J. State Highway No. 66.
Kenneth Terrace Between Green Grove Road and John Terrace.
Knox Boulevard Between Palmer Avenue and Belmar Avenue.
Lakewood Road Between Brighton Avenue and the Shark River
Bridge.
Lawrence Avenue a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Main Avenue Entire length.
Maple Avenue Between N.J. State Highway 33 and Wayside
Road.
Mayfair Lane Entire length.
Monroe Avenue State Highway Route No. 35 and the Asbury
Park corporate line.
a. Between N.J. State Highway Route 33 and
West Lake Avenue.
b. Between West Lake Avenue and Bangs
Avenue.
Myrtle Avenue
c. Between Bangs Avenue and Monroe Avenue.
a. Between Sixth Avenue and N.J. Highway
Route No. 33.
b. Between N.J. State Highway No. 33 and West
Bangs Avenue.
Neptune Boulevard
c. Between West Bangs Avenue and the
northerly terminus of Neptune Boulevard.
a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Asbury Avenue.
New Jersey Avenue
c. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
§ 7-10 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-10
1:276
Name of Street Limits
a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Asbury Avenue.
New York Avenue
c. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
a. Between Brighton Avenue and Westwood
Place.
North Riverside Drive
[Ord. No. 2016-48 § 1]
b. Between Westwood Place and Lakewood
Road.
Oakdale Drive Between South Riverside Drive and Lakewood
Road.
Name of Street Limits
Oak Terrace Between Cliffwood Drive and N.J. State
Highway Route No. 33.
Ocean Avenue
O'Hagen Terrace
Between Broadway and Spray Avenue.
Between West Bangs Avenue and Roberta
Drive.
Overlook Drive Between Carton Avenue and North Riverside
Drive.
Oxford Way Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33 and
Fordham Road.
a. Between Bradley Beach/Ocean Grove
corporate line and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Stockton Avenue and Broadway.
c. Between Broadway and Main Avenue.
Pennsylvania Avenue
d. Between Main Avenue and Asbury Avenue
with a Yield sign on Pennsylvania Avenue.
Pilgrim Pathway a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Pine Terrace Between Hemlock Drive and N.J. State Highway
Route 33. A Yield sign to be installed on Willow
Drive.
Pitman Avenue Between Central Avenue and New York Avenue.
Pittenger Place Between Hillside Drive and Robbins Road.
Princeton Avenue Between Green Grove Road and Cornell
Avenue.
Prospect Avenue Between Fairfield Way and South Riverside
Drive.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:277
Name of Street Limits
a. Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33
and the Asbury Park/Neptune Township
corporate line.
Ridge Avenue
b. Between Tenth Avenue and N.J. State
Highway Route No. 33.
Roberts Drive Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33 and
Jeanne Drive.
Ruth Drive Between Kenneth Terrace to Shadowlawn
Drive.
Sayre Street Between Millbrook Avenue and Bangs Avenue.
Schoolhouse Road Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33 and
the southerly boundary line of the Township.
a. Between Hamilton Avenue and N.J. State
Highway No. 35.
Seventh Avenue
b. Between N.J. State Highway No. 35 and
Atkins Avenue.
Shadowlawn Drive Between Green Grove Road and East Lawn
Drive. A Yield sign to be installed on West Lawn
Drive.
South Riverside Drive Between Lakewood Road and Brighton Avenue.
Stamford Drive —
Neswick Court —
Fordham Road — Oxford
Way
Between Surrey Lane and Route N.J. 33 (Corlies
Avenue).
Stockton Avenue Entire length.
Sunshine Parkway Between Wayside Road and Monmouth Avenue.
Sunnyfield Terrace Between Green Grove Road and Kenneth
Terrace.
Sycamore Street Entire length.
a. Between West Lake Avenue and Stratford
Avenue.
b. Between Heck Avenue and West Lake
Avenue.
c. Between Corlies Avenue (N.J. State Highway
Route No. 33) and Heck Avenue.
Taylor Avenue
d. Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33
and Sixth Avenue.
Valley Road a. Between Highland Avenue and Lakewood
Road.
§ 7-10 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-10
1:278
Name of Street Limits
b. Between Prospect Avenue and South
Riverside Drive.
Wakefield Road Entire length.
a. Between N.J. State Highway Route 33 and
West Bangs Avenue.
Wayside Road
b. Between West Bangs Avenue and N.J. State
Highway Route No. 66. A Yield sign to be
installed on the easterly leg of Asbury Park
Boulevard facing northbound traffic.
West Concourse Between South Concourse and the Neptune
City-Neptune Township corporate line.
West Jumping Brook
Road
Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 33 and
Jumping Brook Road.
a. Between West Bangs Avenue and Neptune
Boulevard.
b. Between Neptune Boulevard and N.J. State
Highway Route No. 35.
West Lake Avenue
c. Between N.J. State Highway Route No. 35
and the Asbury Park corporate line.
Westwood Place Between Brighton Avenue and a point 50 feet
east of North Riverside Drive.
Whitefield Avenue a. Between Broadway and Stockton Avenue.
b. Between Main Avenue and Broadway.
Wilson Road Between Carton Avenue and Pittenger Place.
Worth Road Between Asbury Avenue and the southerly
terminus of Denbo Drive.
§ 7-10A. THROUGH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 13-15]
The following intersections shall be designated as No Through Traffic
permitted at all times. Vehicles shall not be permitted to cross the
intersection at the following locations:
Name of Street Through Traffic Prohibited at:
Monroe Avenue State Highway 35 [Ord. No. 13-15]
§ 7-11. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. V, Sched. IX; Ord.
No. 1038; Ord. No. 1144 § 1; Ord. No. 1184 § 1; Ord. No. 1200; Ord.
No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1288 § 1; Ord. No. 1293 § 1; Ord. No. 1308
§ 1; Ord. No. 1514 § 1; Ord. No. 1517 § 1; Ord. No. 1532 § 1; Ord. No.
1566 § 1; Ord. No. 1573; Ord. No. 1668 § 1; Ord. No. 1689 § 1; Ord.
No. 95-11 § 1; Ord. No. 96-1 § 1; Ord. No. 96-16 § 1; Ord. No. 96-25
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:279
§ 1; Ord. No. 98-3 § 2; Ord. No. 00-9 § 1; Ord. No. 00-55 § 1; Ord. No.
02-35 § 1; Ord. No. 05-13 § 1; Ord. No. 14-01; Ord. No. 2014-18;
Ord. No. 2016-01; Ord. No. 2016-48 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-27]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection: Stop Sign On:
Albany Road and Center Street Center Street
Benson Avenue and Mt. Hermon
Way
Mt. Hermon Way
Brookside Road and Coral Way Coral Way
Brookside Road and Hillview Drive Hillview Drive
Center Street and New York Road New York Road
Clayton Avenue and Helen Terrace Helen Terrace
Cliffwood Drive and Beach Road Beach Road
Cliffwood Drive and Milford Road Milford Road
Cliffwood Drive and Woodmere
Avenue
Woodmere Avenue
Clinton Place and Valley Road Valley Road
Columbus Avenue and Oak Street Oak Street
Coral Way and Hill Drive Hill Drive
Cornell Avenue and Princeton
Avenue
Princeton Avenue
Davis Avenue and Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue
Denbo Drive and Dartmouth Road Dartmouth Road
Doremus Way and Heck Avenue Heck Avenue
Doris Terrace and East
Shadowlawn Drive
East Shadowlawn Drive
Durand Road and Smock Avenue Smock Avenue
East Shadowlawn Drive and John
Terrace
John Terrace
Embury Avenue and Pharo Street Pharo Street
Glenmere Avenue and Sylvan
Drive
Sylvan Drive
Harvard Avenue and Yale Road
[Ord. No. 2018-27]
Yale Road
§ 7-11 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-11
1:280
Intersection: Stop Sign On:
Hawthorne Street and Prospect
Place
Prospect Place
Heck Avenue and Benson Avenue Benson Avenue
Heck Avenue and Borden Avenue Borden Avenue
Heck Avenue and Taylor Avenue Taylor Avenue
Hill Drive and Valley Drive Valley Drive
Hillside Drive Hillside Drive facing westbound
traffic
Hillside Drive and May Place May Place
Hillview Drive and Hill Drive Hill Drive
Hoover Road and Cardinal Road Cardinal Road [Ord. No. 14-01]
Hoover Road and Robin Road Robin Road [Ord. No. 14-01]
Iris Drive and Phoebe Drive Phoebe Drive [Ord. No. 2014-18]
Jumping Brook Road and Essex
Road
Essex Road
Manor Drive and Hill Drive Hill Drive
Milton Avenue and Oak Street Oak Street
Monmouth Avenue and Central
Boulevard
Central Boulevard
Moss Place and Iris Drive Iris Drive
Mount Tabor Way and Pilgrim
Pathway
Pilgrim Pathway
New Jersey Avenue and Embury
Avenue
Embury Avenue
Ninth Avenue and Ridge Avenue Ridge Avenue
North Riverside Drive and
Westwood Place [Ord. No.
2016-48 § 2]
North Riverside Drive facing
southbound traffic
Palmer Avenue and Knox
Boulevard
Knox Boulevard
Pilgrim Pathway and Olin Street/
Mt. Hermon Way
Olin Street/ Mt. Hermon Way
Pitman Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Pilgrim Pathway
Roberta Drive and O'Hagen
Terrace
O'Hagen Terrace
Seaview Court and Seaview Circle Seaview Circle facing westbound
traffic
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:281
Intersection: Stop Sign On:
South Concourse and Center
Street
Center Street
Stamford Drive and Gables Court Gables Court
Stamford Drive and Marlow Place Marlow Place
Stratford Avenue and Oak Street Oak Street
Stamford Drive and Mayfair Lane
[Ord. No. 2016-01]
Mayfair Lane
Stamford Drive and Chadwell
Court [Ord. No. 2016-01]
Chadwell Court
Stratford Avenue and Taylor
Avenue
Taylor Avenue
Summit Road and Beverly Way Beverly Way
Sylvan Drive and Beach Road Beach Road
Sylvan Drive and Glenmere
Avenue
Glenmere Avenue, facing southbound
traffic
Tenth Avenue and LaFayette
Avenue
LaFayette Avenue
Tenth Avenue and Ridge Avenue Ridge Avenue
Tilton Place and Victor Place Victor Place
Union Avenue and Tenth Avenue Tenth Avenue
Valley Road and Milford Road Milford Road
Valley Road and Tremont Drive Tremont Drive
Washington Avenue and Grant
Avenue
Grant Avenue
Whitefield Avenue and Mt.
Hermon Way
Mt. Hermon Way
Whitesville Road and Sewell
Avenue
Sewell Avenue
Wilson Road and Smock Avenue Smock Avenue
§ 7-11A. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Multiple Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
Intersection: Stop Signs On:
(Reserved)
§ 7-11 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-12
1:282
§ 7-12. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. V, Sched. X; Ord.
No. 1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1668 § 1; Ord. No. 97-7 § 1; Ord. No. 97-26
§ 1; Ord. No. 98-3 § 1; Ord. No. 08-17 § 2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Yield Sign On: At the Intersection Of:
Alfred Court John Terrace
Berkley Lane Eaton Way, facing northbound traffic
Fortunato Place Poplar Place
Hillview Drive Brookside Drive
Hillview Drive Spray Boulevard
Laurel Place Poplar Place
Manor Drive W. Squirrel Road
N. Chaphagen Drive John Terrace
Roberta Drive John Terrace
Sand Place Trident Boulevard
Shell Place Spray Boulevard
Spray Boulevard Coral Way
Squirrel Road Coral Way
Tide Place Trident Boulevard
Trident Boulevard Hillview Drive
Valley Drive Edgemere Road
Wilson Road Durand Road
§ 7-13. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. VII, Sched. XIV,
XV; Ord. No. 1038; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 00-49 § 1; Ord. No. 02-11
§ 1; Ord. No. 12-26]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13
1:283
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Route NJ 33 (Corlies
Avenue) and Davis
Avenue [Added
5-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-14]
Left Southbound Davis Avenue,
Route NJ 33 eastbound
Route NJ 33 (Corlies
Avenue) and Stanley
Avenue [Added
5-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-14]
Left Northbound Stanley Avenue,
Route NJ 33 westbound
Sean Drive and Old
Corlies Avenue
Left Sean Drive onto Old Corlies
Avenue
State Highway 35 and
Monroe Avenue
Left Monroe Avenue onto State
Highway 35 [Ord. No.
12-26]
Taylor Avenue and
Alberta Avenue
Left Alberta Avenue onto Taylor
Avenue
§ 7-13A. RIGHT TURNS ONLY.
No person shall make a turn at the below listed location(s) other than a
Right Turning Movement:
Intersection Movement Permitted
Monroe Avenue and Route
NJ 35
Eastbound from Monroe Avenue to
Southbound onto Route NJ 35 [Ord. No.
2015-30]
Monroe Avenue and Route
NJ 35
Westbound from Monroe Avenue to
Northbound onto Route NJ 35 [Ord. No.
2015-30]
§ 7-14. NO TURN ON RED. [New]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
(Reserved)
§ 7-15. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. No. 1000 A. VI, Sched. XI; Ord. No.
1264 § 1; Ord. No. 1575 § 1; Ord. No. 04-01 § 3; Ord. No. 07-50 § 2;
Ord. No. 10-39 § 2; Ord. No. 12-25]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
§ 7-13 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-15
1:284
Name of
Street Side Location
Atkins Avenue West From the southerly property line of Lot 341
in Block 167, 75 feet northerly to the
approximate midpoint of the easterly
property line of said Lot 341 in Block 167.
Harding Avenue South From the westerly property line of Lot 371
in Block 267B to the easterly property line of
said Lot 371 in Block 267B.
Heck Avenue South From the southwest intersection of the
Board of Education owned roadway known
as Flyer Drive westward 185 feet to an
existing parking lot curb cut on Heck
Avenue.
Main Avenue North From the northeast intersection of Main
Avenue and Pilgrim Pathway extending
eastward 65 feet to a point on the north side
of Main Avenue.
Ocean Avenue East East side of Ocean Avenue beginning 60 feet
south of the southeast intersection of Ocean
Avenue and westbound Ocean Pathway and
extending 35 feet. [Ord. No. 12-25 § 2]
§ 7-16. BUS STOPS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. VI, Sched. XIII; Ord. No.
1030; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 10-27 § 1]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours Location
Ocean Avenue All—July and August
Only
East side of Ocean Avenue
beginning 60 feet south of the
intersection of Embury and
Ocean Avenues.
§ 7-17. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. VI, Sched. XII; Ord. No.
1038; Ord. No. 1200]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:285
§ 7-18. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 7-19. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. No. 1000 A. XI, Sched. XIX; Ord.
No. 1466]
"No Passing Zones" are hereby established and maintained along the
following described streets or parts of streets, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated
and numbered as indicated.
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Gully Road As authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation on
August 28, 1989. Gully Road
between Wall Township and the
Township of Neptune corporate
line to Old Corlies Avenue, a
distance of 1,690 feet in the
Township of Neptune.
§ 7-20. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. No. 1000 A. IX, Sched. XVII; Ord. No.
1038; Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No. 07-55 § 1]
The following described streets or parts of streets shall have the speed
limits designated below.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the
designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-18 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-20
1:286
Name of Street Side Speed Limit Location
Brighton Avenue Both 20 Between 75 feet north of
the intersection with the
northwest corner of Ely
Road and 110 feet south of
the intersection with the
southwest corner of
Morrisey Road.
Green Grove
Road
Both 20 Between 75 feet north of
the intersection with the
northeast corner of Larson
Drive and 70 feet south of
the intersection with the
southeast corner of
Wooley Drive.
Green Grove
Road
Both 20 Between 60 feet south of
the intersection with the
southeast corner of
Kenneth Terrace and 180
feet south of the
intersection of Sunnyfield
Terrace.
§ 7-21. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-21.1. Handicapped Parking on Street. [Ord. No. 1200; Ord. No.
95-28 §§ I, II; Ord. No. 96-24 § I; Ord. No. 97-33 § 1; Ord. No. 98-26
§ 2; Ord. No. 98-40 § 1; Ord. No. 99-19 § 1; Ord. No. 99-24 § 1; Ord.
No. 00-9 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 00-16 § 1; Ord. No. 00-36 § 1; Ord. No.
00-41 § 1; Ord. No. 00-45 § 1; Ord. No. 01-4 § 1; Ord. No. 01-6 § 1;
Ord. No. 01-10 § 1; Ord. No. 01-16 § 1; Ord. No. 01-20 § 1; Ord. No.
01-28 § 2; Ord. No. 01-46 § 1; Ord. No. 02-04 § 1; Ord. No. 02-13
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 02-18 § 1; Ord. No. 02-20 § 1; Ord. No. 02-31 § 1;
Ord. No. 02-37 § 1; Ord. No. 03-1 § 1; Ord. No. 03-18 § 1; Ord. No.
03-26 § 1; Ord. No. 03-34 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 03-36 § 1; Ord. No. 04-01
§ 1; Ord. No. 04-24 § 1; Ord. No. 04-33 § 1; Ord. No. 04-36 § 1; Ord.
No. 04-40 § 1; Ord. No. 04-42 § 1; Ord. No. 05-17 § 1; Ord. No. 05-28
§ 1; Ord. No. 05-43 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 06-10 § 1; Ord. No. 06-15 § 1;
Ord. No. 06-26 § 1; Ord. No. 06-40 § 1; Ord. No. 06-50 §§ 1,2; Ord.
No. 07-15 § 1; Ord. No. 07-18 § 1; Ord. No. 07-32 §§ 1,2; Ord. No.
07-36 § 1; Ord. No. 07-45 § 1; Ord. No. 07-52 § 2; Ord. No. 07-57 § 1;
Ord. No. 08-02 § 1; Ord. No. 08-15 § 1; Ord. No. 08-17 § 1; Ord. No.
08-23 § 1; Ord. No. 08-25 § 1; Ord. No. 08-29 § 1, 2; Ord. No. 08-31
§ 1; Ord. No. 08-36 § 1; Ord. No. 08-47 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 09-01 § 1;
Ord. No. 09-11 § 1; Ord. No. 09-15 §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 09-17 § 1; Ord.
No. 09-19 § 1; Ord. No. 09-25 § 1; Ord. No. 09-29 § 1; Ord. No. 09-31
§ 1; Ord. No. 09-40 § 1; Ord. No. 10-06 § 1; Ord. No. 10-08 §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 10-16 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 10-21 § 1; Ord. No. 10-24; Ord. No.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:287
10-39 § 1; Ord. No. 11-09; Ord. No. 11-18; Ord. No. 11-23; Ord. No.
11-27; Ord. No. 11-36 § 1; Ord. No. 11-38; Ord. No. 11-40 § 1; Ord.
No. 11-42; Ord. No. 12-06; Ord. No. 12-10; Ord. No. 12-12; Ord. No.
12-20; Ord. No. 12-25; Ord. No. 12-27; Ord. No. 12-31; Ord. No.
13-01; Ord. No. 13-03; Ord. No. 13-08; Ord. No. 13-19; Ord. No.
13-24; Ord. No. 13-35; Ord. No. 13-41; Ord. No. 13-43; Ord. No.
14-11; Ord. No. 14-15; Ord. No. 2014-22; Ord. No. 2014-23; Ord. No.
2014-35; Ord. No. 2014-46; Ord. No. 2014-49; Ord. No. 2015-01;
Ord. No. 2015-11; Ord. No. 2015-15; Ord. No. 2015-18; Ord. No.
2015-24; Ord. No. 2015-31; Ord. No. 2015-41; Ord. No. 2016-05;
Ord. No. 2016-18 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-21 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-25 §§ 1,3;
Ord. No. 2016-30 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-39 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2017-07;
Ord. No. 2017-12; Ord. No. 2017-18; Ord. No. 2017-27; Ord. No.
2017-41; Ord. No. 2017-44; Ord. No. 2018-13]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as Handicapped Parking Spaces. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards or plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Abbott Avenue North 1 At northeast corner of
intersection with
Benson Avenue.
Abbott Avenue South 1 South side of Abbott
Avenue 38 feet west of
the intersection of
Abbott Avenue and
Benson Avenue.
Abbott Avenue South 1 South side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 114
feet east of the
southeast intersection
of Abbott Avenue and
Whitefield Avenue.
Abbott Avenue
Abbott Avenue North 1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 93
feet east of the
northeast intersection of
Abbott Avenue and New
Jersey Avenue.
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.1
1:288
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Abbott Avenue North 1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 10
feet east of the fire
hydrant located in front
of 77 Abbott Avenue.
Abbott Avenue
Abbott Avenue North 1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 123
feet west of the
northwest intersection
of Abbott Avenue and
Pilgrim Pathway.
Abbott Avenue
Abbott Avenue
Abbott Avenue South 1 South side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 90
feet east of the
southeast intersection
of Abbott Avenue and
Benson Avenue.
Anelve Avenue
[Repealed
10-22-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-31]
Anelve Avenue West 1 West side of Anelve
Avenue beginning 230
feet north of the
southwest intersection
of Anelve Avenue and
Monroe Avenue.
Beach Avenue West 2 West side of Beach
Avenue beginning 25
feet north of the
northwest intersection
of Beach Avenue and
Main Avenue.
Beach Avenue West 1 West side of Beach
Avenue beginning 150
feet north of the
northwest intersection
of Seaview Avenue and
Beach Avenue.
§ 7-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:289
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Benson Avenue East 1 East side of Benson
Avenue beginning 25
feet south of the
southeast intersection
of Mt. Hermon Way and
Benson Avenue.
Broadway South 1 Beginning 52 feet west
of the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of
Ocean Avenue and
extending 12 feet
westerly therefrom.
Broadway
Broadway South 1 South side of Broadway
beginning 76 feet east
of the southeast
intersection of
Broadway and
Pennsylvania Avenue.
Central Avenue West 1 Beginning 35 feet south
of the southerly curbline
of Main Avenue and
extending 22 feet
southerly therefrom.
Central Avenue East 1 East side of Central
Avenue 25 feet north of
the intersection of
Central Avenue and Olin
Street.
Central Avenue West 1 West side of Central
Avenue beginning 25
feet north of the
northwest intersection
of Broadway and
Central Avenue.
Central Avenue
Clark Avenue South 1 South side of Clark
Avenue 100 feet east of
the intersection of Clark
Avenue and Benson
Avenue.
Clark Avenue
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.1
1:290
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Clark Avenue South 1 South side of Clark
Avenue beginning 137
feet west of the
southwest intersection
of Clark Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Cookman Avenue South 1 South side of Cookman
Avenue 70 feet west of
the southwest
intersection of
Pennsylvania Avenue
and Cookman Avenue.
Cookman Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-04]
Cookman Avenue
Delaware Avenue West 1 West side of Delaware
Avenue 89 feet south of
the intersection of
Delaware Avenue and
Embury Avenue.
Delaware Avenue West 1 West side of Delaware
Avenue 77 feet north of
the northwest
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Delaware
Avenue.
Delaware Avenue West 1 West side of Delaware
Avenue 48 feet south of
the southwest
intersection of Embury
Avenue and Delaware
Avenue.
Drummond Avenue West 2 West side of Drummond
Avenue beginning 25
feet south of the
southwest intersection
of Drummond Avenue
and Bangs Avenue.
§ 7-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:291
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Embury Avenue North 1 North side of Embury
Avenue beginning 50
feet east of the
northeast intersection of
Embury Avenue and
Atkins Avenue.
Embury Avenue South 1 South side of Embury
Avenue 129 feet east of
the intersection of
Embury Avenue and
Beach Avenue.
Embury Avenue South 1 South side of Embury
Avenue 179 feet west of
the intersection of
Embury Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Embury Avenue
[Repealed
6-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Embury Avenue South 1 South side of Embury
Avenue beginning 50
feet east of the
southeast intersection
of Embury Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Embury Avenue
[Repealed
5-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-12]
Fisher Avenue East 1 East side of Fisher
Avenue beginning 223
feet north of the
northeast intersection of
Fisher Avenue and Heck
Avenue.
Franklin Avenue
[Repealed
9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-28]
Franklin Avenue
[Repealed
9-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-26]
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.1
1:292
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Heck Avenue North 1 Beginning 35 feet south
of the southerly curbline
of Pilgrim Pathway and
extending 22 feet
southerly therefrom.
Heck Avenue South 1 South side of Heck
Avenue 139 feet west of
the intersection with
Pilgrim Pathway.
Heck Avenue South 1 South side of Heck
Avenue 70 feet east of
the intersection of Heck
Avenue and Atkins
Avenue.
Heck Avenue
Heck Avenue South 1 South side of Heck
Avenue beginning 25
feet west of the
southwest intersection
of Heck Avenue and
Pilgrim Pathway.
Heck Avenue South 1 South side of Heck
Avenue beginning 53
feet east of the
southeast intersection
of Heck Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Inskip Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-04]
Lawrence Avenue
Main Avenue South 1 Beginning 35 feet east
of the eastern curbline
of Central Avenue and
extending 12 feet
easterly therefrom.
Main Avenue South 1 Beginning 35 feet west
of the westerly curbline
of Central Avenue and
extending 12 feet
westerly therefrom.
§ 7-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:293
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Main Avenue South 1 Beginning 35 feet north
of the northerly curbline
of Main Avenue and
extending 12 feet
northerly therefrom.
Main Avenue North 1 Beginning 35 feet east
of the easterly curbline
of Pilgrim Pathway and
extending 12 feet
easterly therefrom.
Main Avenue South 1 Beginning 35 feet east
of the easterly curbline
of Pilgrim Pathway and
extending 12 feet
easterly therefrom.
Main Avenue
McClintock Street North 1 North side of
McClintock Street
beginning 45 feet east
of the northeast
intersection of
McClintock Street and
Central Avenue.
Milton Avenue South 1 South side of Milton
Avenue beginning 215
feet east of the
southwest intersection
of Milton Avenue and
Neptune Boulevard.
Monroe Avenue North 1 North side of Monroe
Avenue beginning 25
feet west of the
northwest intersection
of Monroe Avenue and
State Highway #35.
Mt. Carmel Way North 1 North side of Mt.
Carmel Way beginning
48 feet west of the
northeast intersection of
Mt. Carmel Way and
Pilgrim Pathway.
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.1
1:294
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Mt. Hermon Way North 1 North side of Mt.
Hermon Way beginning
25 feet west of the
northwest intersection
of Mt. Hermon Way and
Whitefield Avenue.
Mt. Hermon Way
Myrtle Avenue East 1 East side of Myrtle
Avenue 130 feet south
of the intersection of
Myrtle Avenue and West
Lake Avenue.
New York Avenue East 1 East side of New York
Avenue beginning 25
feet south of the
intersection of Heck
Avenue.
New York Avenue West 1 West side of New York
Avenue beginning 25
feet north of the
northwest intersection
of New York Avenue and
Abbott Avenue.
New York Avenue West 1 West side of New York
Avenue beginning 50
feet south of the
southwest intersection
of New York Avenue and
Franklin Avenue.
New York Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-04]
Ocean Avenue East 2 Beginning 35 feet north
of the prolongation of
the northerly curbline of
Embury Avenue and
extending 24 feet
northerly therefrom.
§ 7-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:295
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Ocean Avenue East 2 Beginning 35 feet north
of the prolongation of
the northerly curbline of
Main Avenue and
extending 24 feet
northerly therefrom.
Ocean Avenue East 2 Beginning 35 feet north
of the prolongation of
the northerly curbline of
Ocean Pathway
(eastbound roadway)
and extending 24 feet
northerly therefrom.
Ocean Avenue East 2 Beginning 35 feet north
of the prolongation of
the northerly curbline of
Seaview Avenue and
extending 24 feet
northerly therefrom.
Ocean Avenue East 2 Beginning 35 feet north
of the prolongation of
the northerly curbline of
Heck Avenue and
extending 24 feet
northerly therefrom.
Ocean Avenue West 1 West side of Ocean
Avenue beginning 62
feet north of the
northwest intersection
of Ocean Avenue and
Embury Avenue.
Olin Street North 1 North side of Olin
Street beginning 68 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Olin
Street and Beach
Avenue.
Oxonia Avenue East 1 East side of Oxonia
Avenue beginning 50
feet south of the
southeast intersection
of Oxonia Avenue and
Asbury Avenue.
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.1
1:296
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Pilgrim Pathway East 1 Beginning 35 feet north
of the northerly curbline
of Pitman Avenue and
extending 22 feet
northerly therefrom.
Pilgrim Pathway West 4 West side of Pilgrim
Pathway beginning 110
feet south of the
southwest intersection
of Pilgrim Pathway and
Bath Avenue and
continuing 95 feet.
Pitman Avenue South 1 Beginning 35 feet west
of the westerly curbline
of Ocean Avenue and
extending 22 feet
westerly therefrom.
Pitman Avenue South 1 South side of Pitman
Avenue 25 feet east of
the intersection with
Central Avenue.
Seaview Avenue
Stockton Avenue South 1 South side of Stockton
Avenue 71 feet west of
the intersection with
New York Avenue.
Stockton Avenue South 1 South side of Stockton
Avenue beginning 25
fee east of the southeast
intersection of Stockton
Avenue and Lawrence
Avenue.
Surf Avenue South 1 At southeast corner of
intersection with Beach
Avenue.
Surf Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-04]
Surf Avenue
§ 7-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.1
1:297
Name of Street Side Spaces Locations
Union Avenue West 1 West side of Union
Avenue beginning 25
feet south of the
southwest intersection
of Union Avenue and
Corlies Avenue
Webb Avenue North 1 North side of Webb
Avenue 25 feet west of
the intersection of Webb
Avenue and New York
Avenue.
Webb Avenue North 1 North side of Webb
Avenue beginning 130
feet east of the
northeast intersection of
Webb Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Webb Avenue South 1 South side of Webb
Avenue beginning 53
feet west of the
southwest intersection
of Webb Avenue and
Beach Avenue
West Lake Avenue North 2 North side of West Lake
Avenue beginning 102
feet east of the
northeast intersection of
West Lake and Fisher
Avenue.
§ 7-21.2. (Reserved)
§ 7-21.3. Vehicle Identification Required. [Ord. No. 95-28 § III]
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and marked
as being set aside for the physically handicapped on any public road,
avenue, pathway, street, way or terrace unless said vehicle shall have
affixed thereto an identification certificate or marker issued either by the
New Jersey Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and/or a local
certificate and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in
the vehicle. Parking in a handicapped space without the aforesaid vehicle
identification shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of space was
not for the physically handicapped.
§ 7-21.4. Temporary Placard. [Ord. No. 95-28 § IV]
§ 7-21.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.4
1:298
§ 7-21.5. Violation; Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-28 § V; Ord. No. 96-24
§ I; Ord. No. 2017-25]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section by parking
a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without a special vehicle
identification card or license, or any other violation of this section involving
handicapped parking, shall be liable upon conviction for a fine of $250.00
for the first offense, and for subsequent offenses a minimum fine of $250.00
and up to a maximum fine of $2,000.00 and up to 90 days community service
on such terms and in such form as the Court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.
§ 7-21.6. Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles. [Ord. No. 95-28 § VI]
§ 7-21.7. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences.
[Ord. No. 03-22 § 1]
a. Chief of Police to Issue Temporary Placard. The Chief of Police shall
issue to any person who has temporarily lost the use of one (1) or more
limbs or is temporarily disabled as to be unable to ambulate without the
aid of an assisting device or whose mobility is otherwise temporarily
limited, as certified by a physician with a plenary license to practice
medicine and surgery in this State or a bordering State, a temporary
placard of not more than six (6) months duration. Each temporary
handicapped placard issued under the provisions of this subsection
shall set forth the date upon which it shall become invalid.
A physician's certificate shall be necessary to establish the qualifying
status of each applicant. The certification shall be provided on the
standard form approved by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
The placard may be renewed one (1) time for a period of not more than
six (6) months' duration. It shall be displayed on the motor vehicle used
by the temporarily handicapped person.
b. Fee for Issuance of Temporary Placard. The Chief of Police shall collect
a fee of four ($4.00) dollars payable to the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles upon issuance of the temporary placard pursuant to this
subsection 7-21.4b.
a. An eligible handicapped person may request a law enforcement officer
to arrange for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle which is
parked unlawfully in a parking space or zone which is restricted for use
by a handicapped person. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
motor vehicle to pay the reasonable cost for the removal and for any
storage which may result from the removal.
b. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a person under
this section shall be in addition to any other penalty assessed against
the person.
§ 7-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:299
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a restricted parking
space in front of a residence occupied by a handicapped person, which
person has been issued a windshield placard or wheelchair symbol
license plates for the vehicle owned by the handicapped person.
b. Statutory Authority. This section is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:197.6, which does confer upon the Township a right to establish
resident handicapped on-street parking in order to preserve and
safeguard the public health, safety and welfare.
c. Criteria. This section shall be subject to the following criteria:
1. The person requesting on-street resident handicapped parking is a
resident of the Township of Neptune who shall make an application
to the Neptune Township Police Department. The application shall
be reviewed and approved or denied by the Chief of Police of
Neptune Township. A negative determination may be appealed to
the Township Committee if a request from the resident aggrieved is
received within twenty (20) days from the date of the Chief's
declination.
2. The person requesting on-street resident handicapped parking has
been issued a wheelchair symbol license plate or windshield
placard issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, which
is properly displayed in either the handicapped resident's vehicle,
or the vehicle of an immediate family member who also resides at
that location.
3. The subject property passes an on-site inspection by the Neptune
Township Police Department, which inspection shall determine
whether handicapped parking will interfere with the normal flow of
traffic or whether there is immediate adjacent off-street parking
available to the applicant.
4. The applicant complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138(o)
and 39:4-197.6 regulating handicapped parking in designated
spaces.
5. Upon approval of an applicant's request for handicapped on-street
parking, the Township will enact an appropriate ordinance
designating the name of the subject street, the side of that street
where the resident resides, and a description of the allowed
parking area in front of the subject residence. Such designation
shall be within the property lines of the subject residence, but
otherwise shall be subject to the discretion of the Neptune
Township Police Department and the Chief of Police.
6. A sign shall be installed specifically identifying the handicapped onstreet
parking space as being resident-handicapped parking only,
and a special permit shall be issued to the resident, which shall be
placed in the window of the subject vehicle or be available for
production, if requested by law enforcement, which indicates that
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:300
the applicant is a handicapped resident in possession of the
aforesaid special permit.
d. Fees. The fee for a Resident Handicapped Parking Permit shall be
$100.00.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person improperly parking in a properly
designated resident handicapped restricted parking space shall be
subject to the penalties under subsections 7-21.5 and 7-21.6 of this
chapter.35
f. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following
on-street locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in
front of private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards or plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle
Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No
other person shall be permitted in these spaces.
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-15]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 25 feet
west of northwest
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Central Avenue
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-18 § 1]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 25 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Lawrence
Avenue
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-27]
1 South side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 25 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Beach Avenue
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-41]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 87 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
35.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2014-32 established subsection 7-21.7. Ordinance amendments for
specific spaces are found below with each handicapped space.
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:301
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-33]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 137 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Central Avenue
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-33]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 30 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and New York
Avenue
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No. 2016-21 § 2; deleted by Ord. No.
2017-07]
Abbott Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-05]
1 North side of Abbott
Avenue beginning 170 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Abbott
Avenue and Central Avenue
Asbury Avenue [Added
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-22]
1 North side of Asbury
Avenue beginning 135 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of Asbury
Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Asbury Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-10]
1 South side of Asbury
Avenue beginning 71 feet
west of the southwest
intersection of Asbury
Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Asbury Avenue [Added
6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-1636]
Atlantic Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-39 § 1; repealed
7-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
36.Editor's Note: This entry is valid through 11-30-2019.
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:302
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Atlantic Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-22]
1 South side of Atlantic
Avenue beginning 29 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Atlantic
Avenue and Beach Avenue
Atlantic Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-26]
1 North side of Atlantic
Avenue beginning 113 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Atlantic
Avenue and Beach Avenue
Atlantic Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-13]
1 North side of Atlantic
Avenue beginning 25 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Atlantic
Avenue and Beach Avenue
Atlantic Avenue [Ord. No.
2014-35]
1 South side of Atlantic
Avenue beginning 168 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Atlantic
Avenue and Central Avenue
Bath Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-21 § 1]
1 South side of Bath Avenue
beginning 103 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Bath Avenue and Central
Avenue
Bath Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-45; deleted by Ord. No. 2016-18 § 3]
Beach Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-21 § 1]
1 West side of Beach Avenue
beginning 125 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Beach Avenue and
Seaview Avenue
Beach Avenue [Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-28]
1 West side of Beach Avenue
beginning 145 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Beach Avenue and
Seaview Avenue
Beach Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-41; deleted by Ord. No. 2018-02]
Benson Avenue [Added
5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
1 East side of Benson Avenue
beginning 48 feet north of
the northeast intersection
of Benson Avenue and Mt.
Hermon Way
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:303
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Benson Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-10]
1 West side of Benson Avenue
beginning 75 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Benson Avenue and
Abbott Avenue
Benson Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-26]
1 West side of Benson Avenue
beginning 32 feet south of
the southwest intersection
of Benson Avenue and
Embury Avenue
Broadway [Ord. No.
2017-07]
1 North side of Broadway
(next to median) beginning
83 feet east of the
northeast intersection of
Broadway and Central
Avenue
Broadway [Ord. No.
2015-01]
1 North side of Broadway
beginning 77 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Broadway and Delaware
Avenue
Broadway [Ord. No.
2018-12]
1 North side of Broadway
beginning 49 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Broadway and New
Jersey Avenue
Broadway [Ord. No.
2016-21 § 2]
1 North side of Broadway
beginning 89 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Broadway and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Broadway [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-37]
1 South side of Broadway
beginning 47 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Broadway and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Broadway [Ord. No.
2015-31]
1 South side of Broadway
beginning 30 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Broadway and New
Jersey Avenue
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:304
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Central Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-15]
1 West side of Central Avenue
beginning 30 feet south of
the southwest intersection
of Central Avenue and
Cookman Avenue
Clark Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-11]
1 South side of Clark Avenue
beginning 145 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Clark Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Cookman Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-27; repealed
10-22-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-31]
Cookman Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-18]
1 South side of Cookman
Avenue beginning 74 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Cookman
Avenue and New York
Avenue
Embury Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-18; repealed
10-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-33]
Embury Avenue [Added
6-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
1 North side of Embury
Avenue beginning 25 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of New York
Avenue and Embury Avenue
Embury Avenue [Added
5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
1 South side of Embury
Avenue beginning 78 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Embury
Avenue and Central Avenue
Franklin Avenue [Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-28]
1 North side of Franklin
Avenue beginning 39 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of Franklin
Avenue and Benson Avenue
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:305
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Franklin Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-01]
1 North side of Franklin
Avenue beginning 60 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of Franklin
Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-25 § 2]
1 South side of Heck Avenue
beginning 97 feet west of
the southwest intersection
of Heck Avenue and New
York Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-30 § 1]
1 South side of Heck Avenue
beginning 92 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Heck Avenue and
Whitefield Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-27]
1 South side of Heck Avenue
beginning 25 feet west of
the southwest intersection
of Heck Avenue and
Delaware Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-18]
1 North side of Heck Avenue
beginning 60 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Heck Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-21]
1 South side of Heck Avenue
beginning 103 feet west of
the southwest intersection
of Heck Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-41]
1 South side of Heck Avenue
beginning 30 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Heck Avenue and
Whitefield Avenue
Heck Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-48; repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:306
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Inskip Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-07]
1 South side of Inskip Avenue
beginning 35 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Inskip Avenue and
Whitefield Avenue
Lake Avenue [Added
11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-32]
1 West side of Beach Avenue
beginning 109 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Beach Avenue and
Seaview Avenue
Lake Avenue [Added
11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-32]
1 West side of Beach Avenue
beginning 10 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Beach Avenue and Spray
Avenue
Lawrence Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-10; repealed
5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
Lawrence Avenue [Added
6-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
1 East side of Lawrence
Avenue beginning 52 feet
south of the southeast
intersection of Lawrence
Avenue and Abbott Avenue
Lawrence Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-39 § 1]
1 East side of Lawrence
Avenue beginning 25 feet
north of the northeast
intersection of Lawrence
Avenue and Main Avenue
Lawrence Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-43]
1 East side of Lawrence
Avenue beginning 89 feet
south of the southeast
intersection of Main Avenue
and Lawrence Avenue
Main Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-33; repealed
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-22]
Main Avenue [Added
10-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
1 North side of Main Avenue
beginning 122 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Main Avenue and Central
Avenue
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:307
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Main Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-04]
1 North side of Main Avenue
beginning 25 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of Main Avenue and
Lawrence Avenue
Main Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-13; repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
Main Avenue [Added
11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-32]
1 South side of Main Avenue
beginning 79 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Main Avenue and Beach
Avenue
Main Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-26]
1 South side of Main Avenue
beginning 25 feet east (first
diagonal space) of the
southeast intersection of
Main Avenue and New
Jersey Avenue
McClintock Street [Ord.
No. 2015-18]
1 North side of McClintock
Street beginning 95 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of McClintock
Street and Beach Avenue
Mt. Carmel Way [Ord.
No. 2018-12; repealed
7-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Mt. Hermon Way [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
1 North side of Mt. Hermon
Way beginning 25 feet east
of the northeast
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and Lawrence Avenue
Mt. Hermon Way [Ord.
No. 2017-39]
1 North side of Mt. Hermon
Way beginning 115 feet
west of the northwest
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and New Jersey
Avenue
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:308
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Mt. Hermon Way [Added
11-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-36]
1 North side of Mt. Heron
Way beginning 52 feet east
of the northeast
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and New York Avenue
Mt. Hermon Way [Ord.
No. 2017-39]
1 South side of Mt. Hermon
Way beginning 50 feet east
of the southeast
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and Benson Avenue
Mt. Hermon Way [Ord.
No. 2016-21 § 2]
1 South side of Mt. Hermon
Way beginning 94 feet east
of the southeast
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and Benson Avenue
Mt. Hermon Way [Ord.
No. 2014-49]
1 South side of Mt. Hermon
Way beginning 55 feet east
of the southeast
intersection of Mt. Hermon
Way and Lawrence Avenue
Mt. Tabor Way [Ord. No.
2018-02; repealed
3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
Mt. Tabor Way [Ord. No.
2018-02; repealed
7-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Mt. Tabor Way [Ord. No. 2016-24; deleted by Ord. No. 2017-33]
New Jersey Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-41]
1 East side of New Jersey
Avenue beginning 50 feet
south of the southeast
intersection of New Jersey
Avenue and Broadway
New York Avenue [Added
3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
1 East side of New York
Avenue beginning 64 feet
north of the northeast
intersection of New York
Avenue and Mt. Hermon
Way
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:309
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
New York Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-05]
1 West side of New York
Avenue beginning 50 feet
north of the northwest
intersection of New York
Avenue and Mt. Tabor Way
Ocean Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-44]
1 West side of Ocean Avenue
beginning 25 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Pathway
Ocean Avenue [Added
5-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
1 West side of Ocean Avenue
beginning 25 feet north of
the northwest intersection
of Ocean Avenue and
Seaview Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Ord. No. 2017-12; deleted by Ord. No. 2018-26]
Ocean Pathway [Ord. No. 2015-48; deleted by Ord. No. 2018-16]
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Ord. No. 2015-45;
repealed 6-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
Pilgrim Pathway [Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-28]
1 East side of Pilgrim
Pathway beginning 70 feet
south of the southeast
intersection of Pilgrim
Pathway and McClintock
Street
Pilgrim Pathway [Added
11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-32; repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
Pitman Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-01]
1 North side of Pitman
Avenue beginning 43 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Pitman
Avenue and Beach Avenue
Pitman Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-24]
1 North side of Pitman
Avenue beginning 112 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Pitman
Avenue and Central Avenue
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-21.7
1:310
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Pitman Avenue [Added
9-9-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-24]
1 South side of Pitman
Avenue beginning 50 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Pitman
Avenue and Central Avenue
Pitman Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-44; repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
Seaview Avenue [Ord.
No. 2018-02; repealed
7-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Seaview Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-24; repealed
11-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-36]
Seaview Avenue [Added
5-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
1 North side of Seaview
Avenue beginning 160 feet
east of the northeast
intersection of Seaview
Avenue and Central Avenue
Seaview Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-30]
1 South side of Seaview
Avenue at southwest corner
intersection of Seaview
Avenue and Ocean Avenue
Stockton Avenue [Added
10-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
1 South side of Stockton
Avenue beginning 75 feet
east of the southeast
intersection of Stockton
Avenue and Benson Avenue
7th Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-44]
1 North side of 7th Avenue
beginning 50 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of 7th Avenue and State
Highway 35 (adjacent to
1323 7th Avenue)
Spray Avenue [Added
9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-26]
1 North side of Spray Avenue
beginning 50 feet west of
the northwest intersection
of Spray Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.7
1:311
§ 7-22. CHANNELIZATION. [Ord. No. 00-28 § 1]
The locations described are hereby designated for channelization.
Name of Street Location
Neptune Boulevard Between State Highway 33 and West Bangs
Avenue.
Name of Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Spray Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-24]
1 South side of Spray Avenue
beginning 24 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Spray Avenue and Beach
Avenue
Spray Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-01]
1 South side of Spray Avenue
beginning 115 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Spray Avenue and Beach
Avenue
Surf Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-10]
1 South side of Surf Avenue
beginning 40 feet east of
the southeast intersection
of Surf Avenue and Beach
Avenue
Tenth Avenue [Ord. No.
2018-16]
1 North side of 10th Avenue
beginning 222 feet east of
the northeast intersection
of 10th Avenue and Atkins
Avenue
Webb Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-13; repealed
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-22]
Webb Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-25 § 2]
1 South side of Webb Avenue
beginning 154 feet west of
the southwest intersection
of Webb Avenue and Pilgrim
Pathway
Webb Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-39 § 1]
1 South side of Webb Avenue
beginning 90 feet west of
the southwest intersection
of Webb Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
Webb Avenue [Ord. No. 2015-31; deleted by Ord. No. 2017-18]
§ 7-21.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-23
1:312
§ 7-23. KNOX HILL TOWNHOMES.
§ 7-23.1. General Parking. [Ord. No. 03-22 § 1]
§ 7-23.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 03-22 § 1]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Frankfort Avenue and Graham Avenue Graham Avenue
Frankfort Avenue and Knox Boulevard Frankfort Avenue
Lexington Avenue and Frankfort Avenue Frankfort Avenue
Louisville Avenue and Lexington Avenue Lexington Avenue
Louisville Avenue and Upper Louisville
Avenue
Upper Louisville Avenue
§ 7-23.3. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 03-22 § 1]
a. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines provided.
b. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Frankfort Avenue All All As indicated on site
plan*
Graham Avenue All All As indicated on site
plan*
Lexington Avenue All All As indicated on site
plan*
Louisville Avenue All All As indicated on site
plan*
Upper Louisville
Avenue
All All As indicated on site
plan*
*The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of
the Township Clerk.
a. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway m.p.h. Limits
Frankfort Avenue 20 Entire length
Graham Avenue 20 Entire length
§ 7-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23.3
1:313
§ 7-23.4. Tow-Away Zones. [Ord. No. 03-22 § 1]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-24. MID-BLOCK PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS. [Ord. No. 04-54 § 1;
Ord. No. 05-14 § 1]
The locations described are designated for Mid-Block Pedestrian Crossings.
Name of Street Location
Neptune Boulevard From a point 425 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Heck Avenue to a point 10 feet southerly
therefrom.
§ 7-25. HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGE STOPS. [Ord. No. 10-27 §§ 2, 3]
The locations described are hereby designated as Horse Drawn Carriage
Stops. No vehicle other than a horse drawn carriage shall be permitted to
occupy said locations during the times indicated:
Name of Street Hours Location
Central Avenue 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
daily May 1 to September
30.
10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
weekends only October 1
to April 30.
25 feet north of northwest
corner of Central Avenue
and eastbound Ocean
Pathway
§ 7-26. MUNICIPAL OWNED PROPERTY—PARKING PROHIBITED.
[Ord. No. 10-25 § 1; Ord. No. 11-28]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any portion of property
owned by the Township of Neptune herein described.
Name of Roadway m.p.h. Limits
Lexington Avenue 20 Entire length
Louisville Avenue 20 Entire length
Upper Louisville Avenue 20 Entire length
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-23.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-26
1:314
Address of
Property Location
1701 Highway 35
South
Property bordered by Highway 35 to the east and
Seaview Circle on the north and south.
1611 Sewell Avenue Sewell Avenue 100 feet west of the Asbury Park
border.
§ 7-27. ELDRIDGE TRAILER PARK.
§ 7-27.1. General Parking. [Ord. No. 11-08]
§ 7-27.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 11-08]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein:
Intersection Stop Sign On:
Ashley Lane and Bradley Place Ashley Lane
Dean Street and Chad Drive Dean Street
Kelly Avenue and Ashley Lane Ashley Lane
a. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines provided.
b. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except as designated in Exhibit C of a
Stipulation of Settlement entered into between Garden Homes
Management, Corp. and Third Garden Park Limited Partnership v. the
Township of Neptune in the Superior Court of New Jersey, County of
Monmouth, Law Division, Docket No. MON-L-280-09 filed on August 5,
2010 and based on said Exhibit, signage will properly identify parking
and no-parking areas in the streets listed below: (Exhibit C may be
found on file in the Township offices.)
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Ashley Lane All All As indicated on Exhibit C of
Stipulation of Settlement
Bradley Place All All As indicated on Exhibit C of
Stipulation of Settlement
Chad Drive All All As indicated on Exhibit C of
Stipulation of Settlement
Dean Street All All As indicated on Exhibit C of
Stipulation of Settlement
Kelly Avenue All All As indicated on Exhibit C of
Stipulation of Settlement
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-27.2
1:315
Intersection Stop Sign On:
Kelly Avenue and Bradley Place Bradley Place
Kelly Avenue and Chad Drive Chad Drive
Kelly Avenue and Dean Street Dean Street
Kelly Avenue and Highway Route 33 Kelly Avenue
§ 7-27.3. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 11-08]
§ 7-27.4. Tow-Away Zones. [Ord. No. 11-08]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-28. WAYSIDE ASSOCIATES. [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
§ 7-28.1. General Traffic and Parking.
§ 7-28.2. Tow-Away Zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
a. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway m.p.h. Limits
Ashley Lane 15 Entire length
Bradley Place 15 Entire length
Chad Drive 15 Entire length
Dean Street 15 Entire length
Kelly Avenue 15 Entire length
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Township of
Neptune.
a. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines provided.
b. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets where no stopping or standing signs are installed and visible.
c. All vehicles must stop at intersections where stop signs are installed
and visible.
§ 7-27.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 7-28.2
1:316
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
Chapter 8
PARKING METERS, PARKING LOTS
§ 8-1. PARKING METERS.
§ 8-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 359 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
OPERATOR — Shall mean and include every individual who shall operate a
vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the
owner.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, firm, copartnership or
corporation.
STREET — Shall mean and include any public street, avenue, road, highway
or other public place located in the Township and established for the use of
vehicles.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is
operated upon rails or tracks.
§ 8-1.2. Parking Meter Zones Established. [Ord. No. 359 § 2; Ord.
No. 464 § 1; Ord. No. 486 § 1]
There are hereby established zones to be known as parking meter zones in
the following streets:
§ 8-1.3. Installation of Meters Required. [Ord. No. 359 § 3]
Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones.
a. Zone A. On the west side of South Main Street from Corlies Avenue to
the boundary line of the City of Asbury Park.
b. Zone B. On both sides of the Boulevard from South Main Street to the
boundary line of the City of Asbury Park.
c. Zone C. On the north side of Corlies Avenue from South Main Street to
the right of way of the New York and Long Branch Railroad.
d. Zone D. (Reserved)
e. Zone E. All that parking lot on the west side of Main Street, opposite the
Main Avenue entrance to Ocean Grove.
§ 7-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1.4
1:317
§ 8-1.4. Parking Meter Fees Established. [Ord. 359 § 4; Ord. No. 405
§ 1; Ord. No. 486 § 1]
§ 8-1.5. Duties of Township Committee. [Ord. No. 359 § 5]
The Township Committee is hereby authorized to provide for the
installation, regulation, control, operation and use of parking meters
provided for in this section and to maintain the meters in good workable
condition, and is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into a contract
for the purchase and installation of parking meters, together with extra coin
boxes, service kits, extra units and other accessories.
§ 8-1.6. Placement of Meters; Display of Information. [Ord. No. 359
§ 6]
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided
in subsection 8-1.2 hereof shall be placed upon the curb immediately
adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each
parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display
by a signal facing the street that the parking space adjacent to the meter
is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a
proper legend the legal parking time established and when operated shall
indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal
parking for each coin deposited, and on the expiration of such period, shall
indicate illegal or over-parking.
a. Parking meter Zones A, C, and D, the fees are hereby fixed as follows:
Time Fee
12 minutes 1 cent
24 minutes 2 cents
1 hour 5 cents
b. Parking meter Zone B, the fees are hereby fixed as follows:
Time Fee
1 hour 5 cents
2 hours 10 cents
5 hours 25 cents
c. Parking meter Zone E, the fees are hereby fixed as follows:
Time Fee
2 hours 5 cents
4 hours 10 cents
10 hours 25 cents
§ 8-1.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-1.7
1:318
§ 8-1.7. Marking of Metered Spaces. [Ord. No. 359 § 7]
Lines or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb or upon the
street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the
parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked
adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or
markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section
to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or park the vehicle
in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so
designated by such lines or markings.
§ 8-1.8. Placement of Vehicle in Metered Space. [Ord. No. 359 § 8]
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parking in such parking space shall
be so parked that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the
parking meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal
to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be
parked with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such meter.
§ 8-1.9. Deposit of Payment; Legal Parking Time. [Ord. No. 359 § 9]
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this section, the
operator of the vehicle shall upon entering the parking space, immediately
deposit or cause to be deposited a coin of the United States in such parking
meter in accordance with subsection 8-1.4, and failure to deposit such coin
shall constitute a breach of this section and shall subject such person to
the penalty described in subsection 8-1.11 or 8-1.12. Upon deposit of such
coin and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully
occupied by the vehicle for the period of time as indicated in subsection
8-1.4 hereof. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond
the maximum parking time limit fixed for the parking space, such vehicle
shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal
parking time and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period
of legal parking time in any such part of a street where any such meter is
located shall be a violation of this section.
§ 8-1.10. Violations Enumerated. [Ord. No. 359 §§ 10—13]
a. Overtime Parking. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions
of this section for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by such person to be
parked overtime or beyond the maximum period of legal parking time
established for any parking meter zone.
b. Parking When Time Expired. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the
provisions of this section for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or
be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter, which
meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying the
§ 8-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1.10
1:319
§ 8-1.11. Duties of Police Department. [Ord. No. 359 § 14]
It shall be the duty of the Police Officers of the Police Department acting in
accordance with the instructions of the Township Committee to report:
§ 8-1.12. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 359 § 15]
Every person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall upon conviction be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty
($50.00) dollars or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty (30)
days or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the Judge of
the Municipal Court.
parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time
prescribed for the parking space.
c. Deposits in Meters. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions
of this section to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
any slug, device or any substitute for a coin of the United States.
d. Damage to Meters. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions
of this section for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or
willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this section.
a. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has
been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section.
b. The State license number of such vehicle.
c. Any facts, a knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. Each Police
Officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that
the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this section
and instructing the owner to report at the Municipal Court of the
Township in regard to the violation. Each owner may within twenty-four
(24) hours of the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle, pay
to the Municipal Court of the Township a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one ($1.00) dollar provided,
however, that the violator has not violated any of the provisions of this
section on more than two (2) occasions during the thirty (30) days
immediately prior to the date of the act for which he receives
notification of a third violation. The failure of the owner to make
payment to the Municipal Court, or on receipt of notification of a third
violation within any period of thirty (30) days, shall render the owner
subject to the penalty hereinafter provided for the violation of the
provisions of this section.
§ 8-1.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-1.13
1:320
§ 8-1.13. Purpose of Meter Fees. [Ord. No. 359 § 16]
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are
hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and
control of traffic upon the public streets, and also the cost of supervision
and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created
hereby, and to cover the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection,
inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the
parking meters described herein.
§ 8-1.14. Collection from Meters; Deposit of Revenues. [Ord. No.
359 § 17]
The receipts and revenues collected from the parking meters shall be
handled in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 8-1.15. Chief of Police to Supervise. [Ord. No. 359 § 18]
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the maintenance of the parking
meters in good workable condition, the proper collection of all coin boxes,
and the enforcement of all provisions of this section.
§ 8-1.16. Supplementary Provision. [Ord. No. 359 § 19]
This section shall be deemed to be supplementary to other ordinances of the
Township, as an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and parking
in those zones provided for herein.
§ 8-2. MUNICIPAL COMPLEX PARKING LOT.
§ 8-2.1. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. No. 1405, Preamble]
a. Collection of coin boxes from the meters shall be made by the Police
Department and a record kept by the Chief of Police showing:
1. Date of collection.
2. Meter numbers included in collection.
3. Name and signature of Police Officer making collection.
b. The coin boxes shall be transmitted unopened to the custody of the
Township Treasurer at his office, or one (1) of the depositories approved
by the Township Committee designated by him and the police record of
the collection receipted for by the Township Treasurer.
c. The Township Treasurer shall cause the boxes to be opened, the
receipts checked and deposited in the general funds of the Township.
d. The Township Treasurer shall maintain a record of each collection
showing the date, and the amount collected from each meter by
number, and the total amount deposited.
§ 8-1.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.1
1:321
§ 8-2.2. Regulations Established; Statutory Authority. [Ord. No.
1405, Preamble]
The Township Committee of the Township of Neptune establishes the
following regulations for parking areas in the Municipal Complex Parking
Lot in accordance with Section 39:4-1 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated
and more particularly N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 (1) g.
§ 8-2.3. Specific Provisions; Restrictions. [Ord. No. 1405 §§ 1—4;
New]
§ 8-2.4. No Stopping or Standing at Any Time. [Ord. No. 00-25 § 1;
Ord. No. 06-45 § 1]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the
following driveways or roads adjacent to the Neptune Municipal Complex.
Name of Roadway Side Location
North driveway Both The driveway to the immediate
north of the Municipal Complex
a. The Township is experiencing problems controlling the use of the
Municipal Complex Parking Lot by vehicles used by persons having no
authorized business in the Municipal Building;
b. This unauthorized use of the Municipal Complex Parking Lot prevents
free access to the Municipal Building to persons having business with
the Township;
c. It is the purpose of the Municipal Building to provide a location for the
Township to conduct its business;
d. The Municipal Complex Parking Lot is particularly congested between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. in the months from September
through June.
a. The Municipal Complex Parking Lot will be used only by those
conducting business within the Municipal Building.
b. One hundred (100) parking spots will be reserved for all day parking by
employees of the Township doing business in the Municipal Building, in
addition to the spaces required for municipal vehicles. All vehicles
should be properly identified.
c. All employees authorized to park all day in the Municipal Complex
Parking Lot will display an official certificate prominently on the
dashboard of their car.
d. These restrictions will be in effect from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. during
the months of September through June.
§ 8-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-2.5
1:322
§ 8-2.5. Stop Sign. [Ord. No. 00-25 § 1]
No person shall cause their vehicle to enter onto a roadway without first
stopping and making careful observation before proceeding onto the
roadway.
Name of Roadway Limitation
North driveway Exit at Neptune Boulevard
§ 8-3. NEPTUNE HIGH SCHOOL.
§ 8-3.1. No Stopping or Standing at Any Time. [Ord. No. 954 § 1;
Ord. No. 1549 § 1; Ord. No. 99-40 § 1]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of
the following streets, driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent to the
Neptune High School.
Name of Roadway Side Location
Circle Entire
circumference
The circle that is in front of
entrance to Neptune High School
South driveway Both sides for
entire length
The driveway to the immediate
south of Neptune High School
§ 8-3.2. No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours. [Ord. No. 954 § 1;
Ord. No. 1549 § 2; Ord. No 99-40 § 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
streets, driveways, roads or parts thereof during the hours indicated,
adjacent to the Neptune High School.
Name of Roadway Side Hours Location
Neptune Boulevard West 7:00 a.m. –
3:00 p.m.
Neptune Boulevard
from the north driveway
all the way to the south
driveway directly in
front of Neptune High
School
§ 8-3.3. No Stopping or Standing. [Ord. No. 1549 § 3]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any of the following
areas designated as Fire Zones adjacent to the Neptune High School.
§ 8-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3.3
1:323
Name of Roadway Side Location
Circle Entire
circumference
Immediately in front of the
entrance to Neptune High School
East driveway (located
in front of Neptune
High School)
Both From the south driveway to the
circle immediately in front of the
gymnasium entrance
South driveway Both The driveway to the immediate
south of Neptune High School
§ 8-3.4. One-Way Roadways. [Ord. No. 1549 § 4; Ord. No. 99-40 § 1]
No person shall cause their vehicle to travel in a direction other than as
set forth below and as designated by road signs upon any of the following
streets, driveways, roadways or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune High
School.
Name of Roadway Direction Location
Circle Counterclockwise as
designated
Immediately in front of
entrance to Neptune
High School
East driveway (located
in front of Neptune
High School and
running parallel with
Neptune Boulevard)
Entering from the south
driveway going north on
the east driveway to the
circle
Immediately in front of
the administrative
offices
North entrance to the
circle
Westerly Entrance to the circle
from Neptune
Boulevard
South driveway to
west driveway to Heck
Avenue
The flow of traffic shall
be entering on the south
driveway from Neptune
Boulevard continuing to
the west driveway
exiting on Heck Avenue
South, and west
perimeter of Neptune
High School
South exit at circle Easterly Immediately in front of
entrance to Neptune
High School
Entrance to north
parking area from
Neptune Boulevard
Westerly Northeast end of
Neptune High School
§ 8-3.5. Limited Access. [Ord. No. 1549 § 5; New]
No person shall cause their vehicle to travel upon or park, stop or stand
their vehicle on any of the following streets, driveways or roads or parts
§ 8-3.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-3.5
1:324
thereof adjacent to the Neptune High School unless authorized as set forth
below. All vehicles shall be properly identified (Authorized Use).
Name of Roadway Authorized Use Location
South driveway to west
driveway to the north
driveway shall be
designated as limited
access for staff,
administration vehicles
and buses only
Staff and
administration vehicles
and buses
South driveway, Faculty
parking lot, west
driveway and west
parking areas
§ 8-3.6. No Student Picked Up or Dropped Off Beyond Designated
Points. [Ord. No. 1549 § 6]
No person shall cause their vehicle to enter onto any of the streets,
driveways, roads or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune High School for
the purpose of picking up or dropping off students.
Name of Roadway Authorized Use Location
South entrance Faculty and
administration vehicles
only
South entrance to south
driveway where
designated by signs
§ 8-3.7. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 1549 § 7]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any space
designated as Handicapped Parking.
Name of Roadway Location
East driveway (located in
front of Neptune High
School and running parallel
with Neptune Boulevard)
One (1) space as designated directly in
front of administration offices
West driveway One (1) space as designated in the rear of
gymnasium parking lot
Parking area of the north
end of the building on
Neptune Boulevard
Two (2) spaces in the southwest corner of
the parking area as designated
§ 8-3.8. No Left Turn. [Ord. No. 1549 § 8]
No person shall cause their vehicle to make a turn in violation of the
designated signs at the following locations:
§ 8-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3.8
1:325
Name of Roadway Limitation
South exit from circle No left turn exiting the circle immediately
in front of entrance to Neptune High School
onto Neptune Boulevard
§ 8-3.9. Stop Locations. [Ord. No. 99-40 § 1]
No person shall cause their vehicle to enter upon or cross an intersecting
street marked with a "STOP" sign unless they have first brought their
vehicle to a complete stop at the following locations:
Name of Roadway Location
South exit from circle Immediately in front of entrance to Neptune
High School onto Neptune Boulevard
West driveway At the intersecting road from Neptune
Middle School
West driveway exit At the intersection of Heck Avenue
§ 8-3.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 99-40 § 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than fifty ($50.00) dollars or
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both in the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court empowered to hear and
determine such violation.
Each day that the prohibited condition exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 8-4. NEPTUNE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL.
§ 8-4.1. Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Ord. No. 957 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets,
driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune Junior High
School.
Name of Roadway Side Location
Athletic fields South Behind Neptune Junior High
School in southeast direction
Front driveway (located
in front of Neptune
Junior High School)
a. North
b. South
Starting at easterly drive of Heck
Avenue extending the entire
length to the westerly drive of
Heck Avenue
§ 8-3.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-4.2
1:326
§ 8-4.2. Stopping and Standing Prohibited. (Ord. No. 957 § 2)
No parking, stopping or standing of a motor vehicle shall be permitted on
the following streets, driveways or roads.
Name of Roadway Side Location
Driveway between the
Gables and Neptune
Junior High Schools;
(located west of
Neptune Junior High
School and east of
Gables Elementary
School)
West Starting at west side of front
driveway and extending south 580
feet to the rear parking lot
(located at the south side of
Neptune Junior High School
behind gym
Driveway to Senior
High School; one way
west located behind
Neptune Junior High
School
Southeast Running perpendicular to
Neptune Boulevard and extending
west to the parking lot behind
Neptune Junior High School gym
§ 8-4.3. Permit Parking for Teachers. [Ord. No. 957 § 3]
No parking except by faculty members is permitted on the following streets,
driveways or roads. All vehicles shall be properly identified.
Name of Area Side Location
Teachers parking lot Northeast Immediately east of Neptune
Junior High School front driveway
and field
§ 8-4.4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 957 § 4; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than fifty ($50.00) dollars,
or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both, in
the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court empowered to hear and
determine such violation. Each day that the prohibited condition exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 8-5. NEPTUNE MIDDLE SCHOOL.
§ 8-5.1. No Stopping or Standing at Any Time. [Ord. No. 1550 § 1]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of
the following streets, driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent to the
Neptune Middle School.
§ 8-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5.1
1:327
Name of Roadway Side Location
Eastside driveway Both The driveway immediately to the
east of the Middle School
South driveway a. Both The driveway to the immediate
south behind the Middle School
b. Both Immediately in front of the athletic
field gate
c. Both The entrance area of the old
modular gate which serves as the
walkway to the athletic field
d. Both The area surrounding the
compound gate at the service
entrance
§ 8-5.2. No Stopping or Standing; Fire Zone. [Ord. No. 1550 § 2]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any of the following
areas designated as Fire Zones adjacent to the Neptune Middle School.
Name of Roadway Area Location
Eastside driveway Where
designated
The driveway immediately to
the east of the Neptune
Middle School
§ 8-5.3. One-Way Roadways. [Ord. No. 1550 § 3; Ord. No. 99-40 § 2]
No person shall cause a vehicle to travel in a direction other than as set
forth below and as designated by road signs upon any of the following
streets, driveways, roadways or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune
Middle School.
Name of Roadway Direction—Location
Eastside driveway Running southeasterly from Heck Avenue and
continuing in an easterly direction at the rear of
the Neptune Middle School to the entrance of
Neptune Boulevard
Parent drop-off parking
lot
Counter-clockwise from Heck Avenue exiting
back onto Heck Avenue at the north side of the
Middle School on Heck Avenue
§ 8-5.4. Limited Access. [Ord. No. 1550 § 4; New]
No person shall cause a vehicle to travel upon or stop or stand their vehicle
on any of the following streets, driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent
to the Neptune Middle School unless authorized as set forth below. All
vehicles must be properly identified.
§ 8-5.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-5.4
1:328
Name of Roadway Authorized Use Location
Entrance to Neptune
Middle School
Faculty,
administration
vehicles and
buses
Driveway immediately east of
the Middle School
§ 8-5.5. No Students Picked Up or Dropped Off Beyond Designated
Points. [Ord. No. 1550 § 5]
No person shall cause a vehicle to enter onto any of the designated streets,
driveways, roads or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune Middle School for
the purpose of picking up or dropping off students.
Name of Roadway Authorized Use Location
Entrance to Neptune
Middle School
Faculty and
administration
vehicles only
Driveway immediately east of
the Middle School
§ 8-5.6. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 1550 § 6; Ord. No. 99-50
§ 2]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any space
designated as Handicapped Parking.
Name of Roadway Location
South side parking lot
behind gymnasium
Seven (7) spaces in the southeast corner of
the lot as designated
Parent drop-off parking lot
on Heck Avenue
One (1) space in the southeast corner of the
parking lot
§ 8-5.7. Stop Locations. [Ord. No. 99-40 § 2]
No person shall cause their vehicle to enter upon or cross an intersecting
street marked with a "STOP" sign unless they have first brought their
vehicle to a complete stop at the following locations:
Name of Roadway Location
Eastside driveway exit From parent drop-off parking lot onto Heck
Avenue
Roadway intersection Intersection of the roadway running
easterly and parallel to the athletic fields,
and the rear exit drive of the High School
§ 8-5.8. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1550 § 7; Ord. No. 99-40 § 2]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than fifty ($50.00) dollars or
§ 8-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5.8
1:329
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both in the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court empowered to hear and
determine such violation.
Each day that the prohibited condition exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 8-6. NEPTUNE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.
§ 8-6.1. No Stopping or Standing at Any Time. [Ord. No. 1551 § 1;
Ord. No. 97-40 § 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
streets, driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune
Elementary Schools specifically designated herein.
§ 8-6.2. No Stopping or Standing. [Ord. No. 1551 § 2; Ord. No. 97-40
§ 2]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any of the following
areas designated as a "No Stopping or Standing Zone" adjacent to the
Neptune Elementary Schools.
a. Green Grove School
Name of Roadway Side Location
Bus ramp Both The entire length of bus ramp, from
the North entrance on Green Grove
Road to the South exit on Green
Grove Road
Green Grove Road The entire length of Green Grove
Road from the North entrance to
the South exit
b. Shark River Hills
Name of Roadway Side Location
Brighton Avenue a. South of the entrance to the
front circle for a distance of 20 feet
as designated by the yellow curb
b. North of the front circle to the
corner of Ely Road
c. Summerfield School
Name of Roadway Side Location
North driveway North As designated
South entrance
driveway
South As designated
§ 8-5.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-6.2
1:330
§ 8-6.3. One-Way Roadways. [Ord. No. 1551 § 3; Ord. No. 96-14 § 1;
Ord. No. 97-40 § 3]
No person shall cause a vehicle to travel in a direction other than as set
forth below and as designated by road signs upon any of the following
streets, driveways, roadways or parts thereof adjacent to the Neptune
Elementary Schools.
a. Ridge Avenue School
Name of Roadway Location
Myrtle Avenue ramp South side of the entrance ramp north to the
intersection of Myrtle Avenue and Heck
Avenue
Ridge Avenue From the corner of Heck Avenue and Ridge
Avenue, south to the intersection of Ridge
Avenue at southern line of Embury Avenue
b. Green Grove School
Name of Roadway Location
Bus ramp The entire length of bus ramp, both sides,
from the North entrance on Green Grove
Road to the South exit on Green Grove Road
c. Summerfield School
Name of Roadway Location
South driveway; continuing
to the west driveway;
continuing to the north
driveway
Entire length of driveway including the
area directly in front of the modular
building as designated
d. Shark River Hills
Name of Roadway Location
Ely Road To the north of the school where designated
e. Gables School
Name of Roadway Location
Bus ramp The entire length of the bus ramp where
designated
a. Green Grove School
§ 8-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6.3
1:331
§ 8-6.4. Limited Access. [Ord. No. 1551 § 4; Ord. No. 96-14 § 2; Ord
No. 97-40 § 4]
No person shall cause a vehicle to travel upon or stop or stand on any of
the following streets, driveways or roads or parts thereof adjacent to the
Neptune Elementary Schools unless authorized as set forth below.
Name of Roadway Location
North driveway to bus ramp
driveway to south driveway
to Green Grove Road
Entering the front driveway from the
north entrance and exiting to the south,
counterclockwise as designated
North driveway of staff and
visitor parking lots
Entering from Green Grove Road, the
north driveway of staff and visitor
parking lots counterclockwise to second
lot and exiting at the southernmost
driveway on Green Grove Road
b. Summerfield School
Name of Roadway Direction
South driveway; west
driveway; north driveway
Entering on the south driveway
continuing to the west driveway and
continuing to the north driveway and
exiting onto Summerfield Road
c. Gables School
Name of Roadway Direction
Circle Counterclockwise around the center
island
d. Ridge Avenue School
Name of Roadway Direction
Myrtle Avenue ramp Counterclockwise (south entrance to
north exit)
e. Shark River Hills
Name of Roadway Direction
Bus ramp Counterclockwise (south entrance to
north exit)
a. Green Grove School
§ 8-6.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-6.4
1:332
§ 8-6.5. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 1551 § 5; Ord. No. 97-40
§ 5]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any space
designated as Handicapped Parking.
Name of Roadway Authorized Use Location
Bus ramp For buses only Driveway with
northernmost entrance on
Green Grove Road exiting
to the south on Green
Grove Road
North Driveway to
bus ramp driveway to
south driveway to
Green Grove Road
Faculty,
administration
vehicles and
buses
Driveways to and from
Green Grove Road
a. Ridge Avenue School
Name of Roadway Location No. of Spaces
West parking lot In the faculty parking
lot
One (1) space as
designated
b. Green Grove School
Name of Roadway Location
Staff and visitor parking lots Western end of lot as designated
c. Summerfield School
Name of Roadway Location No. of Spaces
Southside parking
area
Immediately south of
the school
One (1) space as
designated
d. Shark River Hills
Name of Roadway Location No. of Spaces
Ely Road Parking area As designated
e. Gables School
Name of Roadway Location No. of Spaces
North side of center
island
First parking space in
the parking lot
As designated
f. Summerfield Athletic Field
§ 8-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6.5
1:333
§ 8-6.6. Stop Sign. [Ord. No. 1551 § 8; Ord. No. 02-35 § 1]
No person shall cause their vehicle to enter onto a roadway without first
stopping and making careful observation before proceeding onto the
roadway.
§ 8-6.7. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1551 § 9]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than fifty ($50.00) dollars or
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both in the
discretion of the Judge empowered to hear and determine such violation.
Each day that the prohibited condition exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 8-7. PARKING ON THE PROPERTY OF THE JERSEY SHORE
MEDICAL CENTER.
Name of Roadway Location No. of Spaces
Visitor's parking lot Summerfield visitor's
parking lot
Two (2) spaces as
designated
a. Green Grove School
Name of Roadway Limitation
Green Grove Road Exit at Circle Drive and exit from faculty
parking lot onto Green Grove Road (as
designated by Stop signs)
b. Summerfield School
Name of Roadway Limitation
North driveway onto
Summerfield Road
Exit from north driveway onto Summerfield
Road as designated by Stop sign
c. Gables School
Name of Roadway Limitation
Gables Court Exit at Gables Court intersecting Stamford
as designated by Stop sign
d. Shark River Hills
Name of Roadway Limitation
Bus ramp (circle) Exit at Brighton Avenue
§ 8-6.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-7.1
1:334
§ 8-7.1. Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Ord. No. 662 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets,
driveways or roads, or parts thereof.
Name of Street Sides Location
Ambulance Drive a. Both Beginning at the northerly terminus
of Ambulance Drive and extending
southerly 100 feet
b. East Beginning at a point 462 feet from
the northerly curbline of N.J. Rt. #33
and extending northerly 62 feet
c. East Beginning at a point 126 feet from
the northerly curbline of N.J. Rt. #33
and extending northerly 240 feet
d. North Beginning at the easterly terminus of
Ambulance Drive and extending
westerly 280 feet
e. South Beginning at the easterly terminus of
Ambulance Drive and extending
westerly 565 feet
Auxiliary Road Both Between the easterly curb of
Wakefield Road and the westerly curb
of Ambulance Drive
Doctors' Drive Both Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of N.J. Rt. #33 and
extending northerly 20 feet
Main Drive a. East Beginning at a point 182 feet from
the northerly curbline of N.J. Rt. #33
and extending northerly 100 feet
b. West Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of N.J. Rt. #33 and
extending northerly 460 feet
§ 8-7.2. Parking Time Limited. [Ord. No. 662 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown, at any
time, between the hours listed, of any day upon any of the streets, driveways
or roads described.
§ 8-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7.2
1:335
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Ambulance Drive East 15
minutes
24
hours
Beginning at the westerly
terminus of Ambulance Drive
and extending northerly 72
feet
Main Drive a. East 15
minutes
24
hours
Beginning at a point 40 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of N.J. Rt. #33 and
extending for a distance of 50
feet
b. East 15
minutes
24
hours
Beginning at a point 168 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of N.J. Rt. #33 and
extending for a distance of 54
feet
§ 8-7.3. Penalty. [Ord. No. 662 § 3]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than fifty ($50.00) dollars, or
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge empowered to hear and determine such violation.
Each day that the prohibited condition exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 8-8. PARKING FACILITIES FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
§ 8-8.1. Statutory Authorization; Purpose. [Ord. No. 1098,
Preamble]
N.J.S.A. 52:32.11 et seq. supplementing N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 and N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.46 authorizes the Township Committee to provide for the
establishment and regulation of parking facilities for handicapped persons
as hereinafter defined.
The Township Committee has determined that the establishment and
regulation of parking facilities for handicapped persons will promote the
health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Township, particularly the
handicapped.
§ 8-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1098 § 1]
As used in this section:
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — Shall mean a physical impairment which confines
a person to a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or
insecurity, affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person
functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty
§ 8-7.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-8.2
1:336
coordination or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and
perceptiveness to the extent that the facilities are needed to provide for the
safety of that person.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS — Shall mean any building, structure, facility or
complex used by the general public or to which the general public is invited,
including, but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums,
schools, libraries, recreational facilities, public transportation terminals and
stations, factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels
or motels and public eating places whether privately or publicly owned,
except that this term shall not include private family residences, warehouse
storage areas and all buildings conducting hazardous occupancies. As used
herein, hazardous occupancies shall mean the occupancy or use of a
building or structure or any portion thereof, that involves highly
combustible, highly flammable, or explosive material or which has inherent
characteristics that constitute a fire hazard.
§ 8-8.3. Notice to Owners of Buildings. [Ord. No. 1098 § 2]
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent
to or used in conjunction with a public building shall within one hundred
eighty (180) days of notice thereof, provide for parking spaces for
handicapped persons in accordance with the guidelines herein set forth and
in a location and manner as determined by the Building Subcode Official.
Any parking facility with less than sixteen (16) existing spaces shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 8-8.4. Standards for Parking Spaces. [Ord. No. 1098 § 3]
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be constructed
according to the following guidelines:
a. A minimum of one (1%) percent of the total number of the parking
spaces but not less than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided in an
area of the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to
the building or buildings which the facility serves.
b. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the International Symbol of Access along with the
following wording:
"These spaces reserved for physically handicapped drivers."
c. Each space shall be twelve (12') feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or arm braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of
an automobile onto a level, paved surface suitable for wheeling or
walking.
d. Where possible such spaces shall be located so that the persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
§ 8-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8.4
1:337
§ 8-8.5. Parking of Unauthorized Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. No.
1098 § 4]
No person shall park a vehicle in any space designated and marked as being
set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking facility unless the
vehicle shall have affixed thereto an identification certificate or mark issued
either by the New Jersey Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and/
or a local certificate. Parking in a handicapped space without the aforesaid
vehicle identification shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of the
space was not for the physically handicapped.
§ 8-8.6. Issuance of Local Permit. [Ord. No. 1098 § 5]
The Township Clerk shall issue free of charge a Township Special Vehicle
Identification Card to any physically disabled person (resident or nonresident)
who may not qualify for such identification under N.J.S.A. 39:4-204
but does qualify under the definition of "Physical Handicap" in subsection
8-8.2. A physician's certificate shall be necessary to establish the qualifying
status of each applicant.
§ 8-8.7. Penalty. [Ord. No. 1098 § 6]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be liable
upon conviction, to a maximum penalty not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars
or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both.
§ 8-8A. REGULATIONS FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES IN
PARKING YARDS AND PARKING PLACES WHICH ARE OPEN TO
THE PUBLIC OR TO WHICH THE PUBLIC IS INVITED.
§ 8-8A.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1649 § I]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the parking of vehicles on public
property or on private property that is open to the public or to which the
public is invited by prohibiting parking in areas designated as handicapped
parking spaces except for use by persons who have been issued
handicapped person identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
or a temporary placard by the Chief of Police of a municipality in the State
of New Jersey and providing penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 8-8A.2. Authority. [Ord. No. 1649 § II]
This section is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 which does
confer upon the Township of Neptune the right to establish handicapped
parking spaces in order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety
and welfare.
e. Where applicable curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from parking area to sidewalk.
§ 8-8.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-8A.3
1:338
§ 8-8A.3. Property Affected. [Ord. No. 1649 § III]
The owners of all properties which contain parking yards and parking
spaces which are open to the public or to which the public is invited and
which require properly designated handicapped parking spaces pursuant
to approved site plans or as may have been otherwise authorized by the
Township of Neptune in accordance with its ordinances shall provide,
maintain and install signs and pavement markings for each parking space
reserved for use by handicapped persons. The cost of procurement and
installment of the signs and pavement markings shall be that of the owner.
The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation,
maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or
expense to the Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 8-8A.4. Signs. [Ord. No. 1649 § IV]
Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible sign
displaying the international symbol of access along with the following words
"Reserved Parking" together with notification of the penalties which may
be imposed for a violation. The layout, designing and position of the signs
erected shall be subject to review and approval by the Police Department.
§ 8-8A.5. Vehicle Identification Required. [Ord. No. 1649 § V]
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and marked
as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking facility
whether on public or private property unless said vehicle shall have affixed
thereto an identification certificate or marker issued either by the New
Jersey Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and/or a local certificate
and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in the vehicle.
Parking in a handicap space without the aforesaid vehicle identification
shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of the space was not for the
physically handicapped.
§ 8-8A.6. Temporary Placards. [Ord. No. 1649 § VI]
a. Chief of Police to Issue Temporary Placard. The Chief of Police shall
issue to any person who has temporarily lost the use of one (1) or more
limbs or is temporarily disabled as to be unable to ambulate without the
aid of an assisting device or whose mobility is otherwise temporarily
limited, as certified by a physician with a plenary license to practice
medicine and surgery in this State or a bordering State, a temporary
placard of not more than six (6) months' duration. Each temporary
handicapped placard issued under the provisions of this subsection
shall set forth the date upon which it shall become invalid.
A physician's certificate shall be necessary to establish the qualifying
status of each applicant. The certification shall be provided on the
standard form approved by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
§ 8-8A.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8A.6
1:339
§ 8-8A.7. Violation; Penalty. [Ord. No. 1649 § VII]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for the first offense and, for
subsequent offenses, a fine of at least one hundred ($100.00) dollars and up
to ninety (90) days' community service on such terms and in such form as
the Court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof. A mandatory
Court appearance is required under this section.
§ 8-8A.8. Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles. [Ord. No. 1649
§ VIII]
§ 8-9. NO STOPPING OR STANDING.
§ 8-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1313 Preamble; New]
Various approvals issued by the Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment
of the Township have required certain areas to be set aside as "No Stopping
or Standing" areas.
Certain structures and uses have not heretofore had areas designated as
"No Stopping or Standing" areas and it is desirable for the protection of life
and property for this restriction to be established.
§ 8-9.2. No Stopping or Standing Lanes Required by Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 1313 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.6, the owner or owners of property are hereby
required to establish and maintain "No Stopping or Standing" areas which
may have heretofore been required or in the future may be required by
the Planning Board and/or the Board of Adjustment of the Township in
The placard may be renewed one (1) time for a period of not more than
six (6) months' duration. It shall be displayed on the motor vehicle used
by the temporarily handicapped person.
b. Fee for Issuance of Temporary Placard. The Chief of Police shall collect
a fee of four ($4.00) dollars payable to the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles upon issuance of the temporary placard pursuant to
paragraph b.
a. An eligible handicapped person may request a law enforcement officer
to arrange for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle which is
parked unlawfully in a parking space or zone which is restricted for use
by a handicapped person. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
motor vehicle to pay the reasonable cost for the removal and for any
storage which may result from the removal.
b. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a person under
this section shall be in addition to any other penalty assessed against
the person.
§ 8-8A.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-9.2
1:340
connection with approval of use, improvement and/or development of
property in the Township.
§ 8-9.3. Existing Properties; Fire Lanes Required. [Ord. No. 1313
§ 2]
With respect to any shopping centers, commercial structures, places of
public assembly, multiple dwelling structures and groups, individual parks,
office buildings, hotels, motels, schools, condominiums, cooperative
housing, nursing homes, homes for the physically or mentally impaired, or
any property and structure used for purposes similar to the aforesaid, the
owner or owners of such property or properties upon which any of the
aforesaid activities take place for which "No Stopping or Standing" Lanes
have not heretofore been required and where practical shall designate
areas as "No Stopping or Standing" Lanes where such lanes shall be
required.
§ 8-9.4. Definition; Deviations. [Ord. No. 1313 § 3; New]
NO STOPPING OR STANDING AREAS — Shall mean a lane or zone not
more than fifteen (15') feet in width which runs from public streets or
rights of way to any improvement or structure and which may also run
alongside or abut such improvement or structure. Where strict enforcement
of this section may not be practicable, the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment may allow deviation in the location and establishment of "No
Stopping or Standing" Lanes.
§ 8-9.5. Regulations for "No Stopping or Standing" Lanes;
Markings. [Ord. No. 1313 § 4]
"No Stopping or Standing" Lanes shall be striped in yellow letters on paved
surfaces and bear the words "No Stopping or Standing Lane" area and in
either event shall also bear the words "No Parking or Obstruction." Curbs
on edges of "No Stopping or Standing" Lanes shall be painted yellow. The
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall provide the owner with
a sketch of the required markings and location of any required signs. The
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall require where practicable
metal signs setting forth the designation of "No Stopping or Standing" areas
so as to inform the public of their location. The markings shall be legible at
all times and shall be maintained by the owner or owners of such property.
§ 8-9.6. Considerations in Establishing "No Stopping or Standing"
Areas. [Ord. No. 1313 § 5]
In establishing and requiring "No Stopping or Standing" areas, the Planning
Board or the Board of Adjustment shall take into consideration the size,
type and location of building or buildings on the premises regulated, the
type of activity or activities, the number of parking spaces which may be
required by law, traffic patterns, existing means of ingress and egress, the
total area of the premises and area available for fire lanes and such other
§ 8-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-9.6
1:341
means of ingress to the structure or structures in the event of fire or other
emergency.
§ 8-9.7. Purpose of Fire Lanes; Emergency Access. [Ord. No. 1313
§ 6; New]
The purpose of establishing "No Stopping or Standing" Lanes is to allow
access to premises and structures in the event of a fire emergency for fire
fighting and emergency vehicles and equipment.
§ 8-9.8. Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Ord. No. 1313 § 7; New]
No person shall at any time park a vehicle or in any other manner obstruct
a driveway or any other area that has been designated as a "No Stopping or
Standing" Lane.
§ 8-9.9. Notification That a "No Stopping or Standing" Area Is
Required.
Upon notice from the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment an owner
or owners of property wherein a "No Stopping or Standing" Lane has not
heretofore been required shall confer with the Supervisor of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention in order to establish a Fire Lane in accordance with
this section. After the conference or in the event the owner does not so
confer, the Supervisor shall direct the establishment of the "No Stopping or
Standing" Lane.
§ 8-9.10. Written Notice of Specific Requirements; Appeal. [Ord. No.
1313 § 9]
The Supervisor shall give written notice to the owner or owners specifically
setting forth the location or dimensions of the required "No Stopping or
Standing" Lane. The notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The owner or owners may appeal from the requirements of the
notice by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Board of Fire
Commissioners for the District in which the property is located and such
Board of Fire Commissioners shall schedule a hearing thereon.
§ 8-9.11. Time for Compliance. [Ord. No. 1313 § 10]
In the event no such appeal is filed within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
date of the notice from the Supervisor, the owner or owners shall establish
the "No Stopping or Standing" Lane within sixty (60) days of the date of the
notice.
§ 8-9.12. Decision on Appeal. [Ord. No. 1313 § 11]
In the event an appeal is taken in accordance with the aforesaid to the
Board of Fire Commissioners and a decision is rendered requiring the
establishment of a "No Stopping or Standing" Lane, the Board of Fire
Commissioners shall give written notice of its decision by mailing the same
§ 8-9.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-9.12
1:342
by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner and the owner shall
within sixty (60) days of the mailing of the notice establish a "No Stopping
or Standing" Lane as required by the Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 8-9.13. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 1313 § 12-15; Ord. No.
06-19 § 1]
§ 8-9.14. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1313 § 16]
The Police Department of the Township is hereby authorized to enforce this
section.
§ 8-9.15. Towing; Payment of Costs and Storage. [Ord. No. 1313
§ 17; New]
The Police Department of the Township is hereby authorized to tow and
remove motor vehicles and all obstructions from any "No Stopping or
Standing" Lane. All such motor vehicles and/or other obstructions which are
so removed may be stored in an area and the cost of removal and storage
shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle and/or other obstruction and
the charges shall be paid prior to the release of the vehicle or obstruction.
Reasonable steps shall be taken to identify the owner of the vehicle or
vehicles or obstruction or obstructions removed, and to give the owner
notice, as soon as conveniently may be done, of the removal and storage of
such vehicle or obstruction.
§ 8-10. ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR PARKING LOT ACCESS
DRIVEWAYS.
a. Any person who shall at any time park a vehicle or in any other manner
obstruct a "No Stopping or Standing" Lane shall be liable to a fine of not
less than fifty ($50.00) dollars and not exceeding one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars together with court costs enforceable in the
Municipal Court of the Township.
b. Any owner or owners of property who fail to comply with the terms of
this section shall be liable to a fine of not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars
and not exceeding two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars a day together
with court costs enforceable in the Municipal Court of the Township.
c. In addition to the aforesaid any owner or owners in violation of this
section shall be subject to such legal and equitable relief as is allowed
by law in which case such owner or owners shall be responsible for the
payment of reasonable attorney fees and court costs together with all
other expenses incurred to enforce the provisions of this section.
d. All remedies and fines provided in this section shall be cumulative and
not in exclusion of each other.
§ 8-9.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-10.1
1:343
§ 8-10.1. Ingress Only. [Ord. No. 05-42 § 1]
Outbound vehicle movements from the following parking lot access
driveways shall be prohibited. (Driveway shall be ingress only):
Name of Street Location of Driveway
Asbury Avenue (C.R. 16) Asbury Avenue driveway to Whitesville
Commons (Block 185, Lots 7—10)
§ 8-10.2. Left Turn Prohibition Ingress and Egress. [Ord. No. 05-42
§ 1]
No person shall make a left turn to either enter or exit the following parking
lot access driveways:
Name of Street Location of Driveway
West Bangs Avenue (C.R.
17)
West Bangs Avenue driveway to Heritage
Commons (Block 254, Lot 1)
§ 8-11. PARKING FOR POLICE, EMERGENCY VEHICLES AND
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
§ 8-11.1. Parking Spaces Designated. [Ord. No. 2014-37]
§ 8-11.2. Violation; Penalty. [Ord. No. 2014-37]
a. Designated reserved parking spaces with reserved parking signs posted
shall be set aside for police and other emergency vehicles as well as
public employees at the municipal parking lot at Municipal Hall, 25
Neptune Blvd., Neptune Township, New Jersey. All spaces shall be
properly posted with signs concerning the reservation of parking and
all vehicles shall be properly identified either with vehicle markings or
in the case of public employees, parking permits placed in the window
of the vehicle.
a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of a minimum of $100.00 for the first offense, and for a
subsequent offense, a fine of at least $200.00 and/or up to ninety (90)
days community service on such terms and in such form as a court shall
deem appropriate or any combination thereof.
b. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall also
be subject to the unlawfully parked vehicle being removed and towed
and stored in an appropriate facility with the owner of the motor vehicle
paying the reasonable costs for the removal and for any storage which
may result from the removal. The assessment of removal and storage
costs against a person under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty assessed against the person.
§ 8-10.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 8-12
1:344
§ 8-12. PROHIBITION OF UNREGISTERED VEHICLES IN PARKING
YARDS AND PARKING PLACES.
§ 8-12.1. Parking of Unregistered Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2015-39]
Unless authorized by a sworn law enforcement officer, no person shall
operate, park, leave, allow to be in possession of a motor vehicle which
is unregistered or has a suspended registration in any parking yard, lot,
parking place or location, which is open to the public or to which the public
is invited, whether owned or maintained by a governmental entity or in
conjunction with any business or enterprise, whether public, quasi-public or
private.
§ 8-12.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2015-39]
§ 8-12.3. Removal and Impoundment of Vehicles in Violation. [Ord.
No. 2015-39]
Any Police Officer is authorized to order the removal of any unregistered
vehicle in violation of this section to a storage space or garage, and the
expense involved in such a removal and storage of the vehicle shall be borne
by the owner of the vehicle, except that the expense shall be borne by the
lessee of a leased vehicle.
§ 8-12.4. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 2015-39]
The violation of this section shall subject the person so convicted, or
pleading guilty, to a fine of $100.00 for an unregistered vehicle and $175.00
for a vehicle which has a suspended registration.
Chapter 9
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 9-1. GENERAL EMPLOYMENT POLICIES. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-2337]
a. Private property to which the public is not invited, such as residential
lots. However, private and quasi-public property, such as cooperative,
condominium, apartment complexes and mobile home park parking
areas shall be subject to the prohibition if agreed upon by the property
owner.
b. Motor vehicles which are exempted from registration under Title 39 of
the New Jersey Statutes, such as dealer inventory.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance amended in its entirety former Ch. 9, Personnel Policies,
adopted by Ord. No. 1035, as amended.
§ 8-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.1
1:345
§ 9-1.1. Employment Application Required.
Applicants seeking employment with the Township shall complete an
"Application for Employment" form supplied by the Business Administrator.
§ 9-1.2. Agreement to Abide by Personnel Policies.
§ 9-1.3. Medical Examination.
When the applicant has been conditionally hired, the Township shall make
an appointment for a medical examination and advise the doctor to return
the completed medical examination form directly to the Human Resources
Director for a final determination regarding the hiring.
§ 9-1.3A. Criminal Background Checks — Certain Positions.
If the job responsibilities for which the applicant was hired include handling
of money and/or entering a private dwelling or commercial establishment,
a criminal background check shall be performed. The applicant shall be
required to sign an Authorization for Release of Personal Information which
is included in the employment application. The applicant shall not
commence employment with the Township until the background check has
been completed and received by the Human Resources Director. A
conviction of any violation of the law or uniform code of military justice
other than minor traffic violations may cause the employment to be
rescinded at the discretion of the Township Committee.
§ 9-1.4. Resolution of Township Committee.
a. All applicants who have been hired shall receive a copy of the personnel
regulations of the Township and shall read and thereafter agree in
writing to abide by and conform to the policy, code of conduct,
requirements and restrictions contained therein and in this chapter.
b. The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall, for any
reason, be held to be inconsistent with any valid negotiated agreement,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter, but they
shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter
shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
c. Any applicant who does not agree in writing to abide by and conform to
these regulations shall be ineligible for employment and will be so
advised.
d. In the event that the provisions of this subsection are in conflict or are
inconsistent with any valid negotiated collective bargaining agreement
or employment contract, the terms of said agreement or contract shall
prevail.
§ 9-1.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-1.4
1:346
§ 9-1.5. Employee File.
The Human Resources Director will check all papers, etc., for completeness
and set up a personnel file for the employee. Only one personnel file shall be
maintained by the Township on an employee. Nothing of an adverse nature
shall be placed in an employee's file without attempting to attain his or her
initials thereon and a copy being given to the employee. A box to check
off agreement or disagreement will be provided, along with a place for the
employee's signature and date.
§ 9-1.6. Permanent, Full-Time Employees.
Permanent, full-time employees shall mean those employees who have
completed the probationary period and work a regular hourly week for
the department in which they are employed, earn more than the amount
required by the New Jersey Division of Pensions and Benefits, in each
quarter of the calendar year, and are otherwise eligible for benefits under
the New Jersey Division of Pensions and Benefits Retirement Programs and
the New Jersey State Health Benefits Program.
§ 9-1.7. Permanent, Part-Time Employees.
Permanent, part-time employees shall mean those employees who have
completed the probationary period and work a consistent schedule that is
on average less than the regular hourly week for the department in which
they are employed but more than 1,250 hours per year, and earn more than
the amount required by the New Jersey Public Division of Pensions and
Benefits to qualify for retirement benefits.
§ 9-1.8. Casual/Per-Diem Employees.
Casual/per-diem employees are defined as those employees who do not
work more than 1,250 hours per year and are not eligible to enroll in the
New Jersey State Health Benefits Program. If a casual employee becomes
a probationary or permanent employee in the same or a related position,
the time served as a casual employee shall be credited for permanency and
seniority purposes.
a. The applicant can only be employed by resolution adopted at the
discretion of the Township Committee. When a resolution employing
the applicant is adopted by the Township Committee, the applicant will
be notified by the Business Administrator to report to the Human
Resources Office for completion of the necessary formalities and
signing of any other documents required.
b. In the event that the Business Administrator determines that a position
must be filled immediately due to an emergency, the Administrator shall
have the right to hire an individual to fill said position on a temporary
basis contingent upon adoption of a resolution by the Township
Committee.
§ 9-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.9
1:347
§ 9-1.9. Probationary Period.
§ 9-1.10. Grant Employees.
"Grant employees" shall mean any employee hired in conjunction with a
specific program funded either in whole or in part by the federal, state, or
county governments. Said employee shall be hired in conformity with the
guidelines prescribed by the funding program and shall be entitled only to
those benefits as required by the program.
§ 9-1.11. Applicability of Provisions.
All casual, probationary and grant employees, and statutorily elected
officials are subject to the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise
may be provided by the Township Committee.
§ 9-1.12. Effect of Regulations on Elected Officials.
With regard to elected officials, it is understood that none of the provisions
of § 9-1 shall in any way reduce or limit the benefits received by elected
officials from those generally received by the full-time permanent
employees.
§ 9-1.13. Administration of Provisions.
Administration of this chapter shall be free of any personal or political
considerations.
a. All employees hired after the date of this chapter, except elected
officials, employees holding statutory positions, casual employees, or
those employees represented by a recognized collective bargaining
unit, shall serve a probationary period of not less than 90 days, nor no
more than one year unless the employee is terminated prior thereto by
resolution of the Township Committee.
b. At the end of the ninety-day probationary period, the employee shall
continue on probation until such time as the employee is designated as
a permanent employee or is terminated by resolution of the Township
Committee, but such probationary period shall not exceed a total of one
year unless specifically extended by a resolution of the Township
Committee. The anniversary date of all permanent full-time and
permanent part-time employees covered by this agreement shall be the
actual first date of continuous employment with the Township of
Neptune. If a casual employee becomes a probationary or permanent
employee in the same or a related position, the time served as a casual
employee, up to a maximum of one year, shall be credited for the
purpose of establishing the employee's anniversary date.
§ 9-1.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-1.14
1:348
§ 9-1.14. Continuation of Employment.
Continuation of employment shall be at the discretion of the Township
Committee and be subject to good behavior, satisfactory performance of
work, necessity for the performance of work, availability of funds and
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The Township Committee
shall terminate the services of an employee in accordance with the
procedure outlined in this chapter.
§ 9-1.15. Residency Preference.
§ 9-1.16. Powers and Authority of Township.
The Township hereby retains and reserves unto itself, without limitation, all
powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon it prior
to the adoption of this chapter by the laws and Constitution of the State
of New Jersey and of the United States, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the following rights:
a. It is the intent of this subsection to give a preference to qualified and
capable Neptune Township residents in the hiring process for new
employees in the Township of Neptune, accordingly, when the Township
attempts to employ an individual as a new hire to fill a position and has
been unable to fill the position, even though exercising diligent effort,
for a period of 14 days, the Township Committee may employ a
nonresident to fill the position provided the following criteria is
followed:
1. Diligent effort has been exercised which shall include posting on
Township social media accounts and on the Township's website.
2. A qualified, capable Neptune Township resident has not been
located to fill the position within the fourteen-day period.
3. The Business Administrator recommends to the Township
Committee the employment of a nonresident to fill the position
after the fourteen-day period.
4. In the event a nonresident is hired to fill the position, the employee
shall be requested, but not required, to become domiciled in the
Township of Neptune.
b. Grant employees may be exempt from the provisions of this subsection
provided the funding program does not allow for discrimination with
regard to residency. It shall be understood that to be considered for
permanent employment, a grant employee shall be required to comply
with the requirements of this section.
a. To the executive management and administrative control over the
Township government and its properties, facilities and the activities of
its employees by utilizing personnel, methods and means of the most
appropriate and efficient manner possible as may from time to time be
§ 9-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.16
1:349
§ 9-1.17. Limitation of Township's Powers.
The exercise of the foregoing powers, rights, authority, duties and
responsibilities of the Township, the adoption of policies, rules, regulations,
Code of Conduct, and practices in furtherance thereof, and the use of
judgment and discretion in connection therewith shall be limited only by the
specific and express terms of this chapter and then only to the extent such
specific and express terms hereof are in conformance with the Constitution
and laws of the State of New Jersey, and of the United States. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict the Township of its
rights, responsibilities and authority under N.J.S.A. 40 and 40A:1-1 et seq.
or any other national, state, county, or local laws or regulations.
§ 9-1.18. Termination of Employment by Township Committee.
The Township Committee reserves the right to terminate an employee
at any point of time in accordance with any ordinance adopted by the
Township Committee.
§ 9-1.19. Powers of Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall have the power to establish such rules
and regulations which are necessary for the routine administration or
implementation of this chapter. This authority to establish rules and
regulations shall in no way be administered so as to change the intent of this
chapter or to take away the ultimate authority of the Township Committee.
determined by the Township Committee; to make rules of procedure
and conduct, to use improved methods and equipment, to determine
work schedules and shifts, to decide the number of employees needed
for any particular time and to be in sole charge of the quality and
quantity of the work required; to make such reasonable rules and
regulations as it may from time to time be deemed best for the purposes
of maintaining order, safety and/or effective operation of the Township.
b. To hire all employees and, subject to the provisions of law, to determine
their qualifications and conditions for continued employment or
assignment and to promote, transfer, assign or retain employees in
positions within the Township.
c. To take any permissible disciplinary action, such as to suspend, demote,
discharge or take any other appropriate disciplinary action against any
employee for good and just cause according to law.
d. To lay off employees in the event of lack of work or funds or under
conditions where continuation of such work would be inefficient and
nonproductive.
e. The Township's rights with regard to all other conditions of employment
not reserved to make such changes as it deems desirable and necessary
for the efficient and effective operation.
§ 9-1.16 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-1.20
1:350
§ 9-1.20. Employees Not Directly Under Department Head or
Supervisor.
Any employee not directly responsible to a department head or supervisor,
but subject to this chapter, is under the direct supervision and authority of
the Business Administrator.
§ 9-1.21. Nondiscrimination.
The Township decrees that there shall be no discrimination against any
employee because of race, creed, color, religion, sex, national origin,
political affiliation or sexual orientation.
§ 9-1.22. Employment of Township Committee Members and
Relatives; Relatives of Local Government Agency or Authority
Members and Relatives of Department Heads, Supervisors or Other
Administrators.
During any Neptune Township Committee member's term and for a period
of one year next subsequent to the termination of office of such Committee
member, the Neptune Township Committee shall prohibit the following
employment or professional or business service practices:
a. No Township Committee member or relative of such Committee
member shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in
any business, transaction, or professional activity, unless such business,
transaction or professional activity is awarded by public bid;
b. Restrictions.
1. The Neptune Township Committee or any Committee member shall
not:
(a) Award any contract which is not publicly bid to such
Committee member and/or such member's relative;
(b) Allow such Committee member or relative of such Committee
member to represent, appear for or negotiate on behalf of any
other party before any board, commission, authority or
otherwise, unless such prohibition would otherwise be
permitted by law;
(c) Employ for compensation or without compensation, except
pursuant to open competitive examination in accordance with
Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, any former
Committee member or relative of such Committee member, for
any position within the Township of Neptune over which the
Township of Neptune has direct hiring authority; or
(d) Influence or attempt to influence the hiring, firing, promotion,
demotion or transfer of a relative of the Committee member
§ 9-1.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.22
1:351
who is employed or could potentially be employed by the
Township of Neptune or any other governmental entity in the
Township of Neptune.
2. The restrictions contained in this subsection shall also apply to any
business organization in which such Committee member or relative
holds an interest;
c. No Township Committee member shall use or attempt to use his official
position or influence to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages
for himself or others, including but not limited to relatives of such
Committee member;
d. No Township Committee member shall act in his official capacity in any
matter where such Committee member, a relative of such Committee
member or a business organization in which the Committee member
has an interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal
involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his objectivity
or independence of judgment;
e. No Township Committee member shall undertake any employment or
service, whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be
expected to prejudice his independence of judgment in the exercise of
his official duties;
f. No Township Committee member or his/her relative or business
organization in which he has an interest shall solicit or accept any gift,
favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment, or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise, or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing such persons,
directly or indirectly, in the discharge of the Committee member's
official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate
for elective public office, if the local government officer has no
knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if
accepted, was given with the intent to influence the local government
officer in the discharge of his official duties;
g. No Township Committee member shall use, or allow to be used, his
public office or employment, or any information, not generally available
to the members of the public, which he receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose of
securing financial gain for himself, any member of his immediate family,
or any business organization with which he is associated;
h. No Township Committee member, relative of such Committee member
or business organization in which such member has an interest shall
represent any person or party in connection with any cause,
proceeding, application or other matter pending before any agency in
the local government in which such Committee member serves. This
provision shall not be deemed to prohibit one local government
§ 9-1.22 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-1.22
1:352
employee from representing another local government employee where
the local government agency is the employer and the representation
is within the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities;
i. No Township Committee member shall be deemed in conflict with these
provisions if, by reason of his participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or
which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary
gain accrues to him as a member of any business, profession,
occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could
reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such
business, profession, occupation or group;
j. Elected Township Committee members shall not be prohibited from
making an inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee,
reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by
the officer or a member of his immediate family, whether directly or
indirectly, in return therefor; and
k. Nothing shall prohibit any Township Committee member or members of
his immediate family from representing himself, or themselves, in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his, or their, own interests,
provided that such negotiations or proceedings do not impair the
objectivity or independence of judgment of any other Township
Committee member or other local government officer, supervisor or
employee of the Township of Neptune.
l. No department head, supervisor or person in any other administrative
position shall hire or cause to be hired any personnel who is a relative of
such person, or is a relative of any Neptune Township Committee
member, for a position within the Township of Neptune in the same
department over which such person has direct hiring authority.
m. No local government agency or authority shall hire or cause to be hired
any person who is: 1) a relative of any Neptune Township Committee
person for any employment, consulting or professional service position;
or 2) any relative of any member of the local government agency, for a
position within the Township of Neptune in the same department over
which such local government agency has direct hiring authority. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to seasonal or temporary
employment.
n. No department head, supervisor or person in any other administrative
positions, or any member of any local government agency, shall
influence the hiring, firing, promotion, demotion or transfer of a relative
of the department over which, or the agency over which, such person or
member has control.
1. The term "relative" shall be defined as parent, spouse, child,
sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
cousin, in-law or step-relative, domestic partner or co-habitant.
§ 9-1.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.22
1:353
§ 9-2. CODE OF CONDUCT. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-2.1. Causes for Disciplinary Action or Termination of
Employment.
Any one of the following shall be cause for disciplinary action or termination
of employment, although termination may be made for sufficient causes
other than those listed:
2. The term "local government agency or authority" shall be defined
as any board, bureau, division, commission, authority, committee or
other instrumentality within the Township of Neptune, and any
independent local authority, which performs functions other than a
purely advisory nature, and whereby the Township Committee
appoints the members of such governing body, but shall not include
the local school board.
3. The provisions of this chapter are intended to effect upon all future
hiring, firing, promoting, demoting, transferring or appointing of
any persons as an employee, supervisor, director, member,
commissioner or otherwise, within the local governing organization
of the Township of Neptune, whether or not it shall have an impact
on any current or future employee or appointment.
a. Neglect of duty or lack of productivity;
b. Incompetency or inefficiency;
c. Incapacity due to mental or physical disability;
d. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline;
e. Chronic or excessive tardiness or absenteeism;
f. Disorderly or immoral conduct;
g. The conviction or admission of any criminal act or offense;
h. Negligence of or willful damage to public property or waste of public
supplies;
i. Public conduct while in a Township uniform reflecting a discredit to the
Township;
j. The use or attempt to use one's authority or official influence to control
or modify the political action of any person in the Township or engaging
in any form of political activity during working hours;
k. Leaving an assigned post or work station during the work period
without the approval of the supervisor in charge of the operation;
l. Any violation of the Township's policies with regard to drug and/or
alcohol use.
§ 9-1.22 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-3
1:354
§ 9-3. TIME AND ATTENDANCE. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-3.1. Standard Work Periods.
The standard weekly and hourly work period for Township employees is as
follows:
Department Time Range Hours Lunch
Refreshment
Break
Monday to
Friday
Administrative
Departments
8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
8 1 hr. period 2
Public Works
and Sewer
6:30 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
8 1/2 1/2 hr. period 2
Monday to
Sunday
Custodians
24 hours
daily
8 1/2 1/2 hr. break 2
Police
civilians
6:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
8 1 hr. period 2
Police/jailers 24 hours
daily
1/2 hr. break 0
Library In accordance with schedule established by the Library
Trustees
Recreation Same as Administrative Departments, but may flex
schedule to accommodate program activities
§ 9-3.2. Lunch Break; Lunch Period.
The phrase "lunch break" shall mean lunch eaten on the job site or lunch
eaten by an employee remaining on call. The phrase "lunch period" shall
mean that period where an employee is relieved of his job responsibility and
is free to leave the job site.
§ 9-3.3. Work Week; Refreshment Breaks.
The standard work week, except as otherwise stated, is considered to start
Monday and end Sunday. Except as described otherwise in Subsection
9-3.1, all employees shall be entitled to two fifteen-minute refreshment
breaks within their normal work shift, to be taken at the time scheduled by
the department head or supervisor. Breaks shall not be accumulated. The
term "refreshment break" requires the employees to remain in the work
area where they are assigned at the time the break is taken.
§ 9-3.4. Changes in Work Period; Authorized in Advance.
§ 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-3.4
1:355
§ 9-3.5. Casual Employees; Hours.
Casual employees shall work in accordance with a schedule of hours
established by the department head and approved by the Business
Administrator.
§ 9-3.6. Emergency Closings; Compensation When Employee Sent
Home.
In the event that an emergency or inclement weather necessitates the
closing down of any operation of the Township, all permanent, full-time
employees affected by the closing and who have started their assigned
work period shall be paid their normal compensation for that day as if they
had performed the normal work assignment. All casual or permanent parttime
employees shall not be compensated except for those hours actually
worked.
§ 9-3.7. Emergency Closings Before Work; Alternate Day of Work
May Be Required.
In the event of an emergency, as determined by the Business Administrator,
any employee who is advised not to report to work will be paid for the day,
up to two days per calendar year. Employees who are deemed as essential
employees by the Business Administrator and are required to work and who
do work or employees who are not otherwise notified not to report and who
do work, will receive compensatory time off for each hour worked with a
minimum of two hours and a maximum of eight hours. Any additional days
of emergency which occur within a calendar year and result in an employee
being advised not to report, the employee may charge his/her time off to any
time on the books, defined as sick time or comp time.
§ 9-3.8. Failure to Report for Work; Compensation Adjusted.
a. Any permanent change in the standard hourly work period must be
authorized in advance by the Township Committee. Regular assigned
shifts shall not be altered on less than seventy-two-hour notice except in
the event of an emergency declared such by the Business
Administrator.
b. The Township retains the right at its discretion to temporarily change
the work week by notifying the employee under the following formula:
1. Seventy-two-hour notice for a five-day change.
2. Ten working days' notice for a six-to-twenty-day change.
3. Fifteen working days' notice for a twenty-one-to-sixty-day change.
4. Twenty working days' notice for a permanent change.
c. The employee may waive the notice requirement.
§ 9-3.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-3.8
1:356
§ 9-4. HOLIDAYS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-4.1. Holidays Enumerated.
a. All employees shall report to work regardless of the condition of the
weather or the existence of a state of emergency of whatsoever cause,
and the Township reserves the right to adjust accordingly the
compensation of those employees who fail to report to work for the
reasons aforesaid.
b. If an employee is late for work, payroll deduction will be computed as
follows:
1. Up to the first 16 minutes late: no deduction.
2. Sixteen through 30 minutes late: 30 minutes pay deducted.
3. Thirty-one through 60 minutes late: 60 minutes pay deducted.
c. Even though there is no pay loss for the first 16 minutes of tardiness,
the Township reserves the right to impose disciplinary action upon an
employee who is chronically or excessively late.
d. Regular attendance during all scheduled hours of work, reporting, for
work on time and continuing to work to the end of the work period is
expected of every Township employee. Unsatisfactory attendance,
including reporting late or quitting early may be cause for disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
a. The following days will be considered as holidays for all eligible
Township permanent, full-time employees: New Year's Day, Martin
Luther King's Day, President's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor
Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday after
Thanksgiving and Christmas Day. A "floating holiday" may be observed
on another date as approved by the Business Administrator in
cooperation with the leadership of the bargaining unit(s) representing
administrative and public works employees. It is clearly understood
that casual employees shall not receive holiday pay. All Township
permanent, full-time employees except members of the Police
Department, communications operators and custodial staff shall have
the holidays enumerated in this section off with regular pay. Members
of the Police Department, communications operators and custodial staff
are required to work a full workweek as scheduled by their supervisor,
department head or by the Business Administrator and will receive
compensation in lieu of time off as set forth in the negotiated
agreements between the Township and their respective bargaining
units. It is clearly understood that casual employees shall not receive
holiday pay, with the exception of emergency medical technicians
(EMTs) who work on the following holidays and will be compensated at
time and 1/2; New Year's Day, Memorial Day (6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.),
Fourth of July, Labor Day (6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.), Thanksgiving Day,
§ 9-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4.1
1:357
§ 9-4.2. Holidays Falling on Sunday.
Holidays falling on Sunday are observed on the following Monday.
§ 9-4.3. Holidays Falling on Saturday.
Holidays falling on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday.
§ 9-4.4. Unauthorized Absence Preceding or Following Holiday.
An employee who is absent without leave on the day immediately preceding
or on the day immediately following a holiday shall not be paid for the
holiday nor for the day of unauthorized absence.
§ 9-4.5. Compensatory Time for Work Required on Holidays.
When a permanent full-time employee other than members of the Police
Department, communications operators and maintenance staff is required
to work on a holiday in order to maintain certain services, the employee
shall be allowed compensatory time off as near to the holiday as can be
arranged between the employee and the department head or supervisor.
Where the department head or supervisor recommends that the employee
be paid compensation in lieu of compensatory time off, the compensation
shall be paid at the rate of 1 1/2 times the individual's standard hourly pay
for each additional hour worked.
§ 9-4.6. Personal Days.
Christmas Day, Christmas Eve (6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight). and New
Year's Eve (6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight).
b. When a holiday as set forth in Subsection 9-4.1 hereof occurs during an
employee's vacation, said holiday shall not be charged as a vacation
day. It is clearly understood that casual employees shall not receive
holiday pay, except as described above for EMTs.
a. Probationary or permanent full-time employees shall be entitled to four
personal days in each twelve-month period beginning on the employees'
first anniversary date. Probationary or permanent part-time employees
are eligible on a prorated basis. Personal days shall not be accumulated
nor shall the personal days be taken on a day immediately prior to or on
the day immediately after a holiday or vacation day nor shall payment
be made for unused personal days at the end of the year. It is
understood that casual employees are not eligible for this benefit.
b. Personal days may be used for personal, business, household or family
matters described below:
1. Personal business means an activity that requires the employee's
presence during the work day and is of such a nature that it cannot
be attended to at a time outside of the work day.
§ 9-4.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-4.6
1:358
§ 9-4.7. Holidays Limited.
An employee shall be entitled only to those holidays set forth in Subsection
9-4.1 above and to none others except by resolution of the Township
Committee and such is the case whether a holiday is declared by the
President of the United States and/or the Governor of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 9-5. OVERTIME. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-5.1. Overtime; Rate of Pay.
Overtime shall be paid for all work performed in excess of the standard
work week as defined in § 9-3 hereof, at the rate of 1 1/2 times the computed
hourly rate. If an employee has an unexcused, unpaid absence during the
normal work week then overtime will be paid for all work performed in
excess of the number of hours in the standard work week as defined in § 9-3
hereof.
§ 9-5.2. Overtime; Authorization Required.
Overtime work will be kept to a minimum, and shall be authorized in
advance by the Business Administrator. This shall not apply to the Police
Department where authorization must be received in advance from the
Chief of Police. The reasons for the granting of overtime shall be noted on
the time report and certified by the department head or supervisor. In the
event that there are not a sufficient number of employees who volunteer
for overtime and the Business Administrator determines that there is still
a need for additional personnel, no employee may refuse overtime without
permission from the Business Administrator. In this circumstance, the
employees with the least seniority shall be the first to be selected. The
Business Administrator shall not unreasonably withhold such permission.
No employee shall be required to work more than 24 straight hours.
2. Personal, household, or family matters refer to those situations
where an employee's absence from duty is necessary for the
welfare of the employee or his/her family. Written request for a
personal day shall be made to the department head or supervisor
72 hours prior to such leave, unless under emergency conditions it
may be granted on request by the department head or supervisor.
The prior notification time may be waived in the sole discretion of
the Business Administrator under emergency circumstances.
c. The Business Administrator may deny such request when in his/her sole
judgment it will leave the remaining work force below a sufficient
number to operate or when the request does not meet the criteria set
forth above.
§ 9-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5.3
1:359
§ 9-5.3. Report to Be Submitted to Administrator and Chief
Financial Officer.
A report of all overtime worked, supported by the reasons therefor, will
be submitted to the Business Administrator and Chief Financial Officer. All
questions relating to the contents of the overtime report shall be brought to
the attention of the Business Administrator.
§ 9-5.4. Positions Exempt from Overtime Compensation; Exceptions.
§ 9-5.5. Computation of Overtime.
a. Persons holding the following official positions shall not be paid for
overtime unless it is specifically approved by a resolution of the
Township Committee identifying the employee's name and the nature of
the overtime: Township Clerk, Tax Assessor, Chief Financial Officer,
Assistant Chief Financial Officer, Purchasing Agent, Recreation
Director, Tax Collector, Code Enforcement Supervisor, Judge of the
Municipal Court, Prosecutor, Public Defender, Township Attorney, Court
Administrator, Building Superintendent, Library Director, Supervisors
in the Public Works and Sewer Departments, Business Administrator,
Emergency Management Coordinator, Deputy Emergency Management
Coordinator, Construction Code Official, Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of
Police, Director of Public Works, Assistant Director of Public Works,
Director of Code and Construction, Director of the Senior Citizen
Center, Registrar of Vital Statistics, Human Resources Director, and any
other management and/or supervisory position created by the Township
Committee who meets that criteria of exempt management employees
pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act.
b. Persons holding stipend positions are expected to perform their
responsibilities outside of their regular workday and therefore shall not
be paid overtime for work done outside of their regular workday
necessitated because of their stipend position responsibilities.
c. Unused compensatory time for the current year may be redeemed for
pay in the month of December of the current year.
a. Overtime shall be computed and payment made on the following basis:
1. Up to the first 16 minutes: no pay.
2. Sixteen through 30 minutes: 45 minutes pay.
3. Thirty-one through 60 minutes: 90 minutes pay.
4. Thereafter, overtime shall be paid in thirty-minute segments for all
time worked beyond the regular tour of duty. In lieu of cash
payment an employee may opt to receive compensatory time off in
accordance with Subsection 9-5.8 below.
§ 9-5.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-5.5
1:360
§ 9-5.6. Holidays During Overtime Work.
In any week in which there is an authorized holiday, such holiday shall
be credited to an employee as a normal work day in computing his
compensation for overtime pay.
§ 9-5.7. Authorization for Overtime Limited.
Any authorization of overtime shall be limited to the available funds within
the Department.
§ 9-5.8. Payment for Overtime.
§ 9-5.9. Meals During Emergency Overtime.
Whenever an employee is entitled to emergency overtime as defined in
Subsection 9-5.5 hereof, the department supervisor shall designate the time
when an emergency employee shall take a meal break and the meal break
shall not exceed once for every four hours of emergency overtime. The
department supervisor also shall designate a convenient location within the
Township for the feeding of emergency personnel and the Township shall
pay to the proprietor thereof an allowance in accordance with the following
schedule:
b. Any eligible employee called back to work for emergency reasons for
time which is not contiguous to the eligible employee's regular work
day will get a minimum of two hours' pay. If the time is prior to and
contiguous to the work day, the eligible employee will receive pay for
actual time worked until the commencement of the work day. This is not
applicable for regularly scheduled sewer pumping station work or
scheduled monitoring work.
a. Overtime shall be paid either by compensatory time off or by
compensation at the option of the employee and approval of the
department head or supervisor. Compensatory time shall be arranged
to be taken within 90 days from date the overtime is earned or it
expires. Compensatory time must be taken in increments of at least 1/2
day or the total amount of compensatory time due to an employee,
whichever is less. Requests to utilize banked compensatory time must
be made at least 24 hours in advance.
b. Whenever the employee shall choose compensatory time off, he/she
shall be entitled to 1 1/2 hours off for each hour worked in excess of his
normal hourly work week.
c. Whenever an employee chooses to receive compensation for overtime
work, such compensation is to be computed at the rate of 1 1/2 times
his/her standard hourly rate for each hour worked in excess of his/her
normal hourly work week.
a. Breakfast: $8.
§ 9-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5.9
1:361
§ 9-6. ABSENCES, LEAVES AND VACATIONS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-6.1. Types of Absences.
Absences from duty shall be classified as sick leave, leave of absence with
pay, leave of absence without pay, military leave or vacations and shall be so
noted on the employee's time report or such other report as may be directed
by the Business Administrator. Sick leave is covered in § 9-7.
§ 9-6.2. Leave of Absence Without Pay.
With the exception of leaves specifically granted by federal and/or state
law, a leave of absence without pay for a period of time not to exceed 10
work days per year may be granted by the Business Administrator upon a
written request from the employee to the Business Administrator and shall
be recorded as directed by the Business Administrator.
§ 9-6.3. Notification of Absence; Failure to Notify Supervisor.
§ 9-6.4. Death in Family; Leave of Absence with Pay.
b. Lunch: $9.
c. Dinner: $12.
a. Each employee shall notify his or her supervisor or department head of
any intended absence from duty. If it is not possible for the employee to
give notice in advance of the working day, the report shall be made by
telephone as early as possible on the day the employee will be absent. If
it is not possible to notify the supervisor or department head, the
employee shall notify the Business Administrator or the Police
Department who shall be responsible to forward the notice to the
supervisor or department head.
b. In the event that an employee does not follow the foregoing procedure,
the Business Administrator at his discretion may take disciplinary
action to be confirmed by the Township Committee.
c. The reason for each absence shall be listed on the time report and other
reports relating thereto, with a statement as to whether or not it is
approved by the supervisor or department head.
d. The supervisor or department head shall file with the Business
Administrator, on a daily basis, all notices of "intended absence" from
duty.
a. In the case of death in the immediate family, an employee shall be
granted leave and suffer no loss of regular straight time pay from the
day of death, up to and including the day of the funeral not to exceed
four work days.
§ 9-5.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-6.4
1:362
§ 9-6.5. Scheduling of Vacations.
Supervisors or department heads shall schedule the individual vacation
days or weeks so that the functions of the Township can be carried on
with a minimum of delay or public inconvenience. The employee with the
longest continuous service with the Township shall have preference in the
assignment of vacation days.
§ 9-6.6. Use of Vacation Days.
An employee with prior approval of his/her supervisor or department head
may charge a single day or two against his vacation time but no more
than five vacation days shall be used in this manner or for that purpose,
during any twelve-month period. The Business Administrator may, with
the concurrence of the department head or supervisor, approve additional
single vacation days in excess of the stated five days.
§ 9-6.7. Vacation Allowances.
b. Immediate family shall be defined as the employee's spouse, and the
employee's or his/her spouse's child, stepchild, mother, stepmother,
father, stepfather, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister, grandparents,
step-grandparents, son-in-law, stepson-in-law, daughter-in-law,
stepdaughter-in-law, grandchildren and step-grandchildren. This
section shall also apply to those family members who regularly reside in
the employee's household.
c. Reasonable verification of the event may be required by the Township.
d. Such bereavement leave is not in addition to any holiday, day off,
vacation leave, or compensatory time off falling within the time of the
bereavement.
e. An employee may make a request to the Business Administrator for
time off to attend a funeral separate and distinct from bereavement
leave. Such request, if granted by the Business Administrator, shall be
charged at the option of the employee as a personal day, vacation day or
against accumulated compensatory time off.
a. Permanent full-time officers and employees shall receive vacation with
pay for each twelve-month period in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. From the beginning of the second year of service through the fifth
year of service: 10 working days.
2. From the beginning of the sixth year of service through the 10th
year of service: 15 working days.
3. From the beginning of the 11th year of service through the 15th
year of service: 22 working days.
§ 9-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6.7
1:363
§ 9-6.8. Accumulation of Vacation Time.
All vacation time shall be used in the current year and shall not be
accumulated without the prior approval of the Township Administrator and
further subject to any special provisions that the Township Administrator
may decide to be in the best interest of the Township.
§ 9-6.9. Compensation in Lieu of Vacation.
It is the policy of the Township that each employee take advantage of
the authorized vacation period for reasons of health, rest, relaxation and
pleasure and thus extra compensation in lieu of vacation shall not be
allowed unless prior authorization shall be obtained from the Township
Committee or as specifically stated in personnel contracts.
§ 9-6.10. Attendance Review.
The attendance record of each employee shall be reviewed periodically,
annually, and at such time that a promotion or reduction in force is being
considered.
§ 9-6.11. Permission Required for Absence; Exceptions.
§ 9-6.12. Vacation Requests; Approval; Advance Notice.
All employees shall submit requests for vacation at least one month in
advance to the supervisor or department head, in duplicate, on the form
provided by the Business Administrator for that purpose. After signing
his/her approval, the supervisor or department head shall turn the form
over to the Business Administrator. An approved copy of the form will be
returned to the employee. Emergency conditions to justify the granting
of emergency vacation use will be considered separately on an individual
basis, notwithstanding the time limitations otherwise set forth above. The
4. From the beginning of the 16th year of service through the 20th
year of service: 24 working days.
5. From the beginning of the 21st year of service: 28 working days.
b. Probationary or permanent part-time employees are eligible on a
prorated basis. No employee shall accumulate vacation benefits those
months in which said employee is not performing his/her assigned work
assignment.
a. An employee must obtain permission to be absent from his employment
at least 24 hours in advance except in case of illness, accident, death or
vacation. Failure to obtain a babysitter or lack of transportation shall
not be considered an acceptable reason for being absent or late.
b. Where an employee requests permission to use an individual day or
part thereof, such request shall be granted at the discretion of the
department head, Supervisor or Business Administrator.
§ 9-6.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-6.12
1:364
Township may decline a request for vacation if approving the request will
adversely impact on the Township's ability to maintain order, safety and/or
effective operation of the department. When two or more employees request
the same vacation dates and the Township determines that in order to
maintain order, safety and/or effective operation of the department, one or
more of these requests must be declined, seniority will be the determining
factor if such requests are submitted to the department head prior to the
first day of January in the year in which the vacation request is made.
Requests made during the year for which the vacation request is made will
be evaluated on a first come, first serve basis.
§ 9-6.13. Supervision by Business Administrator; Advance Notice.
In those cases where an employee is not directly responsible to a supervisor
or department head, all requests for vacation, or absence from work, shall
be presented to the Business Administrator at least one month in advance
of the requested date.
§ 9-6.14. Use of Individual Days; Procedure.
Where an employee requests permission to use an individual day or part
thereof for leave or vacation, such request shall be granted at the discretion
of the supervisor, department head or Business Administrator. Where
permission is sought to use an individual day, the one-month notice required
by Subsection 9-6.12 above shall be waived provided that the permission
can be granted without affecting the operation of the department.
§ 9-6.15. Compensation for Court Appearances; Suit by Employee
Against Township.
§ 9-6.16. Other Court Appearances; Leave of Absence Without Pay.
An employee required to make a court appearance in litigation not involving
the Township or who is subpoenaed as a witness upon request as set forth
above shall be granted leave of absence without pay. An employee may
utilize a vacation day or a personal day in lieu of losing a day's pay. It is
expressly understood that an employee may not use a sick day for court
appearances.
a. An employee of the Township shall receive the standard daily
compensation for court appearances, requested by the Township
Committee, the Township Attorney or an attorney representing the
Township's insurance company in which the Township is a party.
b. Where an employee has instituted a suit against the Township for
benefits beyond those initially provided by the Workmens'
Compensation Act, the employee shall be granted leave without pay.
The employee shall sign a statement setting forth the reason for taking
time off which reason shall be filed with his supervisor or department
head with a copy to the Business Administrator.
§ 9-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6.17
1:365
§ 9-6.17. Jury Duty.
Any employee subpoenaed for jury duty shall receive his/her standard daily
pay and shall be responsible to return to the Township any compensation
received by the employee as a juror. Where an employee receives notice
of jury duty, he/she shall immediately advise his/her department head or
supervisor, who in turn shall notify the Business Administrator and Chief
Financial Officer so that he/she can arrange to receive the compensation
received by the employee for jury duty. Any employee on jury duty shall be
responsible to return to work when not actively serving on a jury or when
released prior to noontime.
§ 9-6.18. Military Leave.
Military leave shall be handled as prescribed by the applicable provisions of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 9-6.19. Attendance at Military Reserve Duty.
Leaves requested by employees who are members of the New Jersey
National Guard or a military reserve unit in order to make minimum
attendance requirements shall be governed by the applicable provisions of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 9-6.20. Leaves of Absence on Election Day.
Any employee who is candidate for public office, a member of a District
Board of Elections or a County Committee member, upon permission, shall
be granted a leave of absence without pay on election day.
§ 9-6.21. Volunteer Fire Company, First Aid Squad Members, or
Emergency Management.
§ 9-6.22. Attendance at Seminars, Continuing Education, Etc.
Requests to attend conferences, seminars and other administrative
programs away from the Municipal Complex, dealing with municipal affairs,
shall be made to the Business Administrator. The requests for leave of
absence with pay shall identify the days that the programs shall run as
distinguished from the number of days required for travel and it shall be
a. The Business Administrator will maintain a list of all active and exempt
members of the Volunteer Fire Departments, First Aid Squads, and
Emergency Management. Upon request of the Township Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief, First Aid Captains, or Emergency Management
Coordinator, all Township employees on the individual lists may answer
alarms or calls where they are requested unless performing duties that
would cause detriment to the Township.
b. Any employee responding to the emergency call and not needed is
required to immediately return to his/her job site.
§ 9-6.17 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-6.22
1:366
accompanied by an estimate of the costs that could be charged to the
Township.
§ 9-6.23. Compensation for Federal/State Certifications.
Employees who attain a federal/state certification by passing a federal/
state examination and that is directly related to their current position,
preapproved by the Business Administrator, will receive a stipend in an
amount of $1,000 unless otherwise specified by collective bargaining
agreement. The number of certification stipends will be limited to a
maximum of two per employee, unless additional stipends are approved by
the Business Administrator. The list of approved eligible certifications will
be available in the office of the Business Administrator.
§ 9-6.24. Reimbursement of Transportation Costs Associated with a
Leave of Absence to Attend Seminars, Continuing Education, Etc.
It is Township policy to provide transportation to conferences and
continuing education at no expense to the employee. However, in the event
that the employee is required to provide his/her own transportation, the
Township will reimburse the employee at the mileage rate established by a
resolution of the Township Committee, with prior approval of the Business
Administrator.
§ 9-6.25. Requests for Other Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
a. Requests for permission for a leave of absence without pay for other
compelling reasons shall be granted by the Business Administrator or
Township Committee on recommendation of the Business
Administrator. An employee desiring a leave of absence without pay will
submit a request in writing to his/her department head or supervisor
giving the following information:
1. The period for which the leave is desired (maximum of 10 days).
2. The reason for the leave.
3. The specific date on which he/she will return to work and upon
which he/she can expect to be terminated from his/her employment
if he/she has not returned to work or obtained an extension of the
original leave.
b. The department head or supervisor shall forward his/her
recommendation in writing, together with the employee's written
request, to the Business Administrator for presentation to the Township
Committee. If the Township Committee approves the leave without pay,
the date of the leave shall be recorded in the employee's personal file.
Prior to starting the approved leave without pay, the employee shall
arrange with the Chief Financial Officer to pay any benefit payments
due during the period the employee is off the payroll. Failure to make
these arrangements may result in loss of benefits.
§ 9-6.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7
1:367
§ 9-7. SICK LEAVE. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-7.1. "Sick Leave" Defined.
"Sick leave" shall mean absence of an employee from post or duty because
of illness, accident, exposure to contagious disease, or attendance upon a
member of the employee's immediate family, seriously ill and requiring the
care or attendance of such employee.
§ 9-7.2. "Immediate Family" Defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, a member of the immediate family shall
mean the employee's spouse, and the employee's or his/her spouse's child,
stepchild, mother, stepmother, father, stepfather, brother, stepbrother,
sister, stepsister, grandparents, step grandparents, son-in-law, stepson-inlaw,
daughter-in-law, stepdaughter-in-law, grandchildren and step
grandchildren. This section shall also apply to those family members who
regularly reside in the employee's household.
§ 9-7.3. Illness of Family Members.
Sick leave shall not be interpreted as including an extended period where
the employee serves as a nurse or housekeeper during a protracted period
of illness of a member of the family.
§ 9-7.4. Verification of Illness by Township.
In all cases of reported illness or disability suffered by an employee or a
member of an employee's immediate family, the Township reserves the right
to send medical personnel to examine and report on the condition of the
patient to the Business Administrator.
§ 9-7.5. Physician's Statement Required.
a. Every absence on account of illness or disability of an employee or a
member of the employee's immediate family for three or more days
must be certified by a written statement from the attending physician.
The Business Administrator has the right to waive this requirement or
to require the employee to be examined by a Township medical
physician and certified as fit for duty, before returning to work. The
Business Administrator shall notify the Township Committee of any said
waivers given to an employee. Nothing contained herein shall limit the
right of the Business Administrator to require proof of illness of any
employee on sick leave, whenever such requirement appears
reasonable under the circumstances, including a pattern of absences.
Abuse of sick leave shall be cause for disciplinary action. The
attendance of all employees will be monitored monthly for abuse of sick
leave by calculating the number of "occurrences" of sick leave an
employee uses in any twelve-month period or by establishing a pattern
of methodically utilizing sick leave. A single "occurrence" is defined as
any period of consecutive days out on sick leave. For example, an
§ 9-7 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-7.5
1:368
employee who is out 1/2 day will be charged with one occurrence. An
employee who is out for three consecutive days will be charged with
one occurrence. An employee who is out for six consecutive weeks
will be charged with one occurrence. An employee who is out once
for 1/2 day and out for six consecutive weeks will be charged with
two occurrences. Abuse of sick leave is defined having occurred in
accordance with the schedule below:
1. Level 1. An employee who has had no more than two occurrences in
any 12 consecutive months will be considered to have excellent
attendance.
2. Level 2. An employee who has had three, four, or five occurrences
in any 12 consecutive months will be considered to have acceptable
attendance.
3. Level 3. An employee who has had six occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be considered to have unsatisfactory
attendance and will receive a verbal warning.
4. Level 4. An employee who has had seven occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be considered to have unacceptable
attendance and will receive a written warning.
5. Level 5. An employee who has had eight occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be charged with abuse of sick leave and
will receive a written warning and on the employee's next
paycheck, their last use of sick leave (one day minimum/three days
maximum) will be docked from that check and added back into the
employee's sick leave bank [in the event that the employee's last
absence was without pay, their paycheck will be docked for number
of days last absent (one day minimum/three days maximum) and no
days will be added to the employee's sick leave bank].
6. Level 6. An employee who has had nine occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be charged with abuse of sick leave and
will receive a written warning, on the employee's next paycheck,
their last use of sick leave (one day minimum/three days maximum)
will be docked from that check and added back into the employee's
sick leave bank [in the event that the employee's last absence was
without pay, their paycheck will be docked for number of days last
absent (one day minimum/three days maximum) and no days will be
added to the employee's sick leave bank] and receive a two-day
suspension without pay from the Business Administrator.
7. Level 7. An employee who has had 10 occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be charged with abuse of sick leave and
will receive a written warning, and on the employee's next
paycheck, their last use of sick leave (one day minimum/three days
maximum) will be docked from that check and added back into the
employee's sick leave bank [in the event that the employee's last
absence was without pay, their paycheck will be docked for number
§ 9-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7.5
1:369
§ 9-7.6. Interim Reports; Instructions of Physician to Be Followed.
During protracted periods of illness or disability of an employee or a
member of the employee's immediate family, the Business Administrator
may require interim reports on the condition of the patient at weekly or
biweekly periods, from the attending physician and/or a Township medical
physician. When under medical care, employees are expected to conform to
the instructions of the attending physician if they wish to qualify for salary
payment during such period of illness or disability.
§ 9-7.7. Payment for Sick Leave; Full-Time and Part-Time,
Permanent or Probationary Employees Only.
The rules which follow apply to the payment of salaries during periods
of illness or disability of regular, permanent or probationary full-time
employees. Probationary or permanent part-time employees are eligible on
a prorated basis. Casual employees are not entitled to compensation for
such absences.
of days last absent (one day minimum/three days maximum) and no
days will be added to the employee's sick leave bank] and receive a
ten-day suspension without pay from the Business Administrator.
8. Level 8. An employee who has had 11 occurrences in any 12
consecutive months will be charged with abuse of sick leave and
their employment will be terminated by the Business Administrator
with confirmation by resolution of the Township Committee.
b. An employee who has established a pattern of methodically utilizing
sick leave is subject to increased disciplinary action by the Business
Administrator and/or the Township Committee (example: a series of
occurrences before or after a holiday, an occurrence every other month,
a series of occurrences on Mondays and/or Fridays, a series of
occurrences on days when particular work assignments are scheduled,
etc.). The Business Administrator and Township Committee may take
into consideration extenuating circumstances in administering these
provisions. Nothing contained herein shall limit the Business
Administrator and/or Township Committee from using other factors in
determining whether an employee is abusing sick leave.
a. Permanent and Probationary Full-Time Employees. Permanent and
probationary full-time employees will accumulate paid sick leave during
a calendar year at the rate of 1 1/4 working days per month. If an
employee uses none or only a portion of this allowable sick leave during
any calendar year, the amount of this leave not taken accumulates to
his/her credit from year to year, and the employee is entitled to use the
accumulated sick leave with pay if and when needed. No employee shall
accumulate sick leave benefits during those months in which the
employee is not performing his normal work assignment. The
department head or supervisor shall provide each employee within his/
her department a report of his/her sick leave, unused vacation and
§ 9-7.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-7.7
1:370
§ 9-7.8. Conditions When Sick Leave with Pay Disallowed.
personal days to the employee's next anniversary date, and
compensatory time records. Said information shall be supplied within
five working days of the receipt of the request from the employee. Each
employee shall be entitled to make such a request once a year.
b. Any full-time or probationary employee who does not incur any sick
days in an anniversary year will receive 3 1/2 days off the following
anniversary year for perfect attendance. The employee may elect to
receive same either in pay or time off. The incurring of job-related
disability or injury leave shall not impact upon the perfect attendance
record. Probationary or permanent part-time employees are eligible on
a prorated basis. No employee shall be allowed to work and endanger
the health and well-being of other employees and if the employee's
condition warrants, the employee may be directed to take sick leave.
The department head or supervisor may direct the employee to the
Township physician for an opinion as to the eligibility of the employee to
be absent from work. Any employee who takes sick leave after he/she
has already worked a portion of the work day may use 1/2 day of his/her
leave benefits.
a. Sick leave with pay shall not be allowed under the following conditions:
1. When the employee, under medical care, fails to carry out the
orders of the attending physician.
2. When, in the opinion of the Township medical physician, the
employee is ill or disabled because of self-imposed contributory
causes or actions contrary to the code of conduct as set forth in
§ 9-2.
3. When, in the opinion of the Township medical physician, the
disability or illness is not of sufficient severity to justify the
employee's absence from duty.
4. When an employee does not report to the Township physician.
5. When an employee does not follow the notification procedure
outlined below:
(a) The department head or supervisor shall be notified as early as
possible, but no later than 60 minutes prior to the start of the
scheduled work shift from which he/she may be or expects to
be absent. If the supervisor is not available then the employee
must contact the Police Department. Failure to so notify the
department head and/or Police Department, absent
extraordinary circumstances, may be cause for denial of the
use of sick leave for the absence and constitute cause for
disciplinary actions.
§ 9-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7.8
1:371
§ 9-7.9. Second and Third Medical Opinions May Be Required.
The recommendation of the Township's medical physician as well as those
of the attending physician, as to the justification of the absence from duty
on account of disability or illness or of the fitness of the employee to return
to duty, shall be considered by the Business Administrator. The Business
Administrator reserves the right in such cases, where there is a difference
in professional opinion between the Township physician and the personal
physician, to require the employee to submit to an examination by a third
doctor. The selection of the third physician is to be by mutual agreement or
in the event of their failure to reach such agreement, such third physician
shall be appointed by the Monmouth County Medical Society. The report of
the third physician shall be dispositive of the matter.
§ 9-7.10. Least Amount of Sick Leave to Be Used.
In charging an employee with sick leave, the smallest unit to be considered
is 1/2 of a working day.
§ 9-7.11. Elective or Ordinary Medical Procedure.
Sick leave cannot be allowed for such things as ordinary dental care, nor for
any other professional services that may be normally scheduled within the
employee's regular off time. The utilization of sick leave for elective medical
procedures will not be considered without sufficient medical evidence to
substantiate the necessity of scheduling the medical or dental services
during the work day.
§ 9-7.12. Injury on Job Not Counted Against Sick Leave.
An employee who is certified as absent on account of a disability or accident
arising out of or in the course of his employment with the Township shall not
have such absence charged against his/her sick leave. All other provisions
regarding absence on account of sickness or disability shall apply.
§ 9-7.13. (Reserved)
§ 9-7.14. Family Leave.
The Township shall comply with all aspects of any and all applicable federal
and state laws regarding family leave. Policies related to family leave are
detailed in the Personnel Policy Handbook.
§ 9-7.15. Additional Sick Leave Without Pay.
An employee on sick leave who has expended all his/her benefits and
who cannot resume his/her normal duties as a result of the illness, upon
the submission of medical evidence, may be continued without pay as
6. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to contradict any rights
provided under federal and/or state law.
§ 9-7.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-7.15
1:372
an employee by resolution of the Township Committee and the employee
shall pay for the entitled benefits. At the conclusion of three months, if
the employee is not able to resume his/her normal duties, he/she shall be
terminated by resolution as an employee of the Township. Any employee on
unpaid sick leave not approved by resolution of the Township Committee
will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
§ 9-8. JOB-INCURRED INJURY. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-8.1. Report of Injury Required; Time Limit.
Whenever an employee is involved in an incident whereby the employee
may be injured while working, whether slight or severe, the employee must
immediately make a report of the incident to their department head or
supervisor.
§ 9-8.2. Notification of Proper Authorities.
The department head or supervisor shall be responsible to see that all
information concerning the injury is given to the Human Resources
Director, who in turn shall be responsible to notify the insurance company.
Any injury that must be reported to the New Jersey Division of Pensions
and Benefits shall be reported to that system by the employee through the
certifying agent.
§ 9-8.3. Examination and Medical Treatment.
a. Whenever an employee sustains an injury, it shall be the obligation of
the department head or supervisor to contact the Human Resources
Director who will make immediate arrangements for examination and
medical treatment if necessary or when requested by the employee. In
cases of emergency, medical treatment shall be arranged at the nearest
hospital facility without delay. Any other examination and/or medical
treatment shall be administered by the Township physician or any other
doctor as may be designated by the Human Resources Director.
b. The Township may challenge the duration of any such leave whenever it
deems it appropriate and may require an employee to, at the
Township's expense, undergo a physical examination by a Townshipappointed
physician. If the physician's report indicates that the
employee is fit to report for duty and the employee disagrees, he/she
may undergo a physical examination at his/her own expense by his/her
own physician. In the event of a disagreement between the reports of
the two physicians, a third physician shall be agreed upon by the
Township's physician and the employee's physician or in the event of
their failure to reach such agreement, such third physician shall be
recommended by the Township's insurer. The report of the third
physician shall be dispositive of the matter.
§ 9-7.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-8.4
1:373
§ 9-8.4. Qualifying Period for Workmens' Compensation.
When an injured employee with a work-connected disability is on sick
leave for less than the seven-day period necessary to qualify for workmens'
compensation benefits, the Township shall pay the employee at the normal
rate for those days the employee was absent from work.
§ 9-8.5. Workmens' Compensation Benefits.
Any employee who sustains a work-connected injury and is eligible for
workmens' compensation benefits shall be eligible to receive those benefits
provided by said law and in addition shall receive from the Township
the difference between his/her regular straight time pay and the benefits
provided under the workmens' compensation up to a maximum of 26 weeks.
In the event the employee seeks to extend this additional benefit to his/her
work-incurred injury leave beyond the 26 weeks for an additional 26 weeks
up to a maximum of 52 weeks total, he/she must present to the Township a
medical report indicating the reasons therefor. The Township shall advance
to the employee an amount equal to the workmens' compensation check
for any week he/she is absent until the employee begins to receive his/her
normal workmens' compensation checks. When the employee receives his/
her workmens' compensation checks the employee agrees to sign over to
the Township those number of checks which the employee was advanced
by the Township. Failure to sign over the appropriate number of checks to
the Township shall subject the employee to immediate dismissal or other
disciplinary action.
§ 9-8.6. Records and Report of Time Lost.
It shall be the obligation of the department head or supervisor to keep
records of and to report any loss of time due to work-connected injuries to
the Human Resources Director and Chief Financial Officer.
§ 9-8.7. Investigation and Report of Injuries; Recommendations.
The department head or supervisor shall make a separate and independent
investigation of any and all injuries sustained by an employee under his/
her supervision and make a written report thereof, including any
recommendations to avoid a recurrence of said injury, to the Human
Resources Director and the Business Administrator.
§ 9-8.8. Modified Duty, Medical Treatment and/or Physical Therapy,
Requirements to Return to Full Duty After Injury or Illness;
Procedures.
a. Employees who are injured on the job, who are not capable of returning
to work full duty but are physically capable to perform modified duty,
will be required to report to work for modified duty as assigned by the
Business Administrator, Human Resources Director, or department
head until they are reasonably able to transition to their previous
position or transfer to a permanent position with the Township that
§ 9-8.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-8.8
1:374
§ 9-9. RETIREMENT BENEFITS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-9.1. Applicable Retirement Plans.
All Township employees enrolled in the New Jersey Public Employee's
Retirement System, the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New
Jersey or any other retirement plan authorized by the New Jersey Division of
Pensions and Benefits, shall be subject to the requirements and provisions
of the respective plans.
§ 9-9.2. Enrollment in Pension System.
All permanent full-time and permanent part-time employees shall be
enrolled in the pension system as of their permanent employment date.
does not exceed their capabilities. In the event such modified duty
includes classroom training, such training shall occur at sites
designated by the Township and comprehensive training examinations
will be conducted daily. Any employee requiring therapy during the
work day would be released to attend such therapy. Once an employee
is returned to work full duty, any employee who requires further
therapy will not be released to attend such therapy during the regular
work day. Such therapy must be scheduled on the employee's personal
time.
b. Any employee who has a stable non-work or work-related injury or
illness will be required to return to work full duty within 30 days post
injury or be subject to termination unless significant progress has been
documented by the attending physician, by the transitional work
program, or by the physician or therapist performing the fit-for-duty
employment testing no more than every 30 days as status changes after
the injury or illness. Employees who continue to show significant
progress up to 30 days, but still cannot perform "full duty," may have up
to three thirty-day extensions to this policy as determined by the
attending physician, by the transitional work program, or by the
physician or therapist performing the fit-for-duty employment testing.
Furthermore, employees who have reached maximum medical
improvement (MMI) as determined by their physician and have not
demonstrated adequate capability to perform the essential functions of
the job held prior to the injury or illness with or without reasonable
accommodation will be terminated unless there are vacant permanent
positions the employee is qualified for outside of modified duty that do
not exceed their physical capabilities. Federal District Court has held
that a "return to work program does not violate the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA) when it permits the employer to place on medical
layoff injured employees who reach MMI." It is the Township's policy
that modified-duty positions be available for recently injured employees
needing transitional return to work.
§ 9-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9.3
1:375
§ 9-9.3. Contributions from Employee Deducted from Salary.
An employee's contribution to the plan shall be deducted from the salary
paid to such permanent full-time or permanent part-time employee, and
remitted to the state in accordance with the provisions of state law.
§ 9-9.4. Application for Retirement Benefits.
An employee having completed the required number of years of service,
and having attained the specified age, under a state-authorized retirement
program or is retired on approved disability, shall apply for retirement as
provided by the plan and state law. Said retirees who have completed 25
years of continuous service to the Township of Neptune will be provided
with hospitalization benefits for the employee and his/her dependents under
the New Jersey State Health Benefits Program in accordance with State
of New Jersey Statute Chapter 88. In the event the Township changes
insurance carriers, substantially similar benefits will be provided.
§ 9-9.5. Retirement Information Available.
All information regarding retirement can be obtained from the office of the
certifying agent.
§ 9-9.6. Accumulated Sick Leave; Compensation Upon Retirement.
Permanent full-time employees with a minimum of 25 years' service to
the Township and who shall have accumulated sick leave upon retirement
shall be entitled to 1/2 day's pay at the rate of pay in effect at the time
of retirement for each full day of unused accumulated sick leave up to
a maximum of 130 days' pay, reflecting the accumulation of 260 days'
unused sick leave. This payment shall not exceed $15,000 unless otherwise
authorized by law or outlined in an employment contract in effect as of
January 1, 2019. Permanent part-time employees are eligible on a prorated
basis.
§ 9-10. HEALTH BENEFITS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-10.1. Eligibility for Enrollment in New Jersey Health Benefits
Program.
a. The Township shall provide enrollment in the State Health Benefits
Program for all permanent and probationary full-time employees who
have been on the payroll for two months, at the beginning of the third
month of employment. If an employee received his/her permanent
appointment after the fifth day of the month, such month shall not be
counted as aforesaid.
b. Eligibility for health benefits shall be consistent with the requirements
of the New Jersey Division of Benefits and Pensions, State Health
Benefits Program eligibility regulations.
§ 9-9.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-10.1
1:376
§ 9-10.2. Drug Prescription Program and Dental Program.
§ 9-10.3. Employee Contribution Towards Health Benefits.
The Township desires to comply with the provisions of Chapter 2, P.L.
2010, which defines the requirements of contributions by active employees
towards the cost of employee health benefits.
§ 9-11. (RESERVED) [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
c. Employee contributions for health benefits shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Division of Benefits and Pensions,
State Health Benefits Program, or as specifically negotiated in an
employment contract in compliance with state law.
a. The Township shall provide enrollment in the State Health Benefits
Prescription Program for all permanent and probationary full-time
employees who have been on the payroll for two months, at the
beginning of the third month of employment. If an employee received
his/her permanent appointment after the fifth day of the month, such
month shall not be counted as aforesaid. The Township shall have the
right to change insurance carriers so long as equivalent or better
benefits are provided to those available under the New Jersey State
Benefits Prescription Program.
b. The Township shall provide a dental plan for all full-time employees and
their families. The Township shall pay the full cost of the foregoing
program for the employee and his/her eligible dependents for eligible
employees with a date of hire prior to January 1, 1997. The Township
will pay the full cost of the dental care plan. The Township shall have
the right to change insurance carriers so long as equal or better
benefits are provided to those that are currently available under the
dental program.
a. All active employees enrolled in the Township's Health Benefits Plan
shall be required to contribute at least 1.5% of their annual base pay
towards the cost of the health benefits.
b. If a subsequent employment contract is negotiated with a contribution
rate higher than 1.5%, the employee(s) covered under such subsequent
contract shall contribute at the rate negotiated in the subsequent
contract but in no instance shall a subsequent contract require a
contribution of less than 1.5%.
c. Each employee receiving health benefits shall have a pre-tax payroll
deduction each pay period at an amount such that the annual
contribution toward health benefits meets the provisions as described
herein.
d. Active employees who waive health benefits coverage shall not be
required to contribute toward the cost of health benefits.
§ 9-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-12
1:377
§ 9-12. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-12.1. Treatment of Employees and the Public.
§ 9-12.2. Responsibility of Department Head or Supervisor.
§ 9-12.3. Forwarding of Grievance to Business Administrator.
Step 3. If the grievance is denied at Step 2, or no decision is rendered within
time period, the grievance may be processed to the Township Business
Administrator within seven work days.
a. Every employee shall be treated fairly, courteously, and with respect.
Conversely, each employee shall accord the same respect to his/her
associates, supervisors, and to the public. Each employee shall be
careful that his or her behavior, actions, language, dress or conduct,
does not reflect adversely upon himself or herself and/or on the
Township.
b. The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level,
an equitable solution to the problems which may arise affecting the
terms and conditions of employment.
c. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the right of an employee
having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with his or her
immediate supervisor or foreman.
d. A grievance is defined as an appeal by an individual employee
concerning the interpretation, application or alleged violation of this
chapter, Township policies and/or procedures or administrative
decisions by the Township Committee or the Business Administrator
affecting terms and conditions of employment.
e. The time periods set forth in this procedure shall be deemed the
maximum. However, the parties may mutually agree to extend any time
limit set forth in the procedure. In the event that any step of the
grievance procedure is without authority to adjust or resolve the
grievance, the aggrieved party may initiate the grievance at the first
step of the procedure that is authorized to adjust the matter.
a. Step 1. Within seven work days of knowledge of the facts giving rise to
the grievance, the aggrieved party shall discuss it orally with the
department head in an effort to resolve the matter.
b. Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved informally at Step 1, the
aggrieved party shall, within seven working days of the Step 1 denial,
submit it in writing to the department head. The written grievance shall
set forth the nature of the grievance, the relief sought and the
disposition of Step 1. The department head shall render a written
decision to the aggrieved party and Association within 10 calendar days
setting forth his/her reasoning for the decision.
§ 9-12 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-12.4
1:378
§ 9-12.4. Responsibility of Business Administrator.
Within 10 days of receipt of the grievance the Business Administrator shall
either issue a written decision or hold a meeting on the grievance. In
the event the Business Administrator determines to hold a meeting on the
grievance, a written decision shall be issued within 10 days of the end of the
meeting.
§ 9-12.5. Grievance Information Maintained in Employee's File.
All papers and documents relating to the grievance and the disposition
thereof shall be placed in the employee's personal file.
§ 9-13. DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-13.1. Disciplinary Actions - General.
a. The Township of Neptune will at all times consider the rights of the
employee in matters of discipline. It is the responsibility of the
immediate supervisor to enforce and maintain proper discipline. To
ensure that employees are informed when infractions or shortcomings
are noted, a progressive disciplinary procedure will ordinarily be
utilized. In certain more severe instances, it may be necessary to bypass
one or more of the preliminary steps in order to impose suspension or
dismissal of an employee.
b. Neither this manual nor any other Township guidelines, policies or
practices create an employment contract. Employment with the
Township may be terminated at any time with or without cause or
reason by the employee or Township.
c. An employee may be subject to discipline for any of the following
reasons:
1. Falsification of public records, including attendance and other
personnel records.
2. Failure to report absence.
3. Harassment of coworkers and/or volunteers and visitors.
4. Theft or attempted theft of property belonging to the Township,
fellow employees, volunteers, or visitors.
5. Failure to report to work day or days prior to or following a
vacation, holiday and/or leave, and/or any other unauthorized day
of absence.
6. Fighting on Township property at any time.
7. Being under the influence of intoxicants (e.g., liquor) or illegal
drugs (e.g., cocaine or marijuana) on Township property and at any
time during work hours.
§ 9-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-13.1
1:379
8. Possession, sale, transfer or use of intoxicants or illegal drugs on
Township property and at any time during work hours.
9. Insubordination.
10. Entering the building without permission during nonscheduled
work hours.
11. Soliciting on Township premises during work time. This includes
but is not limited to distribution of literature or products or
soliciting membership in fraternal, religious, social or political
organizations, and/or sales of products.
12. Careless waste of materials or abuse of tools, equipment or
supplies.
13. Deliberate destruction or damage to Township or suppliers'
property.
14. Sleeping on the job.
15. Carrying weapons of any kind on Township premises and/or during
work hours, unless carrying a weapon is a function of your job
duties.
16. Violation of established safety and fire regulations.
17. Unscheduled absence and chronic or excessive absence.
18. Chronic tardiness.
19. Unauthorized absence from work area, and/or roaming or loitering
on the premises, during scheduled work hours.
20. Defacing walls, bulletin boards or any other Township or suppliers'
property.
21. Failure to perform duties, inefficiency or substandard performance.
22. Unauthorized disclosure of confidential Township information.
23. Gambling on Township premises.
24. Horseplay, disorderly conduct and use of abusive and/or obscene
language on Township premises.
25. Deliberate delay or restriction of your work effort, and/or
incitement of others to delay or restrict their work effort.
26. Conviction of a crime or disorderly persons offense.
27. Violating any Township rules or policies.
28. Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
29. Violation of Township policies, procedures and regulations.
§ 9-13.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-13.1
1:380
§ 9-13.2. Progressive Discipline.
The normal application of progressive discipline should be:
30. Violation of federal, state or Township laws, rules, or regulations
concerning drug and alcohol use and possession.
31. Unauthorized use of computers, internet and email.
32. Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles.
33. Other sufficient cause.
d. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion,
suspension exceeding five working days. Minor discipline includes a
formal, written reprimand or a suspension of five working days or less.
Employees who object to the terms or conditions of the discipline are
entitled to a hearing under the applicable grievance procedure and/or
this handbook. In every case involving employee discipline, employees
will be provided with an opportunity to respond to charges either
verbally or in writing.
e. In cases of employee misconduct, the Township believes in corrective
action for the purpose of correcting undesirable behavior and
preventing a reoccurrence of that behavior. The corrective action taken
will be related to the gravity of the situation, the number and kind of
previous infractions and other circumstances. In every case, employees
will be given an opportunity to state the situation from their point of
view.
f. In order to correct undesirable behavior, supervisors and managers
may utilize the following corrective tools: verbal reprimand; Township
Administrator review; written reprimand; suspension; fines; and
dismissal. Under normal circumstances, the Township endorses a policy
of progressive discipline in which it attempts to provide employees with
notice of deficiencies and an opportunity to improve. It does, however,
retain the right to administer discipline in any manner it sees fit. At the
discretion of the Township, action may begin at any step, and/or certain
steps may be repeated or bypassed, depending on the severity and
nature of the infraction and the employee's work/disciplinary record.
a. Step 1: Verbal Warning.
1. Step 1 creates an opportunity for the immediate supervisor to
schedule a meeting with an employee to bring attention to the
existing performance, conduct or attendance issue. The supervisor
should discuss with the employee the nature of the problem or the
violation of company policies and procedures. The supervisor is
expected to clearly describe expectations and steps the employee
must take to improve performance or resolve the problem. A
corrective action plan must be implemented. This meeting is to be
documented on an "Employee Warning Notice."
§ 9-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-13.2
1:381
2. This meeting must be documented to ensure that the employee has
a clear understanding of what is expected of him/her. Within one
business day of this meeting, the supervisor will prepare written
documentation of a Step 1 meeting. The employee will be asked to
sign the "Employee Warning Notice" to demonstrate his or her
understanding of the issues and the corrective action.
b. Step 2: Written Warning.
1. Although the Township hopes that the employee will promptly
correct any performance, conduct or attendance issues that were
identified in Step 1, the Township recognizes that this may not
always occur. The Step 2 written warning involves more detailed
documentation of the performance, conduct or attendance issues
and consequences.
2. During Step 2, the immediate supervisor and a division manager or
director will meet with the employee to review any additional
incidents or information about the performance, conduct or
attendance issues as well as any prior relevant corrective action
plans. Management will outline the consequences for the employee
of his or her continued failure to meet performance or conduct
expectations.
c. Step 3: Suspension and Final Written Warning.
1. There may be performance, conduct or safety incidents so
problematic and harmful that the most effective action may be the
temporary removal of the employee from the workplace. When
immediate action is necessary to ensure the safety of the employee
or others, the immediate supervisor may suspend the employee
pending the results of an investigation.
2. Suspensions that are recommended as part of the normal
progression of this progressive discipline policy and procedure are
subject to approval from a next-level manager and the Human
Resources Department.
3. Depending on the seriousness of the infraction, the employee may
be suspended without pay in full-day increments consistent with
federal, state and local wage-and-hour employment laws.
Nonexempt/hourly employees may not substitute or use an accrued
paid vacation or sick day in lieu of the unpaid suspension unless
approved by the Township Administrator. Due to Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) compliance issues, unpaid suspension of
salaried/exempt employees is reserved for serious workplace safety
or conduct issues. The Township Administrator will provide
guidance so that the discipline is administered without
jeopardizing the FLSA exemption status. The Township
Administrator will advise.
§ 9-13.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-13.2
1:382
§ 9-13.3. Appeal of Disciplinary Action.
Any employee may appeal a disciplinary action taken by his immediate
supervisor, by means of the procedure set forth for the handling of
grievances, to the Township Administrator, who shall make the final
determination regarding all disciplinary matters. Disciplinary actions taken
by the Township Administrator may be appealed as provided by law.
§ 9-13.4. through § 9-13.5. (Reserved)
§ 9-13.6. Enforcement of Personnel Policies.
Any department head or supervisor who fails to enforce the policies and
Codes of Conduct as established herein or by any other ordinance of the
Township and/or who knowingly tolerates the violation of said policies or
codes of conduct shall be subject to disciplinary action.
§ 9-14. MERITORIOUS ACTIONS AND SUGGESTIONS. [8-12-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-23]
4. Pay may be restored to the employee if an investigation of the
incident or infraction absolves the employee.
d. Step 4: Recommendation for Termination of Employment.
1. The last and most serious step in the progressive discipline
procedure is a recommendation to terminate employment.
Generally, the Township will exercise the progressive nature of this
policy by first providing documented verbal warning with
corrective action plan, written warning with performance
improvement plan, a final written warning or suspension from the
workplace with performance improvement plan before proceeding
to a recommendation to terminate employment. However, the
Township reserves the right to combine and skip steps depending
on the circumstances of each situation and the nature of the
offense. Furthermore, employees may be terminated without prior
notice or disciplinary action.
2. Management's recommendation to terminate employment must be
approved by the Township Administrator and Committee. The
Township Administrator shall also consult with the Township's
Labor Counsel in termination cases. Final determination of
termination of an employee will be provided in writing.
e. Performance and Conduct Issues Not Subject to Progressive Discipline.
Behavior that is illegal is not subject to progressive discipline, and such
behavior may be reported to local law enforcement authorities.
Typically, the supervisor should suspend the employee immediately
(with or without pay) and an investigation of the incidents leading up to
the suspension should be conducted to determine if any further action,
such as termination, should be taken.
§ 9-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-14.1
1:383
§ 9-14.1. Public Commendation of Employees.
The Township Committee shall publicly commend any employee whose
exemplary action or conduct has furthered the public interest and/or whose
suggestion on Township operation has improved service to the Township
and/or effected economy in government.
§ 9-14.2. Letters of Commendation.
Any letter from the public commending the work or action of an employee
while on duty shall be referred to the Township Committee for its review
and commendation. A copy of the letter shall be forwarded to the employee
and the original placed in the employee's personal file.
§ 9-14.3. Meritorious Actions.
Where an employee shall perform a meritorious act over and above the
call of duty, appropriate formal recognition of that fact shall be made. The
immediate supervisor or department head shall investigate the incident,
obtain all facts relating thereto and forward a written report to the Business
Administrator for presentation to the Township Committee.
§ 9-14.4. Record of Meritorious Action to Be Placed in Employee's
File.
The Township Committee shall consider the matter and take such action
as is necessary and proper to commend the employee for the meritorious
action. All papers in connection therewith shall be placed in the employee's
personal file.
§ 9-14.5. Suggestions for Improving Township Services.
All employees shall submit to the supervisor or department head any and
all suggestions for improving service within the Township and effecting
economy in operation.
§ 9-14.6. Encouragement by Supervisors or Department Heads.
Supervisors or department heads shall encourage the cooperation of and
suggestions from employees towards the end that the public may be the
better served.
§ 9-14.7. Forwarding of Suggestions to Business Administrator.
Supervisors or department heads shall report to the Business Administrator
any suggestions or ideas submitted by an employee that have improved
services and affected economies of Township operations.
§ 9-14.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-14.8
1:384
§ 9-14.8. Report to Township Committee.
Whenever specific suggestions or ideas result in an improvement in service
or of an economy of operation within the Township, a written report thereof
shall be referred to the Business Administrator for consideration by the
Township Committee.
§ 9-14.9. Commendation of Employees for Suggestions.
The Township Committee shall study all reports of suggestions submitted
by the Business Administrator and if deemed appropriate under the
circumstances, publicly commend the employee.
§ 9-14.10. Commendations to Be Placed in Employee's File.
All papers relating to the suggestion and the action taken by the Township
Committee in relation thereto shall be placed in the employee's personal
file.
§ 9-15. CLASSIFICATION AND TRANSFERS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-15.1. Promotions from Within.
Employee promotions shall be made from within the ranks of the Township's
staff whenever practical, and providing the employee possesses the
necessary experience, temperament and knowledge to perform the required
duty and providing further that the employee can be promoted without
adversely effecting the operation of the department.
§ 9-15.2. Interests of Township to Be First Consideration.
The best interest of the Township shall be the first consideration for transfer
of an employee from one position to another within a department or from
one department to another.
§ 9-15.3. Advancement; On-the-Job Training.
§ 9-15.4. Promotions Made at Discretion of Township Committee.
Promotions from within the ranks shall be made at the discretion of the
Township Committee as recommended by the Township Administrator and
a. Each employee shall be encouraged toward self improvement through
on-the-job training as well as by outside study and instruction in order
to qualify him/her for advancement.
b. Supervisors or department heads shall be responsible for on-the-job
instructions as well as providing guidance for all persons under their
leadership.
§ 9-14.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-15.4
1:385
Human Resources Director, but based, nevertheless, on the standards set
forth in Subsection 9-15.1 above.
§ 9-15.5. Recommendations for Promotion.
All recommendations for promotion shall be submitted in writing by the
department head or supervisor and endorsed by the Business Administrator
before being sent to the Township Committee for its consideration and
action.
§ 9-15.6. Requests for Transfers.
Requests by an employee for transfer to another position or department
shall be submitted to the Business Administrator and Human Resources
Director in writing to be considered on its individual merit by the Township
Committee and under no circumstances shall such a transfer, if granted, be
considered as establishing a precedent.
§ 9-15.7. Replacement of Unsatisfactory Employees.
The Business Administrator or Hearing Officer reserves the right to replace
any employee in his/her current job category when, in the opinion of the
Business Administrator/Hearing Officer, the employee is performing his/her
work unsatisfactorily and/or contrary to the best interest of the Township.
The employee so replaced, or his/her bargaining unit, shall have the right
to request a review of the charges and information by the Township
Committee, but a hearing before the Township Committee will not be
provided unless specifically directed by the Township Committee.
§ 9-15.8. Training Programs to Be Available.
§ 9-15.9. Job Openings and Training Programs to Be Posted.
a. It shall be the responsibility of the supervisor or department head to
formalize a training program for each job classification under his
authority. Such training program shall be approved in writing by the
Business Administrator. The training program shall be scheduled to
avoid interfering with the normal operations of the Township.
b. The successful completion of a training program, however, shall not
necessarily mean a promotion or increase in salary except at the
discretion of the Township Committee.
a. It shall be the responsibility of the Human Resources Director to post
all job openings available to the employees except for the following
positions: Assessment Search Officer, Business Administrator, Chief
Financial Officer, Emergency Management Coordinator, Municipal
Public Defender, Municipal Court Judge, Municipal Clerk, Municipal
Prosecutor, Tax Search Officer, Tax Collector, and Tax Assessor. Notice
of all other vacancies shall be posted. Job postings shall be posted in the
following manner: job title, department, salary range, hours of work,
§ 9-15.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-15.9
1:386
§ 9-15.10. Seniority.
§ 9-16. SEPARATION AND TERMINATION. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-16.1. Resignation from Position; Requirements.
job qualifications and person to contact. All job postings shall be held
open for seven working days, except in emergency circumstances as
declared by the Business Administrator, where only three working days
will be required. All applicants for job postings shall be personally
interviewed prior to appointment of the position. All applicants shall be
informed within five working days of a Township Committee resolution
to fill a position. Unsuccessful applicant(s) who make a written request
to the Business Administrator within two business days of the above
notification shall be informed of the basis for the decision within 10
working days.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the department head or supervisor to
post, within his/her department, all training programs available to the
employees. A copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the Human
Resources Director to be posted in all departments of the Township so
that any and all employees regardless of their job classification may
take advantage of the training program. Use of an electronic document
management service will be considered to have fulfilled the
requirements of posting as described herein.
a. Seniority shall be defined as the total length of service with the
Township beginning with the original date of hire. A seniority list, by
department, shall be created for overtime opportunities and overtime
shall be distributed on a rotating basis to employees who normally
perform said work within that specific department and pursuant to said
list.
b. Seniority shall be the determining factor in the selection of vacation
and personal time and special work assignments within the department
provided that it does not interfere with the Township's right to
accomplish the necessary task. In matter of promotions, vacancies or
position upgrades, where the qualifications, skill and abilities are equal,
as determined by the Business Administrator, seniority shall be the
determining factor.
a. An employee who resigns his/her position with the Township shall
tender his/her resignation in writing to the Business Administrator and/
or Human Resources Director at least two weeks prior to the effective
date thereof in order to provide for sufficient time for appointing and
instructing a successor.
b. In such cases where disciplinary charges are pending against the
employee, the Township reserves the right to withhold acceptance of
such resignation pending a determination of the charges.
§ 9-15.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-16.1
1:387
§ 9-16.2. Receipt of Final Compensation; Procedures.
§ 9-16.3. Unused Sick Leave.
Upon termination of service for any reason except as outlined in Subsection
9-9.6 above, no cash payment for unused sick leave shall be made.
§ 9-16.4. Employees "Not in Good Standing"; Effect.
§ 9-16.5. Absence Without Notice.
Any employee who shall fail to report to work for three consecutive days
without notice, and/or approval of the department head or supervisor, shall
be considered to have resigned "not in good standing."
c. An oral resignation will be deemed binding but shall constitute
resignation "not in good standing."
d. Failure to provide at least two weeks, written notice of resignation shall
cause the resignation being found to be "not in good standing."
a. An employee, when leaving the service of the Township, shall complete
and sign the "Separation and Termination Receipt" in the Human
Resources office before receiving his/her final compensation. This
receipt shall be filed in the employee's personal file as evidence of the
satisfaction of all claims against the Township.
b. An employee terminated by the action of the Township Committee shall
receive his/her final compensation upon signing the "Separation and/or
Termination Receipt."
c. On termination of the employee it shall be the responsibility of the
employee to return all property of the Township together with all
identity cards.
d. An employee resigning his/her employment shall receive his/her final
paycheck on the next regularly established payday for all Township
employees.
a. An employee terminated in connection with a disciplinary action, or
resigning and not giving at least two weeks' notice in writing, prior to
the effective date thereof, shall be considered resigning "not in good
standing" and shall forfeit any earned vacation pay, holiday pay and
compensatory time off.
b. An employee terminated due to conviction for a crime or for bringing
discredit to the Township shall be terminated "not in good standing"
and the employee shall forfeit any and all termination benefits unless, in
the discretion of the Township Committee, it is otherwise determined.
§ 9-16.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-16.6
1:388
§ 9-16.6. Beneficiary of Benefits to Be Designated.
Each employee shall designate, on the form provided by the Chief Financial
Officer, a beneficiary for any monies which shall become due from the
Township.
§ 9-17. RESTRICTIONS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-17.1. Compensation Withheld from Paychecks.
No part of the compensation due an employee shall be withheld from his/
her paycheck, except as required by law or as authorized by the employee
in writing.
§ 9-17.2. Certain Activities Prohibited During Working Hours.
No employee of the Township during working hours shall sell merchandise
to or solicit from other employees or engage in political activities while on
Township property or on a job site apart therefrom.
§ 9-17.3. Personal Use of Township Equipment or Supplies.
No employee shall use any equipment, supplies, or other material of the
Township, for personal use without the prior consent of the Business
Administrator.
§ 9-17.4. Personal Use of Township Telephones and Computers.
The policy for use of Township telephones, computers and other electronic
devices during and after work hours is detailed in the Personnel Policy
Handbook.
§ 9-17.5. Outside Employment.
a. Any employee of the Township seeking to engage in work or services for
other employers or in other businesses shall inform the Township in
writing to the Business Administrator.
b. The employee shall also submit to the Business Administrator a
statement certifying that the outside employer maintains a certificate of
workmens' compensation insurance for the employee or, if the
employee is self-employed, an insurance policy covering him/her.
c. Any employee classified in the job title of Building Inspector, Housing
Inspector, any Subcode Official, Subcode Inspector, Construction
Official, Code Enforcement Supervisor or Director of Code shall not
perform work on any structure in the Township of Neptune that involves
construction, building or any other type of improvement or
maintenance with the following exceptions:
§ 9-16.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-17.5
1:389
§ 9-17.6. Prohibited Compensation of Gifts.
§ 9-18. ADMINISTRATION AND RECORDS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-18.1. Copy of Personnel Policies to Be Provided to Employees.
Each employee shall be given a copy of the Personnel Policy Guidebook
and directed to review the personnel ordinances of the Township which he/
she shall study and retain for future reference. The employee shall sign
a statement agreeing to conform to and abide by the policies, rules and
Code of Conduct set forth therein, and return the statement to the Business
Administrator.
§ 9-18.2. Township Committee to Oversee Personnel Policies.
The Township Committee reserves the right to add to, to change, to
interpret, or to eliminate personnel policies, practices and rules, whenever
it appears to be in the best interests of the Township to do so.
§ 9-18.3. Amendments to Personnel Policies; Copies.
All changes, additions or deletions in the Personnel Ordinance and/or the
Personnel Policy Guidebook will be made by means of amendment thereof.
The amendment shall be distributed to each employee.
1. The work is for the employee or a member of the employee's
immediate family for which no compensation or consideration of
any kind is received.
2. The work is for a nonprofit charitable organization for which
compensation or consideration of any kind is not received provided
that any required permits for the structure are issued by a licensing
authority other than the Township of Neptune.
a. No employee shall solicit or accept either directly or indirectly, through
his/her spouse or any member of his/her family, any compensation, gift,
favor or service of value which he/she knows, or should know, is offered
or obtained to influence him/her in the performance of his/her public
duties and responsibilities.
b. Any prohibited gift or gratuity received by any employee from any
person or firm should immediately be returned. An employee shall
promptly report the receipt of such gift to the Business Administrator. If
the gift is perishable or for some other reason cannot be returned, it
shall be turned over to a charitable or public institution. In such
instances, the employee should notify the donor in writing that he/she is
not permitted to accept such gifts and has contributed the gift to a
charitable institution. A copy of the letter from the employee to the
donor shall be submitted to the Business Administrator for inclusion in
the employee's personal file.
§ 9-17.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-18.4
1:390
§ 9-18.4. Employee Personnel File; Access; Maintenance.
§ 9-18.5. Contents of Personnel File for Employee.
A personnel file shall contain but shall not be restricted to the following
enumerated papers:
§ 9-18.6. Pay Dates.
Employees will receive their paychecks on the 15th and last day of the
month. In the event that either of these two days falls on a non-banking day,
paychecks will be given out on the previous banking day. No employee shall
a. A separate personnel file will be established and maintained for each
employee of the Township.
b. A personal file is a confidential file and shall be maintained as such in
the office of the Human Resources Director. A personnel file shall be
classified as "active" where the employee is on the payroll and the same
shall be classified as "closed" where an employee is no longer in the
service of the Township.
c. The Business Administrator and Human Resources Director shall have
access to any and all personnel files. A supervisor or department head
shall have access to review the files of an employee of his/her
department in the office of the Human Resources Director. An employee
may examine his/her personnel file in the office of the Human
Resources, by making an appointment during regular working hours.
d. All personnel files shall be permanently maintained and safe-guarded.
Nothing contained in the file shall be removed therefrom.
a. Application for employment and reference letters, if any.
b. Agreement to conform to personnel policies, practices and Code of
Conduct.
c. Medical examination record (separate file pursuant to Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act).
d. Written authorization appointing the applicant to a position with the
Township together with each promotion, change in position or change
in salary.
e. Letters of commendation or of censure.
f. Report of any disciplinary hearings involving the employee.
g. Any and all correspondence, memoranda or other pertinent material
directly concerning an employee's conduct and work record.
h. Letter of resignation (if any).
i. Termination receipt.
§ 9-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-18.6
1:391
receive their paycheck prior to that date under any circumstances without
the approval of the Business Administrator.
§ 9-19. POLICY AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT. [8-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-23]
The policy regarding sexual harassment is detailed in the Personnel Policy
Handbook and remains in compliance with State and federal law.
§ 9-20. SPECIAL DUTY ASSIGNMENTS FOR POLICE OFFICERS,
SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL EMPLOYEES.
§ 9-20.1. Purpose.
For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the services
of law enforcement officers or certified traffic control employees of the
Township of Neptune, the Township hereby establishes a policy regarding
the use of said employees.
§ 9-20.2. Escrow Accounts.
a. Sworn officers of the Police Department, special police officers and
certified traffic control employees shall be permitted to perform police
or traffic-control-related employment for private employers or school
districts at such times that will not interfere with the efficient
performance of the Township.
b. Any person or entity wishing to employ police or traffic control
employees shall first obtain the approval of the Chief of Police (or
designee), which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the
Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Department, and would
not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the employee or
employees who are to perform the work.
a. Any person or entity requesting the services of a law enforcement
officer in the Neptune Township Police Department or a traffic control
employee shall estimate the number of hours such services are
required, which estimate shall be approved by the Chief of Police, and
shall establish an escrow account with the Township by depositing an
amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and fees set forth
by resolution of the Township Committee for the total estimated hours
of service.
b. Prior to accepting any request for services of law enforcement officers
or traffic control employees, the Chief of Police or his designee shall
verify that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for
the number of hours specified in the request for services. The Chief of
Police shall not accept a request for services from any person or entity
unless all fees and compensation required in the manner described
§ 9-18.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-20.2
1:392
§ 9-20.3. Requests for Service.
§ 9-20.4. Security Assignments.
Security assignments performed on a repetitive scheduled basis shall be
assigned and administered by the Chief of Police. At the option of the
Township, as determined by the Chief of Police, employees of the Township
assigned and working pursuant to this regulation may be treated as an
off-duty employee of the Township. Wages earned for off-duty assignments
shall not be applied toward the pension benefits, shall not be considered
overtime and shall be paid at a rate of pay as established by resolution of
the Township Committee.
above have been deposited with the Township. No officer or employee
shall provide any services for more hours than are specified in the
request for services.
c. In the event the funds in said escrow account become depleted,
services of law enforcement officers or traffic control employees shall
cease and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
d. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
e. Should the Township be able to attain interest-bearing accounts from
the Township bank for this escrow account, interest shall be divided 2/3
to contractor and 1/3 to Township. Any interest earned shall remain in
the account until the account is closed at the request of the contractor
and all fees for service have been satisfied or upon written request of
the contractor to withdraw said funds. The Township shall not be
required to maintain these funds in an interest-bearing account if the
fees for such an account are in excess of the interest that would be
earned by the account.
a. The Chief of Police will be responsible for scheduling employees who
will be assigned to on-duty work as described herein provided the
assignment of such employee does not interfere with the efficient
operation of the Police Department.
b. The Chief of Police shall determine if a Township vehicle is required for
the assignment and shall assign a vehicle in such case as he deems
necessary.
c. The Chief of Police will be responsible for posting the availability of any
assignment deemed to be an off-duty detail for voluntary assignment by
all eligible employees.
§ 9-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-20.5
1:393
§ 9-20.5. Special Duty Assignment Must Be Within Township;
Exceptions.
All special duty assignments shall be within the Township unless specific
written approval is given by the Chief of Police for an employee to work
outside of the Township.
§ 9-20.6. Cancellation of Assignment.
Any assignment which is canceled on less than four hours' notice shall be
charged against the party and, if the detail was deemed to be an off-duty
assignment to which an employee had already been assigned, it shall be
paid to the employee so assigned. Any other canceled assignment shall not
be billable to the party.
§ 9-20.7. Chief's Order to Vacate Assignment.
The Chief of Police has the authority to order any employee to vacate or
terminate any special duty assignment in response to emergency situations
or whenever the assignment creates an unacceptable risk to health, safety
and/or welfare of the employee and/or the public in the sole determination
and discretion of the Chief of Police. The contractor shall not be responsible
for any compensation for the time that the employee is away from the
special duty assignments and shall have no claim for costs or damages
against the Township, the Chief or the employee arising from the
termination of special duty assignment other than the prorated return of
any costs prepaid to the Township.
§ 9-20.8. Township to Provide Insurance Coverage.
The Township shall be responsible to provide all necessary insurance
coverage, as required by law, including, but not limited to, workers'
compensation, public liability, and claims for damage, for personal injury
including death or damage to property which may arise as a result of the
Township's performance under the contract.
§ 9-20.9. Rates for Services.
The Township Committee shall establish the hourly rate of special duty
assignments by resolution, which may be amended from time to time at the
discretion of the Township Committee.
§ 9-20.10. Length of Assignment.
No assignment shall exceed eight hours per employee, unless the Chief
deems the situation to be emergent in nature and thus requiring an
extended shift.
§ 9-20.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-20.11
1:394
§ 9-20.11. Length of Contract.
All persons or entities wishing to employ a police officer, special police
officer or traffic control employee shall enter into a written contract
outlining the terms and conditions as described herein. All contracts shall
expire no later than December 31 of the year in which they are executed.
The form of the contract shall be maintained on file in the office of the
Business Administrator and the Chief of Police.
§ 9-21. NO SMOKING POLICY. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-21.1. No Smoking Policy.
The No Smoking Policy is detailed in the Personnel Policy Handbook.
§ 9-22. SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY FOR EMPLOYEES WITH
COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
§ 9-22.1. Recognition.
a. Neptune Township ("Township") recognizes the present problem of
substance abuse, and the profound effects it has on our society, and the
extent to which it can affect Neptune Township, its agencies and its
employees. In order to make our work environment safer, and to comply
with Federal Department of Transportation and Federal Highway
Administration regulations, Neptune Township has established a
Substance Abuse Policy ("policy"). This policy includes a procedure
which will require applicants and employees who hold a commercial
driver's License ("CDL") to submit to urine screening to detect the
presence of drugs in certain circumstances. Such employees and
applicants shall also be subject to alcohol breath testing. According to
federal regulations, such employees and job applicants will be required
to undergo alcohol and drug screening in the following circumstances:
1. Pre-Placement Testing. Prior to assuming full employment status, a
successful applicant will be granted conditional employment
status, contingent on successful passing of the drug screen.
2. Random Selection Testing. During employment, based on the
average number of CDL holders employed by Neptune Township
annually, 25% of all drivers shall be randomly selected for alcohol
testing and 50% of all drivers shall be randomly selected for
controlled substances testing.
3. Reasonable Cause Testing. Based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning an employee's appearance,
behavior, speech, odor and/or performance, Neptune Township
may require an employee submit to controlled substances and/or
alcohol testing.
§ 9-20.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-22.1
1:395
§ 9-22.2. Policy.
4. Post-Accident Testing. If an employee is involved in an accident, in
a Township vehicle or engaged in official Township business,
resulting in either a citation/ticket/summonses for a moving traffic
violation, an injury resulting in a victim seeking treatment in an
emergency room, or loss of life, the employee shall be required to
undergo both controlled substances and breath alcohol testing.
5. Return-To-Work Testing. No employee who has violated the
provisions of this policy may return to safety-sensitive functions
without having been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor and
having successfully passed either or both a controlled substances
and breath alcohol test.
6. Followup/Rehabilitation Testing. As a condition of continued
employment after having violated provisions of this policy, such
employees shall be subject to a minimum of six unannounced
controlled substances and/or alcohol breath tests during the
following 12 months after returning to work.
b. This policy will deter substance abuse, detect and address substance
abuse problems as quickly as possible, provide help where possible, and
encourage employees who are abusing drugs to seek assistance
voluntarily.
a. Neptune Township considers drug and alcohol screening of its
applicants and employees to be a necessary condition of continued
employment with Neptune Township and will consider an employee's
continuation of work at Neptune Township to be an assent to this
condition of employment.
b. Reporting to work or for the performance of Township business, or
otherwise being on Township property [NOTE: The term "Township
property" includes the following, wherever located: all property,
facilities, land, buildings, structures, trucks, automobiles, and all other
vehicles, whether owned, leased or used, by the Township or its
affiliates and/or subsidiaries.] under the influence of drugs or alcohol is
prohibited as is the use, possession, distribution, manufacture, sale, or
purchase of drugs or alcohol while at work or on Neptune Township
premises, or while on Neptune Township business.
c. Applicants and employees who fail to pass either the drug and/or
alcohol screen are in violation of Federal Highway Administration
regulations (announced in 59 Federal Register 7505-27; codified at 49
CFR Part 382.101-605), and are subject to mandated penalties, which
include: disqualification for driving, mandatory substance abuse
counseling, return-to-duty and random followup testing, and reporting
of the incident to federal authorities. In addition, Neptune Township
may also impose penalties (including termination) for CDL holders in
violation of the federal regulations expressed in this policy.
§ 9-22.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-22.2
1:396
§ 9-22.3. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL/ALCOHOL USE — The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol,
ethyl alcohol, or other low-weight alcohols including methyl and isopropyl
alcohol. Use four hours prior to reporting for work, and working while
under the influence of alcohol measured at 0.02 blood alcohol concentration
("BAC"), or greater, is prohibited.
CDL/DRIVER — Means and designates all holders of a commercial driver's
license. This policy applies to such persons regardless of their status of
intra- or interstate driving responsibilities.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES — As used by this policy and any or all
appended forms, the terms "drugs" and "controlled substances" shall
include all derivatives of the following classes of drugs: marijuana, cocaine,
opiates (heroin, etc.), phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamines.
SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTIONS — Any on-duty functions including but
not limited to: loading, driving, parking, inspecting, moving, servicing,
d. Employees who are convicted for on- or off-job drug activity are also in
violation of this policy, New Jersey State Executive Order No. 204. In
deciding what action to take, management will take into account the
nature of the charges, the employee's present job responsibilities, the
employee's record with Neptune Township, and other factors relevant
to the impact of the employee's arrest upon Neptune Township.
e. Neptune Township may conduct searches without further notice and
without reasonable suspicion for illegal drugs or alcohol in Neptune
Township facilities. Neptune Township facilities include, but are not
limited to: Neptune Township lockers, desks, toolboxes, filing cabinets,
vehicles, packages, work stations and other Township property.
f. Failure to sign any applicable consents, submit to drug and/or alcohol
testing, to disclose and explain the nature of any suspected substance,
or the refusal of any other reasonable request under this policy; or
attempt to dilute, switch or adulterate a urine or breath alcohol
specimen, will be viewed as insubordination and subject to discipline,
including dismissal, reassignment, rehabilitation or other actions as
management finds appropriate. In addition, the Township retains the
option to report such activities to law enforcement officials.
Being under the influence of drugs shall be determined by a substance
screen of bodily fluids that reveals such controlled substances and/or
metabolites. A positive drug screen result will be considered to be a
violation of this policy.
a.
Legally obtained nonprescription and prescription drugs taken in
recommended dosages are not intended to be included in the definition
of "drugs" or "substances."
b.
§ 9-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-22.3
1:397
repairing a commercial motor vehicle (defined at 49 CFR 382.107). In all
cases the listing of such functions at 49 CFR 395.2, Paragraphs (1) to (7),
shall be controlling.
VIOLATION — Any amount of controlled substance found in blood, breath
or urine, or any testing method deemed appropriate by a medical doctor or
testing facility.
§ 9-22.4. Pre-Employment Drug Screening.
a. Statement. Given the Township's concern for drug and alcohol use
interfering with safety within the workplace and all members of the
public with whom Township employees have contact, combined with the
Township's commitment to a drug-free workplace, Neptune Township
will require all offers of employment extended to applicants be
conditioned on the applicant's ability to pass an alcohol and drug
screening prior to being granted full employment status.
1. Controlled Substances Screening. At testing thresholds stated in
the "Urine Specimen Collection Procedures" section of this policy.
2. Alcohol Testing. No applicant shall be granted full employment
status until they have successfully passed an alcohol test with a
result less than 0.02 BAC.
b. Failure of Either Alcohol or Drug Screen. Failure to pass either the
alcohol or drug screening may result in withdrawal of a conditional
offer of employment. When an offer is withdrawn for these reasons, the
applicant may reapply in six months for potential employment with this
Township. However, results of previous failed drug screening may be
considered by the Township in subsequent job applications. Applicants
that are denied full-employment status may request the test results
within 60 days from the date of the testing.
c. Notice of Policy. All applicants will be notified of Neptune Township's
Substance Abuse Policy (this policy), and the mandatory alcohol and
drug screening at the time they complete their job application and at
least 24 hours prior to the test. Each employee will receive a "Pre-
Employment Notice of Drug and Alcohol Screening" at the time they
complete a job application. All applicants subject to such testing shall
be provided with a copy of the "Pre-Employment Specimen Collection
Procedures" to review prior to the alcohol and drug screen.
d. Signed Release of Applicant. Every applicant who is requested to
submit to an alcohol and drug screen will be required to sign the
appropriate releases, thereby acknowledging awareness of this policy
and consent to undergo testing and have the results released to the
Township for employment determinations. Refusal to sign the consent
and/or provide a specimen for testing will be regarded as failing to
complete the application process and thereby rendering the applicant
unqualified for employment with Neptune Township and its agencies.
§ 9-22.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-22.4
1:398
§ 9-22.5. Post-Accident Testing.
e. Invalid Samples.
1. In the event a urine, blood or breath sample is determined to be
invalid or unreliable by the laboratory or by the Township's Medical
Review Officer, but not due to misconduct of the employee, the
applicant/employee will be immediately notified of this fact and be
required to submit to a new test.
2. If a sample is determined to be unreliable due to misconduct of the
applicant/employee, the individual will be regarded as having
violated this policy and subject to nonhiring and/or any other
appropriate discipline.
(a) Testing misconduct includes, but is not limited to: diluting the
specimen, substituting samples and presenting it (wrongfully)
as one's own sample, and attempting to adulterate the
specimen.
a. Neptune Township and its agencies will require all drivers who are
involved in a reportable accident to immediately report such an
accident to a Township supervisor or management representative and
undergo an alcohol and controlled substances test.
b. A reportable accident is an on-duty accident resulting in the loss of
human life, in the employee receiving a citation/ticket/summons for a
moving traffic violation connected to the accident, in bodily injury that
requires medical treatment or property and/or machinery damages in
excess of $2,500.
c. A driver subject to post-accident testing is to remain readily available at
the accident site or close thereby for such testing and shall not
consume any alcohol or substances prohibited by this policy.
1. Failure to remain readily available or not to consume such alcohol
or controlled substances shall be considered a refusal and a
violation of this policy.
2. Failure to sign any one of the consents, provide appropriate urine,
breath or blood samples, failure of the test, or testing misconduct
of the employee will subject the employee to discipline up to and
including termination.
3. However, nothing in this Policy shall require delay of medical
attention for injured person(s) following an accident or to prohibit a
driver from leaving the scene of an accident for their own medical
attention, to obtain assistance to respond to the accident, or to
comply with specific requests of law enforcement officials.
§ 9-22.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-22.5
1:399
§ 9-22.6. Reasonable Cause Testing.
d. Alcohol tests are to be administered: preferably within two hours of the
accident, and in no case any later than eight hours following the time of
the accident.
e. Controlled substances tests are to be administered no later than 32
hours following the accident.
f. Alcohol and/or controlled substances tests conducted by federal, state
or local authorities having independent authority for the testing shall
be considered to meet the requirements of this policy; provided that the
testing complies with this policy's requirements and the results are
released to the Township.
g. All drivers shall be informed of these post-accident procedures,
instructions and information to enable such drivers to comply with this
policy.
a. A driver may be required to submit to alcohol and/or controlled
substances testing based on the Township's reasonable suspicion that
the driver has violated the provisions of this policy.
b. Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning the driver's appearance, behavior,
speech, odor, and/or indications of use or withdrawal of alcohol/
controlled substances prohibited by this policy.
c. Whenever practicable, at least two supervisors should confer and agree
that reasonable suspicion exists to request the employee to submit to
testing. However, when only one supervisor is available, the use of only
one supervisor is permissible.
1. Questioning of Employees. When acting on reasonable suspicion
that the employee may be in violation of this policy, a supervisor
shall make all attempts to respect an employee's privacy.
Therefore, when time permits, a supervisor is to first consult with
management prior to initiating any conversation with the employee
regarding their compliance with this policy. Other guidelines
include:
(a) Questioning should be limited to general condition (e.g., does
the employee feel sick, do they know where they are, to whom
are they talking, and what may be the cause of the employee's
present condition).
(b) Care must be taken to unnecessarily identify the employee to
coworkers when initiating conversations concerning violations
of this policy. In most instances this will mean the employee is
to be questioned away from their designated job station and
from other employees' ability to overhear the conversation.
However, such removal from a job station in itself may
§ 9-22.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-22.6
1:400
needlessly identify an employee, and therefore, it may be
appropriate in some circumstances to begin questioning at the
employee's work station.
(c) Management and supervisors are to limit their conversations
regarding possible violations of this policy to those persons
who are participating in any questioning, evaluation,
investigation, or disciplinary action on a need-to-know basis.
Management and supervisors are to instruct other employees,
except as stated above, not to talk about such possible
violations.
d. In all instances, the supervisor(s) shall make a written record of the
observations leading to reasonable suspicion testing. Such record shall
be signed by the supervisor who made such observations within 24
hours of observed behavior or release of the test results (whichever is
earlier). Whenever practicable, a copy of this form will accompany the
employee to the medical testing facility. Reasonable cause testing
should not be based solely on third-person observations or reports,
unless the supervisor(s) can verify and indicate further such
observations to be reliable.
e. Any driver requested to submit to screening under reasonable cause
circumstances will be immediately escorted by a Township official to a
designated testing facility for the submission of a urine, breath and/or
blood sample. Any machinery being used by the affected employee will
be immediately taken out of operation until inspected and cleared for
reuse.
f. After a sample has been provided, the employee under this section of
this policy will not be permitted to operate Township machinery and will
be directed home. The employee will wait in a designated area until
arrangements are made for the transportation of the employee to their
home. The Township will first attempt to contact the employee's spouse
or member of their family. In the event no one can be contacted,
Neptune Township and its agencies will make arrangements to
transport the employee to their home. If the employee rejects these
alternatives, the Township will take appropriate measures to
discourage the employee from operating his vehicle, including
contacting law enforcement officials if necessary.
g. Employees requested to submit to testing under reasonable cause
circumstances will be suspended pending the results of the test. If the
test results are negative, the employee will be reinstated with full pay
and employee entitlements. If the results are positive, the employee
may be subject to discipline up to and including termination as effective
from the date of suspension.
h. Noncompliance by Employees.
1. Management and supervisors are not to attempt to use force in
seeking compliance with requests. Security personnel or possibly
§ 9-22.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-22.6
1:401
§ 9-22.7. Random Testing.
§ 9-22.8. Return to Duty/Followup Testing.
local law enforcement officials should be called if the supervisor
determines that the employee should not be allowed to remain in
the work area and the employee refuses to leave.
2. The supervisor is to explain to the employee that noncompliance
with the supervisor's requests to submit to alcohol and/or drug
testing under this policy, to disclose and explain the nature of any
suspected substance, to leave the work area or Township facility, or
any other reasonable request will be viewed as insubordination and
subject to discipline, including (but not limited to) termination for a
first time refusal or any subsequent refusal.
a. In order to comply with Federal Department of Transportation and
Federal Highway Administration regulations, all CDL holders shall be
subject to random alcohol and controlled substances testing at the
following rates:
1. Based on Neptune Township's annual average number of CDL
holders, 25% of such drivers shall be subject to unannounced
random selection alcohol testing.
2. Based on Neptune Township's annual average number of CDL
holders, 50% of such drivers shall be subject to unannounced
random selection controlled substances testing.
b. Once a driver is notified of their selection for testing, they are to
immediately proceed to the testing facility.
c. Regarding alcohol testing, a driver is to be notified just prior to, during
the performance of, or just following the completion of safety-sensitive
functions.
a. After having violated the provisions of this policy, no driver shall be
permitted to resume safety-sensitive functions until such driver has:
1. Been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor;
2. Successfully passed either (or both) a controlled substances and/or
alcohol test (return-to-duty testing);
3. In the instance of alcohol use violations of less than 0.04 BAC, the
driver shall also be prohibited from performing safety-sensitive
functions for a period of not less than 24 hours from the time of the
initial test which revealed the violation of this policy.
b. Pursuant to the substance abuse professional's evaluation of the driver,
the driver shall be subject to a minimum of six unannounced alcohol
and/or controlled substances tests during the following 12 months
("followup testing").
§ 9-22.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-22.8
1:402
§ 9-22.9. Other Applicable Provisions.
The provisions of § 9-25 of this chapter apply to employees covered by this
§ 9-22.
§ 9-23. SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY FOR EMPLOYEES HOLDING
SAFETY-SENSITIVE POSITIONS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-23.1. Recognition.
1. The counselor may schedule more than the minimum of six tests.
2. Submission to counseling and testing is voluntary, but failure to
comply will disqualify the driver under federal regulations and may
be grounds for dismissal by the employer, Neptune Township.
a. Neptune Township ("Township") recognizes the present problem of
substance abuse, and the profound effects it has on our society, and the
extent to which it can affect Neptune Township, its agencies and its
employees.
b. In order to make our work environment safer, and to comply with
governmental regulations, Neptune Township has established a
Substance Abuse Policy ("policy"). This policy includes a procedure
which will require applicants and employees of certain safety-sensitive
positions to submit to urine screening to detect the presence of drugs in
certain circumstances. Such employees and applicants shall also be
subject to alcohol breath testing. Our employees and applicants will be
required to undergo alcohol and drug screening in the following
circumstances:
1. Pre-Placement Testing. Prior to assuming full employment status, a
successful applicant will be granted conditional employment
status, contingent on successful passing of the drug screen.
2. Reasonable Cause Testing. Based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning an employee's appearance,
behavior, speech, odor and/or performance, Neptune Township
may require an employee submit to controlled substances and/or
alcohol testing.
3. Post-Accident Testing. If while performing safety-sensitive
functions, an employee holding a safety-sensitive position is
involved in an accident resulting in either a citation/ticket/
summonses for a moving traffic violation or loss of life, the
employee shall be required to undergo both controlled substances
and breath alcohol testing.
4. Return-to-Work Testing. No employee who has violated the
provisions of this policy may return to safety-sensitive functions
without having been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor and
§ 9-22.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-23.1
1:403
§ 9-23.2. Policy.
having successfully passed either or both a controlled substances
and breath alcohol test.
5. Followup/Rehabilitation Testing. As a condition of continued
employment after having violated provisions of this policy, such
employees shall subject to a minimum of six unannounced
controlled substances and/or alcohol breath tests during the
following 12 months after returning to work.
c. This policy will deter substance abuse, detect and address substance
abuse problems as quickly as possible, provide help where possible, and
encourage employees who are abusing drugs to seek assistance
voluntarily.
a. Neptune Township considers drug and alcohol screening of its
applicants and employees to be a necessary condition of continued
employment with Neptune Township and will consider an employee's
continuation of work at Neptune Township to be an assent to this
condition of employment.
b. Reporting to work or for the performance of Township business, or
otherwise being on Township property [NOTE: The term "Township
property" includes the following, wherever located: all property,
facilities, land, buildings, structures, trucks, automobiles, and all other
vehicles, whether owned, leased or used, by the Township or its
affiliates and/or subsidiaries.] under the influence of drugs or alcohol is
prohibited as is the use, possession, distribution, manufacture, sale, or
purchase of drugs or alcohol while at work or on Neptune Township
premises, or while on Neptune Township business.
c. The illegal use of drugs off premises and while off duty is inconsistent
with an employee's responsibilities to the Township. Such use can affect
employee health, safety to the employee and coworkers, job
performance and the ability of the Township to meet its responsibilities.
Consequently illegal use of drugs while working on premises, off duty
and while off premises is prohibited.
d. Neptune Township may conduct searches without further notice and
without reasonable suspicion for illegal drugs or alcohol in Neptune
Township facilities. Neptune Township facilities include, but are not
limited to: Neptune Township lockers, desks, toolboxes, filing cabinets,
vehicles, packages, work stations and other Township property.
e. Violation of this policy will be considered by Neptune Township and its
agencies to be a voluntary offer of resignation by the applicant and/or
employee which may result in dismissal, reassignment, rehabilitation or
other actions as management finds appropriate. Failure to sign any
applicable consents, submit to drug and/or alcohol testing, to disclose
and explain the nature of any suspected substance, or the refusal of any
§ 9-23.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-23.2
1:404
§ 9-23.3. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL/ALCOHOL USE — The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol,
ethyl alcohol, or other low-weight alcohols including methyl and isopropyl
alcohol. Use four hours prior to reporting for work, and working while
under the influence of alcohol measured at 0.02 blood alcohol concentration
("BAC"), or greater, is prohibited.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES — As used by this policy and any or all
appended forms, the terms "drugs" and "controlled substances" shall
include all derivatives of the following classes of drugs: marijuana, cocaine,
opiates (heroin, etc.), phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamines.
SAFETY-SENSITIVE EMPLOYEES — Employees who operate any motorized
vehicle(s) (whether owned by the Township or not) in performing their
responsibilities; operate heavy machinery, enter upon private property,
dwellings and/or businesses in performing their responsibilities; carry
firearms or work with explosives of any nature; are responsible for the
maintenance and/or administration of controlled substances. This listing is
subject to change upon the Township's discretion.
SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTIONS — Any on-duty function of a safetysensitive
position.
§ 9-23.4. Pre-Employment Drug Screening.
other reasonable request under this policy; or attempt to dilute, switch
or adulterate a urine or breath alcohol specimen, will be viewed as
insubordination and subject to discipline, including dismissal,
reassignment, rehabilitation or other actions as management finds
appropriate. In addition, the Township retains the option to report such
activities to law enforcement officials.
Being under the influence of drugs shall be determined by a substance
screen of bodily fluids that reveals such controlled substances and/or
metabolites. A positive drug screen result will be considered to be a
violation of this policy.
a.
Legally obtained nonprescription and prescription drugs taken in
recommended dosages are not intended to be included in the definition
of "drugs" or "substances."
b.
a. Statement. Given the Township's concern for drug and alcohol use
interfering with safety within the workplace and all members of the
public with whom Township employees have contact, combined with the
Township's commitment to a drug-free workplace, Neptune Township
will require all offers of employment extended to applicants be
conditioned on the applicant's ability to pass an alcohol and drug
screening prior to being granted full employment status.
§ 9-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-23.4
1:405
1. Controlled Substances Screening. At testing thresholds stated in
the "Urine Specimen Collection Procedures" section of this policy.
2. Alcohol Testing. No applicant shall be granted full employment
status until they have successfully passed an alcohol test with a
result less than 0.02 BAC.
b. Failure of Either Alcohol or Drug Screen. Failure to pass either the
alcohol or drug screening may result in withdrawal of a conditional
offer of employment. When an offer is withdrawn for these reasons, the
applicant may reapply in six months for potential employment with this
Township. However, results of previous failed drug screening may be
considered by the Township in subsequent job applications. Applicants
that are denied full-employment status may request the test results
within 60 days from the date of the testing.
c. Notice of Policy. All applicants will be notified of Neptune Township's
substance abuse policy (this policy), and the mandatory alcohol and
drug screening at the time they complete their job application and at
least 24 hours prior to the test. Each employee will receive a "Pre-
Employment Notice of Drug and Alcohol Screening" at the time they
complete a job application. All applicants subject to such testing shall
be provided with a copy of the "Pre-Employment Specimen Collection
Procedures" to review prior to the alcohol and drug screen.
d. Signed Release of Applicant. Every applicant who is requested to
submit to an alcohol and drug screen will be required to sign the
appropriate releases, thereby acknowledging awareness of this policy
and consent to undergo testing and have the results released to the
Township for employment determinations. Refusal to sign the consent
and/or provide a specimen for testing will be regarded as failing to
complete the application process and thereby rendering the applicant
unqualified for employment with Neptune Township and its agencies.
e. Invalid Samples.
1. In the event a urine, blood or breath sample is determined to be
invalid or unreliable by the laboratory or by the Township's Medical
Review Officer, but not due to misconduct of the employee, the
applicant/employee will be immediately notified of this fact and be
required to submit to a new test.
2. If a sample is determined to be unreliable due to misconduct of the
applicant/employee, the individual will be regarded as having
violated this policy and subject to nonhiring and/or any other
appropriate discipline.
(a) Testing misconduct includes, but is not limited to: diluting the
specimen, substituting samples and presenting it (wrongfully)
as one's own sample, and attempting to adulterate the
specimen.
§ 9-23.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-23.5
1:406
§ 9-23.5. Reasonable Cause Testing.
a. A specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position may be required
to submit to alcohol and/or controlled substances testing based on the
Township's reasonable suspicion that the employee has violated the
provisions of this policy.
b. Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning the specific employee holding a
safety-sensitive position's appearance, behavior, speech, odor, and/or
indications of use or withdrawal of alcohol/controlled substances
prohibited by this policy.
c. Whenever practicable, at least two supervisors should confer and agree
that reasonable suspicion exists to request the employee to submit to
testing. However, when only one supervisor is available, the use of only
one supervisor is permissible.
1. Questioning of Employees. When acting on reasonable suspicion
that the employee may be in violation of this policy, a supervisor
shall make all attempts to respect an employee's privacy.
Therefore, when time permits, a supervisor is to first consult with
management prior to initiating any conversation with the employee
regarding their compliance with this policy. Other guidelines
include:
(a) Questioning should be limited to general condition (e.g., does
the employee feel sick, do they know where they are, to whom
are they talking, and what may be the cause of the employee's
present condition).
(b) Care must be taken to unnecessarily identify the employee to
coworkers when initiating conversations concerning violations
of this policy. In most instances this will mean the employee is
to be questioned away from their designated job station and
from other employees' ability to overhear the conversation.
However, such removal from a job station in itself may
needlessly identify an employee, and therefore it may be
appropriate in some circumstances to begin questioning at the
employee's work station.
(c) Management and supervisors are to limit their conversations
regarding possible violations of this policy to those persons
who are participating in any questioning, evaluation,
investigation, or disciplinary action on a need-to-know basis.
Management and supervisors are to instruct other employees,
except as stated above, not to talk about such possible
violations.
d. In all instances, the supervisor(s) shall make a written record of the
observations leading to reasonable suspicion testing. Such record shall
be signed by the supervisor who made such observations within 24
§ 9-23.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-23.5
1:407
§ 9-23.6. Post-Accident Testing.
hours of observed behavior or release of the test results (whichever
is earlier). Whenever practicable, a copy of this form will accompany
the employee to the medical testing facility. Reasonable cause testing
should not be based solely on third-person observations or reports,
unless the supervisor(s) can verify and indicate further such
observations to be reliable.
e. Any specific employee holding a safety sensitive position requested to
submit to screening under reasonable cause circumstances will be
immediately escorted by a Township official to a designated testing
facility for the submission of a urine, breath and/or blood sample. Any
machinery being used by the affected employee will be immediately
taken out of operation until inspected and cleared for reuse.
f. After a sample has been provided, the employee under this section of
this policy will not be permitted to operate Township machinery and will
be directed home. The employee will wait in a designated area until
arrangements are made for the transportation of the employee to their
home. The Township will first attempt to contact the employee's spouse
or member of their family. In the event no one can be contacted,
Neptune Township and its agencies will make arrangements to
transport the employee to their home. If the employee rejects these
alternatives, the Township will take appropriate measures to
discourage the employee from operating his vehicle, including
contacting law enforcement officials if necessary.
g. Employees requested to submit to testing under reasonable cause
circumstances will be suspended pending the results of the test. If the
test results are negative, the employee will be reinstated with full pay
and employee entitlements. If the results are positive, the employee
may be subject to discipline up to and including termination as effective
from the date of suspension.
h. Noncompliance by Employees.
1. Management and supervisors are not to attempt to use force in
seeking compliance with requests. Security personnel or possibly
local law enforcement officials should be called if the supervisor
determines that the employee should not be allowed to remain in
the work area and the employee refuses to leave.
2. The supervisor is to explain to the employee that noncompliance
with the supervisor's requests to submit to alcohol and/or drug
testing under this policy, to disclose and explain the nature of any
suspected substance, to leave the work area or Township facility, or
any other reasonable request will be viewed as insubordination and
subject to discipline, including (but not limited to) termination for a
first time refusal or any subsequent refusal.
§ 9-23.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-23.6
1:408
§ 9-23.7. Return to Duty/Followup Testing.
a. Neptune Township and its agencies will require all specific employees
holding safety-sensitive positions who are involved in a reportable
accident to immediately report such an accident to a Township
supervisor or management representative and undergo an alcohol and
controlled substances test.
b. A reportable accident is an on-duty accident resulting in the loss of
human life, in the specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position
receiving a citation/ticket/summons for a moving traffic violation
connected to the accident, in bodily injury that requires medical
treatment or property and/or machinery damages in excess of $2,500.
c. A specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position subject to postaccident
testing is to remain readily available at the accident site or
close thereby for such testing and shall not consume any alcohol or
substances prohibited by this policy.
1. Failure to remain readily available or not to consume such alcohol
or controlled substances shall be considered a refusal and a
violation of this policy.
2. Failure to sign any one of the consents, provide appropriate urine,
breath or blood samples, failure of the test, or testing misconduct
of the employee will subject the employee to discipline up to and
including termination.
3. However, nothing in this policy shall require delay of medical
attention for injured person(s) following an accident or to prohibit a
specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position from leaving
the scene of an accident for their own medical attention, to obtain
assistance to respond to the accident, or to comply with specific
requests of law enforcement officials.
d. Alcohol tests are to be administered preferably within two hours of the
accident, and in no case any later than eight hours following the time of
the accident.
e. Controlled substances tests are to be administered no later than 32
hours following the accident.
f. Alcohol and/or controlled substances tests conducted by federal, state
or local authorities having independent authority for the testing shall
be considered to meet the requirements of this policy provided that the
testing complies with this policy's requirements and the results are
released to the Township.
g. All specific employees holding safety-sensitive positions shall be
informed of these post-accident procedures, instructions and
information to enable such employees to comply with this policy.
§ 9-23.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-23.7
1:409
§ 9-23.8. Other Applicable Provisions.
The provisions of § 9-25 of this chapter apply to employees covered by this
§ 9-23.
§ 9-24. SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY FOR A DRUG-FREE
WORKPLACE. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-24.1. Recognition.
a. After having violated the provisions of this policy, no specific employee
holding a safety-sensitive position shall be permitted to resume safetysensitive
functions until such employee has:
1. Been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor;
2. Successfully passed either (or both) a controlled substances and/or
alcohol test (return-to-duty testing);
3. In the instance of alcohol use violations of less than 0.04 BAC, the
specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position shall also be
prohibited from performing safety-sensitive functions for a period
of not less than 24 hours from the time of the initial test which
revealed the violation of this policy.
b. Pursuant to the substance abuse professional's evaluation of the
specific employee holding a safety-sensitive position, the employee
shall be subject to a minimum of six unannounced alcohol and/or
controlled substances tests during the following 12 months ("followup
testing").
1. The counselor may schedule more than the minimum of six tests.
2. Submission to counseling and testing is voluntary, but failure to
comply will disqualify the specific employee holding a safetysensitive
position and may be grounds for dismissal by the
employer, Neptune Township.
a. Neptune Township ("Township") recognizes the present problem of
substance abuse, and the profound effects it has on our society, and the
extent to which it can affect Neptune Township, its agencies and its
employees.
b. In order to make our work environment safer, and to comply with
governmental regulations, Neptune Township has established a Drug-
Free Workplace Policy (policy).
c. This policy will deter substance abuse and address substance abuse
problems as quickly as possible, provide help where possible, and
encourage employees who are abusing drugs to seek assistance
voluntarily.
§ 9-23.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-24.2
1:410
§ 9-24.2. Policy.
§ 9-24.3. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL/ALCOHOL USE — The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol,
ethyl alcohol, or other low-weight alcohols including methyl and isopropyl
alcohol. Use four hours prior to reporting for work, and working while
under the influence of alcohol measured at 0.02 blood alcohol concentration
("BAC"), or greater, is prohibited.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES — As used by this policy and any or all
appended forms, the terms "drugs" and "controlled substances" shall
a. Neptune Township considers drug and alcohol screening of its
applicants and employees to be a necessary condition of continued
employment with Neptune Township and will consider an employee's
continuation of work at Neptune Township to be an assent to this
condition of employment.
b. Reporting to work or for the performance of Township business, or
otherwise being on Township property [NOTE: The term "Township
property" includes the following, wherever located: all property,
facilities, land, buildings, structures, trucks, automobiles, and all other
vehicles, whether owned, leased or used, by the Township or its
affiliates and/or subsidiaries.] under the influence of drugs or alcohol is
prohibited as is the use, possession, distribution, manufacture, sale, or
purchase of drugs or alcohol while at work or on Neptune Township
premises, or while on Neptune Township business.
c. The illegal use of drugs off premises and while off duty is inconsistent
with an employee's responsibilities to the Township. Such use can affect
employee health, safety to the employee and coworkers, job
performance and the ability of the Township to meet its responsibilities.
Consequently illegal use of drugs while working on premises, off duty
and while off premises is prohibited.
d. Neptune Township may conduct searches without further notice and
without reasonable suspicion for illegal drugs or alcohol in Neptune
Township facilities. Neptune Township facilities include, but are not
limited to: Neptune Township lockers, desks, toolboxes, filing cabinets,
vehicles, packages, work stations and other Township property.
e. Violation of this policy will be considered by Neptune Township and its
agencies to be a voluntary offer of resignation by the applicant and/or
employee which may result in dismissal, reassignment, rehabilitation or
other actions as management finds appropriate. In addition, the
Township retains the option to report such activities to law enforcement
officials.
§ 9-24.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-24.3
1:411
include all derivatives of the following classes of drugs: marijuana, cocaine,
opiates (heroin, etc.), phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamines.
§ 9-24.4. Reasonable Cause Testing.
Being under the influence of drugs shall be determined by a substance
screen of bodily fluids that reveals such controlled substances and/or
metabolites. A positive drug screen result will be considered to be a
violation of this policy.
a.
Legally obtained nonprescription and prescription drugs taken in
recommended dosages are not intended to be included in the definition
of "drugs" or "substances."
b.
a. A specific employee may be required to submit to alcohol and/or
controlled substances testing based on the Township's reasonable
suspicion that the employee has violated the provisions of this policy.
b. Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning the specific employee's
appearance, behavior, speech, odor, and/or indications of use or
withdrawal of alcohol/controlled substances prohibited by this policy.
c. Whenever practicable, at least two supervisors should confer and agree
that reasonable suspicion exists to request the employee to submit to
testing. However, when only one supervisor is available, the use of only
one supervisor is permissible.
1. Questioning of Employees. When acting on reasonable suspicion
that the employee may be in violation of this policy, a supervisor
shall make all attempts to respect an employee's privacy.
Therefore, when time permits, a supervisor is to first consult with
management prior to initiating any conversation with the employee
regarding their compliance with this policy. Other guidelines
include:
(a) Questioning should be limited to general condition (e.g., does
the employee feel sick, do they know where they are, to whom
are they talking, and what may be the cause of the employee's
present condition).
(b) Care must be taken to unnecessarily identify the employee to
coworkers when initiating conversations concerning violations
of this policy. In most instances this will mean the employee is
to be questioned away from their designated job station and
from other employees' ability to overhear the conversation.
However, such removal from a job station in itself may
needlessly identify an employee, and therefore, it may be
appropriate in some circumstances to begin questioning at the
employee's work station.
§ 9-24.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-24.4
1:412
(c) Management and supervisors are to limit their conversations
regarding possible violations of this policy to those persons
who are participating in any questioning, evaluation,
investigation, or disciplinary action on a need-to-know basis.
Management and supervisors are to instruct other employees,
except as stated above, not to talk about such possible
violations.
d. In all instances, the supervisor(s) shall make a written record of the
observations leading to reasonable suspicion testing. Such record shall
be signed by the supervisor who made such observations within 24
hours of observed behavior or release of the test results (whichever is
earlier). Whenever practicable, a copy of this form will accompany the
employee to the medical testing facility. Reasonable cause testing
should not be based solely on third-person observations or reports,
unless the supervisor(s) can verify and indicate further such
observations to be reliable.
e. Any specific employee requested to submit to screening under
reasonable cause circumstances will be immediately escorted by a
Township official to a designated testing facility for the submission of a
urine, breath and/or blood sample. Any machinery being used by the
affected employee will be immediately taken out of operation until
inspected and cleared for reuse.
f. After a sample has been provided, the employee under this section of
this policy will not be permitted to operate Township machinery and will
be directed home. The employee will wait in a designated area until
arrangements are made for the transportation of the employee to their
home. The Township will first attempt to contact the employee's spouse
or member of their family. In the event no one can be contacted,
Neptune Township and its agencies will make arrangements to
transport the employee to their home. If the employee rejects these
alternatives, the Township will take appropriate measures to
discourage the employee from operating his vehicle, including
contacting law enforcement officials if necessary.
g. Employees requested to submit to testing under reasonable cause
circumstances will be suspended pending the results of the test. If the
test results are negative, the employee will be reinstated with full pay
and employee entitlements. If the results are positive, the employee
may be subject to discipline up to and including termination as effective
from the date of suspension.
h. Noncompliance by Employees.
1. Management and supervisors are not to attempt to use force in
seeking compliance with requests. Security personnel or possibly
local law enforcement officials should be called if the supervisor
determines that the employee should not be allowed to remain in
the work area and the employee refuses to leave.
§ 9-24.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-24.4
1:413
§ 9-24.5. Return to Duty/Followup Testing.
§ 9-24.6. Other Applicable Provisions.
The provisions of § 9-25 of this chapter apply to employees covered by this
§ 9-24.
§ 9-25. SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY FOR ALL EMPLOYEES.
[8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-25.1. Controlled Substances Specimen Collection and Testing
Procedures.
2. The supervisor is to explain to the employee that noncompliance
with the supervisor's requests to submit to alcohol and/or drug
testing under this policy, to disclose and explain the nature of any
suspected substance, to leave the work area or Township facility, or
any other reasonable request will be viewed as insubordination and
subject to discipline, including (but not limited to) termination for a
first time refusal or any subsequent refusal.
a. After having violated the provisions of this policy, no specific employee
shall be permitted to resume functions until such employee has:
1. Been evaluated by a substance abuse counselor;
2. Successfully passed either (or both) a controlled substances and/or
alcohol test (return-to-duty testing).
b. Pursuant to the substance abuse professional's evaluation of the
specific employee, the employee shall be subject to a minimum of six
unannounced alcohol and/or controlled substances tests during the
following 12 months ("followup testing").
1. The counselor may schedule more than the minimum of six tests.
2. Submission to counseling and testing is voluntary, but failure to
comply may be grounds for dismissal by the employer, Neptune
Township.
a. Consent and Release. An employee will be required to sign appropriate
consents and releases authorizing the taking of a urine sample and to
disclose the results of the laboratory testing to the Township. The
employee will also be required to disclose on the consent form any and
all prescription or over-the-counter medications they are taking.
b. Chain of Custody Procedures.
1. Prior to the time specimens are taken, the employee will be given a
copy of the specimen collection procedures.
§ 9-24.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-25.1
1:414
2. Employees will be identified upon arrival at the collection site via
photo ID or employer ID. Testing cannot proceed without
verification of the identity of the donor.
3. The donor will be required to take off all jackets, bags,
pocketbooks, etc. (anything that could foreseeably contain a
concealed specimen), and wash their hands prior to providing the
specimen.
4. The donor will be escorted to an area for providing the specimen
that respects the donor's privacy while complying with this policy.
The enclosure shall provide a toilet to complete voiding/urination.
A source of water and towels for the donor to wash their hands
shall be available outside the enclosure (if practicable). No access
to the enclosure during the entire collection procedure where a
specimen is being provided is permitted, so as to minimize any
embarrassment of the donor and prevent distraction of the
collection site personnel.
5. To minimize the risk of adulterated or diluted specimens, no source
of water or soap/cleansing agents in the enclosure is permitted,
and a bluing or dying agent is to be placed in the toilet.
6. Only one test is to be performed at a time. No testing of another
donor is to begin (including the filling out of the necessary
consents, forms and chains of custody) until the testing process of
the current donor is completed by the signing of the chain of
custody forms by both collection site personnel and the donor and
the specimen is placed in its transportation mailer.
7. Collection site personnel are to verify that 45 milliliters of urine
have been provided and that within four minutes of providing the
sample, the temperature is to be measured by the collection site
personnel and be within 90.5° F. to 99.8° F.
8. If the genuineness of the specimen is in doubt due to temperature,
the collection site personnel may request that the donor have their
oral temperature taken (to verify the donor's body vs. urine
specimen temperature), and if the body temperature varies by
more than 1.8° F., the collection site personnel shall request a
second specimen for testing. If the donor refuses to have their
temperature taken, it shall be grounds to consider the specimen as
having been tampered.
9. If the collection site personnel note any unusual color or sign of
contaminants in the specimen, a second specimen shall be
requested.
10. In all instances where a second specimen is requested, the original
(suspect) specimen shall also be forwarded to the laboratory for
testing.
§ 9-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-25.1
1:415
11. The specimen is to be kept in the sight of both the employee and
the collection site personnel from the time it is delivered to the time
of its being labeled and the chain of custody forms being signed by
both collection site personnel and the donor.
12. The collection site personnel are to pour 15 milliliters of the urine
specimen into a second container for split testing.
13. The specimen bottles are then to be labeled in the presence of the
employee, and initialed by the employee that they are indeed his/
her specimens. The bottles are also to be sealed by placing the
chain of custody tamperproof seal over the top of the specimen
bottles and down the sides of the bottles. This procedure will
tamperproof the specimens and guarantee that the specimen
tested by the laboratory are those of the employee from whom the
sample was drawn.
14. The appropriate urine chain of custody and control form should be
filled out by the collection site personnel and then signed by the
donor.
15. No unauthorized personnel shall be permitted in any part of the
designated urine collection site where urine specimens are being
collected or stored.
16. If the specimen container is received at the laboratory in an
undamaged condition, properly sealed, labeled, and initialed as
certified by the laboratory, the Medical Review Officer and Neptune
Township and its agencies will be privileged to rely on the analysis
of the specimens so received.
17. Laboratory and medical personnel will be responsible for
completing appropriate chain of custody documentation and
ensuring that proper procedures are followed to protect the
integrity of the samples and the reliability of the test results.
18. In reasonable cause circumstances, both the Township official
transporting the employee to the collection site and the medical
personnel will ensure that a copy of the supervisor's report
accompanies the urine sample to the laboratory for evaluation.
19. Neptune Township expects all of its employees to exercise good
faith when undergoing the screen and in ensuring that proper test
procedures are adhered to. This will guarantee that the final results
are accurate. Failure or refusal to observe these good faith
requirements may constitute dishonesty and/or insubordination
and may subject the employee to immediate discipline, up to and
including termination.
c. Invalid Samples.
§ 9-25.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-25.1
1:416
1. In the event that a urine sample is determined to be invalid or
unreliable by the collection site personnel, the laboratory analyzing
the sample, or by the Medical Review Officer, due to circumstances
unrelated to the conduct of the employee, the employee will be
immediately notified of the circumstances requiring a new test. If
the employee has otherwise complied with the procedures, they
will be returned to work immediately (except in reasonable or postaccident
circumstances), pending the results of the new test.
2. If the urine sample is determined to be invalid or unreliable due to
circumstances related to the conduct of the employee, they will be
subject to discipline, up to and including termination.
d. Laboratory Requirements and Methodology.
1. Urinalysis.
(a) The initial test will be an immunoassay analysis. If the
immunoassay test results are negative, no further testing will
be required and the result will be reported as negative.
However, if the immunoassay test results are positive, a more
precise test, a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/
MS), must be performed on the specimen.
(b) For the purposes of this policy, presence of drugs shall be
indicated at the following level of drugs and/or drug
metabolites in the urine:
Initial Test
Initial Test Level
(ng/ml)
Marijuana 100
Cocaine metabolites 300
Opiate metabolites 300
Phencyclidine 25
Amphetamines 1,000
Marijuana metabolites** 15
Cocaine metabolites*** 150
Opiate metabolites
Morphine 300
Codeine 300
Phencyclidine 25
Amphetamines
Amphetamine 500
Methamphetamine 500
§ 9-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-25.1
1:417
NOTES:
** Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid.
*** Benzoylecgonine
2. Testing will be limited to the presence of drugs and their
metabolites, and under no other circumstances will the sample be
tested for any other purpose.
3. Specimen retention. All specimens deemed to be "positive" by the
laboratory and MRO will be retained in long-term frozen storage
for identification and retesting purposes at the laboratory for a
period of one year.
4. Approved Testing Laboratories. Any and all laboratories used by
Neptune Township and its agencies to perform drug testing will be
required to perform all of the necessary testing procedures and be
SAMASHA certified, in addition to being appropriately certified
under all applicable local, state and federal licensing and
regulatory requirements.
e. Test Results - Privacy/Confidentiality. Positive test results should be
revealed to the applicant and/or employee only after they have been
verified by the Medical Review Officer. These results are confidential
medical information and must not be revealed or discussed with anyone
in the Township except on an absolute need-to-know basis, and then
only after the result has been confirmed. The Medical Review Officer
shall not release individual test results except to Township personnel
authorized to receive confirmed test results without first obtaining the
written authorization of the employee.
f. Notification. All employees will be notified of confirmed positive test
results. Employees have 72 hours from the time of notification to
request that the second ("split") specimen be tested. Any applicant who
requests results of what drug(s) were discovered will be notified within
60 days of being notified of the disposition of the employment
application, provided that the applicant requests such information.
g. Prescription and Nonprescription Medications.
1. Disclosure. Before any urine drug screening is performed, the
employee and applicant shall note, on the "Consent and Release
Form," the use of any prescription or nonprescription medications.
2. Prescription Drugs. Prescription drugs are a cause for concern to
Neptune Township and its agencies if they affect the ability of the
employee to work safely.
(a) Employees taking a drug prescribed by a licensed physician
must have the drug in its original container which identifies the
drug, dosage, date of prescription, and authorizing physician.
It is the responsibility of the employee to review with their
§ 9-25.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-25.1
1:418
§ 9-25.2. Medical Review Officer ("MRO").
physician any work restriction(s) that should be observed while
on the medication. In cases when use of medication requires
work restrictions, it is the further responsibility of the
employee to report such restriction to their supervisor,
manager, and to the Medical Review Officer. Failure to
properly notify a manager or supervisor of such work
restrictions shall be a violation of this policy that subjects the
employee to discipline at the discretion of the Township.
(b) In the interests of safety, an employee whose use of medication
necessitates work restriction(s) may be reassigned and/or
placed on medical leave until the work restrictions are lifted.
Once such restrictions are lifted, the employee may safely
resume all aspects of their assigned job functions.
(c) If these procedures are followed, the use of prescription and
nonprescription drugs in accordance with the dosage
instructions shall not be cause for discipline under this policy.
h. Records. Neptune Township and its agencies will retain in the
employee's qualification file only the following information:
1. That the employee submitted to a controlled substance test, and on
what occasion (i.e., pre-placement, reasonable cause, postaccident,
or return to work).
2. The date of the test.
3. The location of the test.
4. The identity of the person or entity performing the test.
5. Whether the test results were positive or negative.
a. The Township shall retain a Medical Review Officer ("MRO"), who is a
licensed physician, knowledgeable in the medicinal, pharmaceutical,
and toxicological aspects of drugs. The MRO has knowledge of
substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to
interpret and evaluate an individual's positive test results together with
the patient's medical history and prescription/nonprescription drug
usage.
b. After the laboratory has tested the specimen, it is to direct those results
to the MRO to interpret and evaluate the results, regardless of whether
the test results are confirmed as negative or positive. Regarding
positive results, the MRO must further assess and determine whether
alternative medical explanations could account for the positive drug
screen result before informing designated Neptune Township officials
as to test results.
c. Further Responsibilities:
§ 9-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-25.2
1:419
§ 9-25.3. Training.
Officers, managers and employees should become thoroughly familiar with
Neptune Township's Substance Abuse Policy (this policy). Furthermore,
management's responsibility under this policy is to arrange for the
distribution of this policy to all affected employees, preferably accomplished
by the employee signing an acknowledgment form that they have received
a copy of this policy.
§ 9-25.4. Communication Plan.
1. Receive and review all testing results.
2. Receive and document a certified copy of the original chain of
custody.
3. Inform the tested individual of their test results in the event of a
positive confirmatory test.
4. In the event of a positive result, provide the individual an
opportunity to discuss the results and conduct a medical interview
to determine whether medical, biological, or permitted prescription
(or nonprescription) drug use could be an alternative explanation
for the test result.
5. Order retesting of the sample and/or quantitative description of
testing results, when appropriate.
6. Consult with laboratory officials and personnel, when appropriate.
7. Determine whether a result is consistent with legal drug use.
8. Forward results of verified test results to previously designated
Neptune Township officials.
9. Otherwise conform all activities to the responsibilities of a Medical
Review Officer.
a. The Township shall communicate this policy to its employees by use of
posted notices in the workplace, oral briefings, and distribution of
copies of the policy.
b. The Township shall conduct periodic awareness sessions, i.e., meetings,
films, check staffers, etc.
c. This policy is designed to provide for the maximum safety and wellbeing
of all employees and personnel. Your assistance and cooperation
for the achievement of this goal is vitally important as Neptune
Township intends to strive for increased awareness concerning the
destructive nature of drug and alcohol abuse. Neptune Township and its
agencies regret any inconvenience or problems this policy may create,
but presently believe that the overall benefit to the Township, its
§ 9-25.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-25.4
1:420
§ 9-26. USE OF TOWNSHIP VEHICLES DURING NONWORKING
HOURS. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
employees, and to the community makes this policy both necessary and
helpful.
a. Township-owned vehicles shall be used only on official business. All
passengers must be on Township business as well. Only authorized
Township personnel or persons conducting business with the Township
shall be transported in the Township-owned vehicles.
b. Except as otherwise described herein, personal use of Township-owned
vehicles is prohibited and shall be cause for disciplinary action and/or
removal from employment.
c. Assigned drivers are responsible for ensuring that the Township-owned
vehicles are kept clean, in good condition and are serviced in
accordance with the preventative maintenance schedule. The Township
shall provide liability coverage for all employees operating Townshipowned
vehicles on official Township business.
d. Unless otherwise authorized by the Township Committee, municipal
vehicles may be taken home only with the advance approval of the
Township Administrator and at the discretion of the Township
Committee. A department head may also grant temporary approval to
facilitate responses to after-hours emergency calls. When an employee
takes home a Township vehicle, it is to be used only for official Township
business; any other use is not permitted.
e. For the purpose of enhanced public safety, vehicles assigned to the
Township Administrator, Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Captain
of Police, Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Emergency
Management Coordinator(s) shall be permitted for general use,
provided that the employee using the vehicle is available to respond to
any and all appropriate Township business or emergencies that require
the presence of said employee.
f. Township employees shall be reimbursed for use of their personal
vehicles to travel to approved seminars, educational courses, or to do
Township-related errands, which reimbursement shall include tolls and
parking charges. Mileage reimbursement shall be made at the current,
standard rate established by the United States Internal Revenue
Service. In order to be reimbursed, receipts must be submitted to
support such expenditures and be approved, in advance, by the
department head.
g. Employees are not permitted, under any circumstances, to operate a
Township vehicle, or a personal vehicle for Township business, when
any physical or mental impairment causes the employee to be unable to
drive safely. This prohibition included circumstances in which the
§ 9-25.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-26
1:421
§ 9-27. COMMUNICATION MEDIA POLICY. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
The Communication Media Policy is described in the Personnel Policy
Guidebook.
§ 9-28. USE OF GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS AND GOVERNMENT
EQUIPMENT FOR POLITICAL FUNDRAISING PROHIBITED.
[8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 9-28.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or political
organization at an election.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political organization and
all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any
such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the
date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is full time or part time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or in any
agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether the position is full- or
part-time.
MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department, board,
commission, or agency thereof.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership, or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
employee is temporarily unable to operate a vehicle safely or legally
because of illness, medication, or intoxication.
h. Employees must report any accident, theft, damage, breakdown, or
mechanical problem involving a Township vehicle or a personal vehicle
used on Township business to their supervisor, regardless of the extent
of damage or lack of injuries. These reports must be made as soon as
possible, but no later than 48 hours after the incident. Employees are
expected to cooperate fully with authorities in the event of an accident.
However, they should not make any statements other than in reply to
questions of investigating officers.
i. Any violation of this policy constitutes cause for disciplinary action.
§ 9-26 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-28.1
1:422
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. Political organizations include, but are
not limited to, organizations otherwise defined as political committee, joint
candidates committee, and legislative leadership committee.
PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles, phones, fax
machines, computers or other office equipment or supplies and other real
or personal property owned, leased or controlled by the municipality, except
for public roads and open park land.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 9-28.2. General Regulations.
§ 9-28.3. Reporting Requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of any employee, appointed or elected official
who observes any prohibited forms of fundraising to report such conduct
to the municipal ethics board, if one exists, or in the alternative, to the
a. Prohibition Against Soliciting or Accepting Political Contributions on
Public Property. No municipal official, employee or appointee may
solicit, commit to pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay
any contribution for any candidate, elected official or political
organization while in or on the property of the municipality or utilizing
the property of the municipality.
b. Prohibited Forms of Fundraising. Prohibited forms of fundraising shall
include but are not limited to:
1. Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal telephones,
fax machines or computers.
2. Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property of the municipality.
3. Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly
owned computers or privately owned personal computers while on
the property of the municipality.
4. Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
5. Sending correspondence from municipal buildings or by use of
municipal services, equipment or postage.
6. Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
7. Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to accept
or solicit contributions.
§ 9-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-28.3
1:423
Municipal Prosecutor and the Municipal Clerk who shall report same to the
governing body.
§ 9-28.4. Whistleblower Provision.
It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected official or appointee to be
dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or otherwise intimidated for
complying with the reporting requirements mandated by this section.
§ 9-28.5. Violation.
Violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000.
§ 9-29. PERSONNEL POLICY GUIDEBOOK. [8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
The Personnel Policy Guidebook, described in Subsection 9-29.1 and
referenced throughout this chapter, shall be hereby adopted and may be
revised by resolution of the Township Committee from time to time.
§ 9-29.1. Table of Contents.
This Table of Contents further describes the policies included within the
Personnel Policy Guidebook.
Title Page
INTRODUCTION 3
SECTION 1: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY
5
SECTION 2: CITIZENSHIP 5
SECTION 3: EMPLOYEE DEFINITIONS 5
3.1 Permanent, Full-Time Employees 5
3.2 Permanent, Part-Time Employees 5
3.3 Casual Employees 5
SECTION 4: CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 6
4.1 Probationary Period 6
4.2 Hours of Work 6
4.3 Timekeeping 7
4.4 Overtime 7
4.5 Compensatory Time 8
4.6 Attendance and Tardiness 8
4.7 Inclement Weather 9
§ 9-28.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-29.1
1:424
Title Page
4.8 Appearance 9
4.9 Smoking 10
4.10 Cell Phone Use 11
4.11 Performance Evaluations 12
4.12 Employee Complaint Policy 12
4.13 Access to Personnel Files Policy 13
4.14 "No Strike" Clause 14
4.15 Orientation and Training 14
4.16 Driver's License Policy 14
4.17 Use of Municipal Vehicles 15
4.18 Confidentiality of Work 16
4.19 Outside Employment 16
4.20 Safety 17
4.21 Accident Investigation 17
4.22 Job Postings/Job Descriptions 18
4.23 Contagious or Life-Threatening Illnesses
Policy
18
4.24 Workplace Violence Policy 19
4.25 Conflict of Interest Policy 20
4.26 Political Activity Policy 21
4.27 Work Force Reduction Policy 21
4.28 Communication Media Policy 21
4.29 Bulletin Board Policy 25
4.30 Employment Procedure 25
4.31 Open Public Meetings Act Procedure
Concerning Personnel Matters
29
4.32 Processing and Orientation of New
Employees Procedure
29
SECTION 5: Benefits 30
5.1 Payroll Schedule 30
5.2 Health Insurance Plan 30
5.3 C.O.B.R.A. 30
5.4 Pension Plan 30
5.5 Pension Loans 30
5.6 Social Security 31
§ 9-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-29.1
1:425
Title Page
5.7 Sick Leave 31
5.8 Leave Without Pay 33
5.9 Worker's Compensation 36
5.10 Vacation Leave 37
5.11 Holidays 37
5.12 Personal Days 38
5.13 Bereavement Leave 38
5.14 Jury Duty 38
5.15 Donated Leave 38
5.16 Military Leave 40
SECTION 6: DISCIPLINE 40
6.1 Appeals of Disciplinary Action 44
SECTION 7: SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY FOR A
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE
44
SECTION 8: HARASSMENT AND
DISCRIMINATION
48
8.1 General Statement of Policy 48
8.2 Definitions 48
8.3 Prohibited Conduct 50
8.4 Employee's Responsibilities 52
8.5 Supervisor's Responsibilities 53
8.6 Investigations 54
8.7 Retaliation 54
SECTION 9: Transgender Policy 55
9.1 General Statement of Policy 55
9.2 Definitions 56
SECTION 10: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES
ACT/NEW JERSEY PREGNANT WORKER'S
FAIRNESS ACT
56
SECTION 11: "WHISTLE BLOWER" POLICY 57
SECTION 12: "NON-DISPARAGEMENT CLAUSE" 57
§ 9-29.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 9-29.1
1:426
Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 11-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 11-1.1. Enforcing Agency. [Ord. No. 1001 § 1; Ord. No. 1453 § 1;
Ord. No. 1459 § 1; Ord. No. 1577 § 1; Ord. No. 96-4 § 1]
a. There is hereby established in the Township of Neptune a State Uniform
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Fire Subcode Official, and such other Subcode Officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the Chief Administrator of the Enforcing Agency. The Construction
Official shall establish the day to day operating routines of the Agency
and shall coordinate the activities of the Subcode Officials. He/she shall
be qualified in accordance with Part IV of the regulations, in at least one
(1) Subcode.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23 provided that, in lieu of any particular
Subcode Official an onsite Inspection Agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold such position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at one (1) office location except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
d. No person employed by the Enforcing Agency as the Construction or
Subcode Official, trainee, inspector or plan reviewer, shall engage in, or
otherwise be connected directly or indirectly for purposes of economic
gain, with any business or employment furnishing labor, material,
services or appliances for the construction, alteration, demolition or
maintenance of buildings or structures within the Township of Neptune.
Nor shall any such official or employee engage in any other activity or
work which conflicts with his official duties.
e. Fees may be waived at the discretion of the Enforcing Agency for the
following autonomous agencies; such as Public Institutions.
§ 9-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.2
1:427
§ 11-1.2. Appeals. [Ord. No. 1459 § 2; Ord. No. 1577 § 1; Ord. No.
96-4 § 2]
All appeals from decisions of the Enforcing Agency shall be referred to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Monmouth.
§ 11-1.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 1001 § 3; Ord. No. 1168 A, I; Ord. No. 1171
§ 3; Ord. No. 1453 § 3; Ord. No. 1459 § 3; Ord. No. 1472; Ord. No.
1559; Ord. No. 1577 § 1; Ord. No. 1697 § 1; Ord. No. 96-4 §§ 3, 4;
Ord. No. 01-26 § 1; Ord. No. 02-39 § 1; Ord. No. 04-37 § 1; Ord. No.
07-08 § 1; Ord. No. 08-22 § 1; Ord. No. 08-47 § 1; Ord. No. 10-18;
Ord. No. 2018-25]
a. Plan Review Fee: The fee for plan review shall be ten (10%) percent of
the amount to be charged for a new construction permit. There shall be
an additional fee of $65.00 per hour or part thereof per subcode having
assigned plan review responsibility for review of an amendment or
change to a plan that has already been released. This fee may be waived
at the discretion of the Construction Official in the event the work and
review is of a minor nature.
b. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on
the basis of the volume or the cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of electric
fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes and
detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates and/or the applicable flat
fees provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a basic
construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing, electric
or fire protection work shall be $95.00 per subcode except as herein
noted.
1. Building. Building volume or cost: The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the
amount of $0.046 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and
structures of all use groups and types of construction as
classified and defined in articles 3 and 4 of the building
subcode; except that the fee shall be $0.038 per cubic foot of
volume for the following use groups F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, The
minimum fee shall be $250.00.
(b) Fees for reconstruction, renovations, alterations and repairs or
site construction associated with premanufactured
construction, and external utility connections for
premanufactured construction shall be based upon the
estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount of
$42.00 per $1,000.00 of the estimated cost of work. From
$50,001 to and including $100,000, the additional fee shall be
§ 11-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.3
1:428
in the amount of $36.00 per $1,000 of the estimated cost
above $50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be in
the amount of $31.00 per $1,000 of the estimated cost above
$100,000.
(c) For the purpose of determining the estimated cost, the
applicant shall submit such data as may be available produced
by the architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized
estimating firm, or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's
bid, if available, shall be submitted. The construction official
shall make the final decision regarding estimated cost.
(d) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis for new
construction for the added portion.
(e) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed separately in accordance with items (a) and (b)
above.
(f) The fee for tents requiring a construction permit shall be
$200.00.
(g) The fee for temporary structures requiring a construction
permit shall be $125.00.
(h) The fee for roofing and siding work completed on structures in
use group R-3 and R-5 shall be $95.00 per structure. All other
use groups shall be considered renovation and calculated as
per (b) above.
(i) The fee for an above-ground swimming pool shall be $110.00.
(j) The fee for an in-ground swimming pool with a surface area
greater than 800 square feet shall be $337.00: the fee for all
other cases shall be $200.00.
(k) The fee for replacing barriers surrounding and enclosing
swimming pools required to have barriers shall be $95.00.
(l) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount
of $2.70 per square foot of surface area of the sign, computed
on one side only for a double-faced sign. The minimum fee shall
be $95.00 .
(m) The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be
$215.00. The fee for lead abatement clearance certificate shall
be $45.00.
(n) The fee for the issuance of a building permit that a fee has not
been determined shall be $95.00.
(o) The fee for a permit to move a building or structure from one
lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:429
$110.00 plus the cost of the new foundation and alterations
to the building or structure for the placement in a completed
condition in the new location shall be computed as required for
renovations, alterations and repairs in section b1(b).
(p) The fee to erect a fence greater than 6 feet in height shall be
$95.00.
(q) The fee for an asbestos removal permit shall be $110.00.
(r) Fees for retaining walls that require a construction permit
shall be as follows:
(1) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area greater
than 550 square feet that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $235.00;
(2) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of 550
square feet or less that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $115.00;
(3) The fee for a retaining wall of any size that is associated
with other than a Class 3 residential structure shall be in
accordance with 1(b) above.
2. Plumbing. Plumbing fixtures and equipment: The fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The fee shall be $27.00 per plumbing fixture and or water
closet, urinal, bidet, bath tub, shower, lavatory, sink, laundry
tub, floor drains, drinking fountains, residential dishwashers,
garbage disposals, clothes washers, water heaters up to 99
gallons, recirculation systems, roof drains, hose bibs, air
admittance valve, residential oil piping, manholes, reheat coils,
condensate drains, or similar devices, except as listed below.
(b) The fee shall be $115.00 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, water utility connections per
every 150 lineal feet, sewer utility connections per every 150
lineal feet, commercial dishwashers, back flow preventors in
other than one-and-two-family dwellings, sewer pumps,
interceptors, active solar systems and, testing of waste and
vents for modular homes.
(c) The fee shall be $60.00 for the installation of lawn sprinkler
backflow preventors.
(d) The fee shall be $100.00 for the installation of a boiler (hot
water or steam) or furnace up to 250,000 BTU's.
(e) The fee shall be $390.00 for the installation of a boiler (hot
water or steam) or furnace 250,001 BTU's and above.
§ 11-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.3
1:430
(f) The fee for the installation of gas piping shall be $95.00 plus
$20.00 per appliance or equipment connection to the system.
(g) The fee shall be $65.00 for the installation of a water heater
100 gallons and up.
(h) The fee shall be $50.00 for commercial oil piping. Adding to an
existing system shall be $35.00.
(i) For cross connections and backflow preventors that are subject
to testing, the fee shall be $130.00 per device for each test.
(j) The fee shall be $90.00 for the installation of air conditioning
for use groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5. The fee for the installation
of a Mini Split System shall be in accordance with 2(q) below.
(k) The fee shall be $185.00 for the installation of industrial and
commercial air conditioning and refrigeration.
(l) The fee for the installation of hydronic piping shall be $58.00
per every 100 lineal feet.
(m) The fee for the installation of medical gas shall be $110.00 per
system plus $27.00 for each station, outlet, inlet, or alarm box.
(n) The fee for the installation of a Geo-Thermal system shall be
$110.00.
(o) The fee for the demolition of a sewer or water service, or a
septic system shall be $95.00.
(p) The fee for the installation of pool drains associated with
swimming pools shall be $115.00.
(q) The fee for the installation of a Mini Split system shall be
$90.00 for each condenser unit and one (1) evaporator coil.
The fee for each additional evaporator coil shall be $27.00.
(r) The fee for the installation of duct work for use groups R-3 and
R-5 shall be $60.00.
3. Electrical. The Electrical Subcode fees shall be as follows.
(a) For the first block of one to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices,
the fee shall be $80.00. For each additional block consisting of
up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall be
$35.00. For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles,
fixtures or devices shall include wall switches, convenience
receptacles, light fixtures, exit signs, emergency lights, smoke
detectors, CO detectors, heat detectors, communications
points, rain sensor, CATV, intercoms, alarm devices, glassbreaks,
motion sensors, keypads, light standards eight feet or
less in height including luminaries, thermostats, energy
management points, sensors, dimmers, or similar electric
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:431
fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes or less including motors
or equipment rated less than one horsepower (hp) or one
kilowatt (kW).
(b) For each service equipment, panelboard, switchboard, load
center, overhead service entrance conductor, motor starter,
motor control center, automatic transfer switch, disconnecting
means, and future electric, such as circuits installed for future
use or intermittent needs (all bonding and grounding for the
above items are included), the fee shall be:
(1) Up to and including 200 amps $115.00
(2) Up to and including 400 amps $210.00
(3) Up to and including 800 amps $510.00
(4) Up to and including 1200 amps $775.00
(5) For each additional 400 amps or portion
thereof above 1200 amps
$210.00
(c) For each motor or electrical device rated in horsepower (hp),
the fee shall be:
(1) From one hp up to and including 10 hp $30.00
(2) Greater than 10 hp up to and including
50 hp
$90.00
(3) Greater than 50 hp up to and including
100 hp
$170.00
(4) Greater than 100 hp up to and including
200 hp
$300.00
(5) For each additional 100 hp or portion
thereof above 200 hp
$50.00
(d) For each generator, transformer, battery system, and all other
items measured in kW not specified in this fee schedule, the fee
shall be:
(1) From one kW up to and including 10 kW $30.00
(2) Greater than 10 kW up to and including
45 kW
$90.00
(3) Greater than 45 kW up to and including
112.5 kW
$170.00
(4) Greater than 112.5 kW up to and
including 150 kW
$300.00
(5) For each additional 50 kW or portion
thereof above 150 kW
$50.00
(e) For each piece or unit of equipment used for air conditioning,
refrigeration, measured in tonnage, the fee shall be:
§ 11-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.3
1:432
(1) For the first three (3) tons or fraction
thereof
$39.00
(2) For each additional ton or fraction
thereof above three tons
$18.00
(f) For each swimming pool, spa, hydro message tub, hot tub or
sauna, (fee includes one GFCI, one timer, up to two underwater
lights (UW), bonding and trenches up to 150 lineal feet), the
fee shall be:
(1) Above-ground swimming pool for group
R-5
$115.00
(2) In-ground swimming pool for group R-5 $155.00
(3) Swimming pool for all other groups $235.00
(4) Spa, hydro message tub, hot tub, sauna $55.00
(5) Annual Commercial Pool Inspection $110.00
(6) For each additional UW light add $8.00
(7) Trenches over 150 feet, for each 150
lineal feet, add
$60.00
(g) In other than one-and two-family dwellings, for each burglar
alarm panel, fire alarm panel, intercom panel, audio video
head-end panel, energy management control panel,
communications closet, and automated card access panels, the
fee shall be $60.00 per panel. The fee for devices connected to
the system shall be in accordance with 3(a) above. For one-andtwo-
family dwellings, the fee shall be $95.00, which includes
the first block of 25 devices connected to the system. For each
additional block of 25 devices connected to the system, the fee
shall be $35.00.
(h) For each trench of 150 lineal feet for primary power, secondary
power, and communications, the fee shall be $60.00.
(i) For each solar photovoltaic system and other alternative
energy systems, the fee shall be:
(1) For the first 10 kW $210.00
(2) For each additional 20 kW add $85.00
(j) For light standards above 8-0' in height (includes first 150
lineal feet of trench), the fee shall be $25.00 per fixture.
Trenches over 150 lineal feet shall be $60.00 for each
additional 150 lineal feet.
(k) For each hardwired sign, the fee shall be $75.00.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:433
(l) For each electric range, electric dryer, dishwasher, electric
cook top, double oven, garbage disposal, and electric water
heater, the fee shall be:
(1) Individual dwelling units $40.00
(2) All other groups $75.00
(m) For the installation or replacement of each furnace or boiler,
the fee shall be:
(1) Individual dwelling units $60.00
(2) All other groups $95.00
(n) For all lightning protection, lightning arrester systems, other
than service electrode, the fee shall be $18.00 for each point,
lightning rod or arrestor.
(o) For each satellite dish, the fee shall be $60.00.
(p) For each electric vehicle car charging system the fee shall be:
(1) For use groups R-3 and R-5 $86.00
(2) For all other use groups $125.00
(q) For marina dock power, boatyard, residential dock power, or
similar applications. For each power pedestal, power
distribution center, single-phase or three-phase up to 50-amps
with any devices combination of 15-amp, 20-amp, 30-amp, or
50-amp and having a voltage of 120-volt, 208-volt, or 240-volt
the fee for each pedestal shall be:
(1) 1 to 10 pedestals $40.00 each
(2) 11 to 20 pedestals $35.00 each
(3) 21 to 30 pedestals $30.00 each
(4) 31 to 40 pedestals $25.00 each
(5) 41 to 50 pedestals $20.00 each
(6) 51 to 100 pedestals $15.00 each
4. Fire. For fire protection and hazardous equipment, sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances not connected to
the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators,
crematoriums, fireplaces and flues, the fee shall be as follows:
(a) The installation, relocation or alteration of sprinkler heads and
single or multiple station smoke or heat detectors not
connected to a fire alarm panel:
The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads or detectors shall be
$110.00
§ 11-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.3
1:434
The fee for 21 to and including 100 sprinkler heads or
detectors shall be $210.00
The fee for 101 to and including 200 sprinkler heads or
detectors shall be $420.00
The fee for 201 to and including 400 sprinkler heads or
detectors shall be $815.00
The fee for 401 to and including 1000 sprinkler heads or
detectors shall be $1,240.00
The fee for over 1000 sprinkler heads or detectors shall be
$1,630.00
In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number of each
shall be counted separately and two fees, one for heads and
one for detectors shall be charged.
(b) The fee for the installation of a fire alarm panel shall be $95.00.
The fee for each smoke and heat detector, pull station, horn,
strobe, enunciator, tamper switch, flow switch, and any other
device connected to the fire alarm panel shall be in accordance
with 4(a) above.
(c) The fee for each standpipe shall be $325.00.
(d) The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall be
$170.00.
(e) The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance which is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $95.00.
(f) The fee for each commercial kitchen exhaust system shall be
$115.00.
(g) The fee for each gas fireplace shall be $95.00. The fee for each
solid fuel burning fireplace shall be $115.00.
(h) The fee for each flue attached to an oil or gas fired appliance
shall be $95.00.
(i) The fee shall be $95.00 for the installation of residential fuel
tanks.
(j) The fee for the installation of commercial fuel tanks up to and
including 1000 gallons shall be $160.00 each. For tanks 1001
gallons and above the fee shall be $300.00 each.
(k) The fee for the removal or abandonment of a fuel storage tank
shall be $95.00 for each tank under 2000 gallons and $135.00
for each tank 2000 gallons and above.
(l) The fee for each incinerator shall be $570.00.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:435
(m) The fee for each crematorium shall be $570.00.
(n) The fee for fire suppression system underground piping, up to
the building, shall be $125.00 per every 150 lineal feet.
(o) The fee for the inspection of gasoline vapor/product line shall
be $95.00.
(p) The fee for the installation of a smoke control system shall be
$340.00.
(q) For the installation, relocation, alteration or replacement of
any item requiring a fire protection subcode permit and not
included in section 4, the fee shall be per item as stated in 4 (a)
above.
(r) The fee for the installation of a solar system shall be $95.00.
5. Certificates and Other Fees. Fees are as follows:
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be twelve (12%)
percent of all construction permit and permit update fees. The
minimum fee shall be $60.00.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use group shall be $300.00.
(c) The fee for a continued certificate of occupancy shall be
$300.00.
(d) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
$30.00. There shall be no fee for the first issuance of the
temporary certificate of occupancy provided the certificate of
occupancy fee is paid at that time.
(e) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23- 2.10 shall be $85.00. The fee for a resubmission
of an application for a variation shall be $70.00.
(f) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $150.00 for
structures of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than
30 feet in height, and for one- and two-family residences. The
fee shall be $200.00 for all other structures (accessory
structures, garages and sheds with no utilities shall be $60.00.
(g) The fee to reinstate a lapsed construction permit shall be ten
(10%) percent of the cost of the original permit, but in no case
less than $95.00.
(h) The fee for the issuance of a construction permit as a result of
changing from one contractor to another shall be $95.00 plus
the fees normally charged for any additional items that were
not previously included.
§ 11-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.3
1:436
§ 11-1.4. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 1577 § 5; Ord. No. 96-4 § 7]
This chapter shall become effective upon its passage and publication
according to law.
§ 11-1.5. Fire Limits. [Ord. No. 1001 § 4; Ord. No. 1171 § 4; Ord. No.
1453 § 4]
The Construction Official shall prepare and submit biannually to the
Township Committee a report reevaluating the delineation of the Fire
Limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the Construction
Official, the Building Subcode Official, and the Fire Subcode Official
regarding those areas which should be designated within fire limits, with
the reasons therefor.
§ 11-1.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1001 § 5; New]
(i) The fee for development-wide inspection of homes after the
certificate of occupancy ordered pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.35
or otherwise shall be:
(1) The hourly charge shall be an amount equal to twice the
hourly base salary paid to any licensed code official(s)
performing the work or the hourly fees charged to the
municipality by a professional contracted to provide such
services;
(2) The fees, payments, accounting procedures and limits
shall be set in accordance with and subjected to N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.17(d) 1 — 5.
(j) Pursuant to the rules adopted by the New Jersey Department
of Children and Families, the fee for the issuance of a letter of
verification of the prior uses of a structure that is intended to
be used for a child care facility shall be $115.00.
(k) In order to provide for training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code
Act and the Regulations, the Enforcing Agency shall collect in
addition to the fees, a surcharge fee of $0.00371 per cubic foot
of volume of new buildings and additions. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all
other construction shall be $1.90 per $1,000.00 of value of
construction. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Division of Codes and Standards, Department of Community
Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending
September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not
later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter
for which it is due.
(l) All fees are to be rounded to the nearest dollar.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.6
1:437
§ 11-1.7. Waiver of Building Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 99-46 § 1]
a. Any person or corporation including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section or rules promulgated
hereunder;
2. Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit;
3. Fails to comply with any order issued by the Enforcing Agency or
the department;
4. Makes a false or misleading written statement, or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the Enforcing Agency or the department, shall be
liable, upon conviction to a penalty established in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
this section or who unreasonably interferes with such inspection, shall
be liable upon conviction, to the penalty established in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
c. With respect to paragraph a3 of this subsection, a person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day that he/she fails to comply with a stop
construction order validly issued by the Enforcing Agency or the
department and for each week that he/she fails to comply with any
other order validly issued by the Enforcing Agency or the department.
With respect to paragraphs a1 and a4 of this subsection, a person shall
be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of any provision of this
section or rule promulgated hereunder and for each false or misleading
written statement or omission of required information or statement
made in any application or request for approval to the Enforcing
Agency or the department. With respect to paragraph a2 of this
subsection, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
violation of the conditions of a Construction Permit.
d. The penalties pursuant to this subsection may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law"
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties is
hereby conferred upon Judges of the Municipal Court in addition to the
Courts specified by N.J.S.A. 2A:58-2. Suit may be brought by a
municipality or the State of New Jersey. Payment of a money judgment
pursuant hereto shall be remitted in the case of a suit brought by the
Township to the Township Treasurer and in the case brought by the
State of New Jersey to the State Treasurer.
a. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
§ 11-1.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-1.7
1:438
§ 11-2. (RESERVED)
§ 11-3. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
§ 11-3.1. Determination of Code Enforcement Officer; Complaint
and Notice of Hearing. [Ord. No. 483 § 1; Ord. No. 770 § 1]
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private residential structure or any
of the facilities contained therein.
b. A disabled person or a parent, sibling or child of a disabled person, shall
not be required to pay a municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction alteration or
improvement designed and/or undertaken solely to promote
accessibility to his or her living unit.
c. Disabled person means a person who has a total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of this
State who is disabled pursuant to Federal Social Security Act (42 USC
Section 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 USC
Section 231, et seq.) or is rated as having a sixty (60%) percent
disability or higher pursuant to any Federal law administered by the
United States Veterans Act. For purposes of this paragraph, "blindness"
means central visual activity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the
use of corrective lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in
the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual fields
subtends an angle no greater than twenty (20) degrees shall be
considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
a. Upon the Code Enforcement Officer, or officer designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer, making a report to the Township Committee that
any building, wall or structure in the Township is in such condition that
it is or may become unsafe and dangerous to life or health, or might
tend to increase the hazards of fire, the Township Committee shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
building, wall or structure, a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the
Township Committee at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days
nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint.
b. The complaint shall state that at the hearing the Township Committee
shall inquire into and determine whether the building, wall or structure
therein described is or may become dangerous to life or health, or
might tend to increase the hazards of fire and, if so, that an order will
be made requiring the removal or destruction of the building, wall or
structure, and the manner in which the same is to be carried out. The
property to be affected shall be sufficiently described to identify the
§ 11-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3.1
1:439
§ 11-3.2. Findings; Issuance of Order to Abate. [Ord. No. 483 § 2]
After such notice and hearing, if the Township Committee determines that
such building, wall or structure is or may become dangerous to life or
health, or is of such character as might tend to increase the hazards of
fire, the Township Committee shall state in writing its findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 11-3.3. Cost of Removal to Become Lien on Property. [Ord. No.
483 § 3; Ord. No. 770 § 1]
§ 11-3.4. Service of Complaints or Orders. [Ord. No. 483 § 4; Ord.
No. 770 § 1]
Complaints or orders issued by the Township Committee shall be served
upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts
of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the
Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Code
same. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint, and to appear in person or otherwise and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
a. To remove or demolish the building, wall or structure within a period of
thirty (30) days after the service of the order;
b. The manner in which the same is to be carried out;
c. That if the owner fails to comply with the order to remove or demolish
the building, wall or structure within said period of time, the Township
will proceed with such removal or destruction or cause such building,
wall or structure to be removed or demolished;
d. The cost of such removal or destruction shall be assessed as a municipal
lien against the premises.
a. The amount of such cost of removal or demolition of any building, wall
or structure shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred. The assessment shall be made upon the
Code Enforcement Officer filing a detailed statement, under oath, of the
cost with the Township Tax Assessor and Tax Collector, and a copy of
said detailed statement shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail.
b. The materials of such building, wall or structure shall be sold at public
or private sale by the Code Enforcement Officer and the proceeds of
such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition
of any building, wall or structure. Any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court and shall be secured as may be directed
by the Court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto.
§ 11-3.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-3.4
1:440
Enforcement Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving
of the complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the
same once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper printed
and published in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or
order and a copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded with the
Clerk of the County of Monmouth.
§ 11-3.5. Basis for Determination. [Ord. No. 483 § 5; Ord. No. 770
§ 1]
The Code Enforcement Officer may determine that a building, wall or
structure is unfit for occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist
concerning such building, wall or structure which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of such municipality.
§ 11-3.6. Powers of Code Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No. 483 § 6;
Ord. No. 770 § 1]
The Code Enforcement Officer is herein given the power in order to
effectuate the purposes of this section:
§ 11-3.7. Existing Provisions. [Ord. No. 483 § 7]
The provisions of this section are not intended to repeal any existing
ordinance dealing with removal or destruction to any building, wall or
structure, but is intended to be in addition and supplemental to any other
existing ordinance.
§ 11-4. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 11-4.1. Service of Complaints or Orders. [Ord. No. 1199 § 1]
The owner or occupant of every dwelling house, store, office building,
or other building or structure, which now fronts or may hereafter front
upon any public street within the Township, shall cause the street number
assigned to the property upon which the dwelling house, store, office
building, or other building or structure is erected, to be placed in digital
figures as outlined below.
a. To investigate the building, wall or structure in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for occupancy or use;
b. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
c. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he/she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section;
d. To delegate any of his/her functions and powers under this section to
such officers and agents as he/she may designate.
§ 11-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-4.1
1:441
§ 11-4.2. Number Assignments. [Ord. No. 1199 § 2]
Street number assignments shall be made by the Office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 11-4.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1199 § 3]
The enforcement of this section shall be vested in the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, the Police Department and Code Enforcement Department of
the Township.
§ 11-4.4. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. No. 1199; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this section shall be
liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-5. PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT SEWER RENTALS BEFORE
ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
§ 11-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1430 Preamble]
§ 11-5.2. Payment of Delinquent Sewer Rental Required. [Ord. No.
1430 §§ 1—2]
a. Dwellings. Numbers to be placed in digital figures of at least three (3")
inches in height within two (2') feet of the main entrance of the
structure facing the street.
b. Commercial and Industrial. Numbers to be placed in digital figures of at
least six (6") inches in height within two (2') feet of the main entrance
or on the door.
c. Where there is more than one (1) occupant in the same numbered
building, each street level occupant is to have an alphabetical
designation included in the street address.
a. The Township Committee may demand more stringent requirements for
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy than the requirements
established by the Uniform Construction Code.
b. The Township Committee has determined that it is in the public interest
to protect the safety of its citizens through ordering more sanitary
safety conditions with regard to sewers prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
a. The payment of delinquent sewer rentals is an essential precondition to
the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy for the sanitary safety and
protection of future occupants.
b. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy shall demand that delinquent sewer rentals be paid as an
§ 11-4.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-5.2
1:442
§ 11-6. CERTIFICATES OF INSPECTION FOR BOARDING HOUSES
AND ROOMING HOUSES.
§ 11-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1622 § 1; Ord. No. 1658 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by regulating the condition and habitability of rooming and boarding
houses.
§ 11-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1622 § 2; Ord. No. 1658 § 2]
As used in this section:
BOARDER — Shall mean one who rents, leases or otherwise occupies any
unit or rental dwelling space or room in a boarding house or rooming house.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto, and any part
thereof, which contains two (2) or more units of dwelling space arranged
or intended for single-room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied
by an owner or operator, and wherein personal or financial services are
provided to the residents, including any residential hotel or congregate
living arrangement; but excluding any hotel, motel or established guest
house wherein a minimum of eighty-five (85%) percent of the units of
dwelling space is offered for limited tenure only; any foster home as defined
in Section 1 of PL 1962, c. 137 (C.30:4C-26.1); any community residence
for the developmentally disabled, as defined in Section 2 of PL 1977, c.
448 (C.30:11B-2); any dormitory owned or operated on behalf of any nonprofit
institution of primary, secondary or higher education for the use of
its students; any building arranged for single-room occupancy wherein the
units of dwelling space are occupied exclusively by students enrolled in
a full-time course of study at an institution of higher education approved
by the Department of Higher Education; any facility or living arrangement
operated by or under contract with any State department or agency, upon
the written authorization of the Commissioner; and any owner-occupied,
one (1) family residential dwelling made available for occupancy by not
more than six (6) guests where the primary purpose of the occupancy is to
provide charitable assistance to the guests and where the owner derives no
income from the occupancy. A dwelling shall be deemed "owner occupied"
within the meaning of this section if it is owned or operated by a nonprofit
religious or charitable association or corporation and is used as
the principal residence of a minister or employee of that corporation or
association. For any such dwelling, however, fire detectors shall be required
as determined by the Department of Community Affairs.
OWNER — Shall mean the person who owns, purports to own or exercises
control of any boarding house or rooming house.
addition to all the other requirements established in the Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 11-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6.2
1:443
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a boarding house wherein no personal or
financial services are provided to the residents.
§ 11-6.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1622 § 3; Ord. No. 1658 § 3]
This section does not apply to licensed nursing homes, state-operated
institutions, or to any Municipal corporation, or to any political subdivision
of the State or body politic of any kind. Any non-profit group or organization
operating a rooming house or boarding house must comply with the terms
of this section.
§ 11-6.4. Inspection Required. [Ord. No. 1622 § 4; Ord. No. 1658
§ 4]
No owner shall lease, rent or otherwise allow the occupancy of any unit
or rental dwelling space or room in a boarding house or rooming house
within the Township without first securing a Certificate of Inspection. The
Certificate of Inspection so issued shall apply each time, and as a
prerequisite to, a new boarder leases, rents or otherwise seeks to occupy
an individual unit, rental dwelling space or room within a boarding house or
rooming house.
§ 11-6.5. Application for Inspection. [Ord. No. 1622 § 5; Ord. No.
1658 § 5]
Upon filing of an application for such Certificate of Inspection, the Township
shall cause such rental unit to be inspected by a Township inspector
designated therefor, whose findings for such unit, rental dwelling space
or room within a boarding house or rooming house must indicate that
the unit complies with the standards provided by law in the interests of
public safety, health and welfare. The unit, rental dwelling space or room
within the boarding house or rooming house, specifically the bed, furniture
and premises, must be in a clean and sanitary condition. In addition, the
premises shall be kept free from vermin, insects and rodents.
§ 11-6.6. Inspection Fees. [Ord. No. 1622 § 6; Ord. No. 1658 § 6]
a. Upon the filing of an application for an inspection, the applicant shall
pay to the Township a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars which will
entitle the applicant to initial inspections for all units, dwelling spaces
or rooms within a boarding house or rooming house.
b. Additional inspections shall be required each time a boarder changes
within a single unit, rental dwelling space or individual room within a
boarding house or rooming house unless such an inspection has been
conducted of the same room(s) within the preceding thirty (30) days. In
such a case, no additional inspection will be required until the thirty
(30) days since the last inspection has elapsed and a new boarder
occupies said room. Upon the filing of an application for said additional
inspection, the applicant shall pay to the Township of Neptune a fee of
fifteen ($15.00) dollars per inspection which will entitle the applicant to
§ 11-6.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-6.6
1:444
§ 11-6.7. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 1622 § 7; New; Ord. No.
1658 § 7]
Every owner who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars and not more than
one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
six (6) months or both.
§ 11-7. DEED CONTROL PERIOD FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
UNITS IN SCHOOLHOUSE SQUARE. [Ord. No. 10-01 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby designates a control period of ten (10)
years for deed restrictions on affordable housing units being constructed
in Schoolhouse Square under the parameters Ridge Avenue School Site
Redevelopment Plan.
§ 11-8. STATE LOCAL COOPERATIVE HOUSING INSPECTION
PROGRAM.
§ 11-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
ACT — Shall mean the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (P.L. 1967, C.76 as
amended, N.J.A.C. 55:13A-1 et seq.
BUILDING — Shall mean a multiple dwelling as defined by the N.J.S.A.
55:13A-3(k) or a hotel as defined by N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(j) subject to the
jurisdiction of the Bureau of Housing Inspection.
BUREAU — Shall mean Bureau of Housing Inspection.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Shall mean the certificate issued by the
Bureau, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-13, to the owners of the buildings that
are found to be in compliance with the Regulations.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — Shall mean the certificate issued by
the Bureau, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-12, to the owners of buildings that
have been properly registered.
COMMISSIONER — Shall mean the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Department of Community Affairs.
an immediate inspection of a single unit, rental dwelling space or
individual room.
c. If an appointment is made by an applicant with an Inspector for the
purposes of conducting an inspection, and the applicant does not
appear without having notified the Inspector at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of the time agreed upon for the inspection, the
applicant shall forfeit the application fee paid for the scheduled
inspection and must pay an additional application fee, which shall be
equal to the initial application fee, for any rescheduled inspection.
§ 11-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.1
1:445
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY (LEA) — Shall mean a permanent municipal,
county or interlocal agency maintained for the purpose of conducting
inspections and enforcing building maintenance laws, ordinances, codes
and rules, that is supervised by, and has all hotel and multiple dwelling
inspections performed by persons licensed under N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean Neptune Township, authorized by a letter
transmitted together herewith to perform inspections on behalf of the
Bureau.
OWNER — Shall mean the person who owns, purports to own, or exercises
control of any hotel or multiple dwelling.
REGISTRATION — Shall mean registration of a hotel or multiple dwelling in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:13A-12.
REGULATIONS — Shall mean the current Regulations for the Maintenance
of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings (N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.1 et seq.) promulgated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-7.
REGISTRATION-INSPECTION-MAINTENANCE SYSTEM (RIMS) — Shall
mean the electronic application used to manage registrations and
inspections conducted by the Bureau of Housing Inspection and its local
inspection SCHLIP staff. (State Local Cooperative Housing Inspection
Program).
SHALL — As used in this section is always construed as mandatory.
§ 11-8.2. Scope. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
This section shall apply to the inspection, repair, maintenance, occupancy
and use of new and existing hotels, retreat lodging facilities and multiple
dwellings in the Township of Neptune, State of New Jersey, as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.4.
§ 11-8.3. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
a. Neptune Township shall comply with all provisions of the Act and
regulations and with all directives of the Bureau issued pursuant
thereto.
b. The Bureau shall create a reservation for the purchase of inspection
services from Neptune Township during each period from July 1 to the
following December 31 and from January 1 to the following June 30, and
shall give notice to Neptune Township of the amount of such
reservation for each such period. Neptune Township may make
requisitions against this reservation in amounts not to exceed credits
earned up to the time of requisition. Said reservation may be decreased
by the Bureau, if, in its sole discretion, it determines that the Township
of Neptune cannot reasonably be expected to do enough work
satisfactory to the Bureau to earn the full amount of the reservation
before the end of the State's fiscal year.
§ 11-8.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-8.3
1:446
§ 11-8.4. Inspection Reports. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
c. Neptune Township shall identify all unregistered buildings within its
jurisdiction. A separate information form prescribed by the Bureau
shall be completed and promptly forwarded to the Bureau for each such
building.
d. Neptune Township shall be obligated to keep the local registry accurate
by promptly reporting to the Bureau all transfers of ownership,
demolitions, alterations and construction of buildings within its
jurisdiction and by reporting all errors that may appear.
e. Neptune Township shall inspect, in each State fiscal year, all of the
multiple dwellings and hotels and units of dwelling space therein which
the Bureau determines to be subject to Cyclical Inspection in that fiscal
year.
f. Twenty-five (25%) percent of the inspections require to be performed
pursuant to Section 3(E) above shall be completed prior to October 1 of
each State fiscal year, Fifty percent (50%) prior to January 1 of each
State fiscal year, Seventy-five percent (75%) prior to April 1 of each
State Fiscal year and One Hundred percent (100%) on or before June 30
of each State fiscal year. In the event that any of these percentages
cannot be met based on the number of Cyclical Inspections that are due
during a portion of a year, this requirement shall be deemed satisfied if
all buildings that can be scheduled for Cyclical Inspections are
inspected.
g. All buildings are to be inspected in accordance with the most recently
promulgated State Regulations.
h. Neptune Township, in addition to whatever local procedures it chooses
to adopt by resolution, shall make an Inspection Report concerning
each inspected building upon forms prescribed by the Bureau.
a. All inspection and reinspection reports submitted to the Bureau shall be
signed by the Director of Code and Construction or other designee
designated by Neptune Township and approved by the Bureau.
b. Such reports shall include the name of the inspector who performed the
inspection, and shall be submitted to the Bureau not less frequently
than once per month.
c. In the event that an inspection of a building discloses a violation of the
regulations constituting an imminent hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of its occupants, Neptune Township shall, without delay,
transmit its inspection report findings to the Bureau for appropriate
action.
d. All reports submitted to the Bureau which disclose violations shall be
clearly segregated from reports which disclose no violations.
§ 11-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.5
1:447
§ 11-8.5. Reinspections. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 11-8.6. Information to Bureau. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 11-8.7. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
a. When specifically requested by the Bureau, Neptune Township shall
conduct, within one week of the request, reinspection of those buildings
where violations were discovered at the time of the original inspection.
b. Neptune Township shall make a reinspection report concerning such
building upon forms prescribed by the Bureau and forward such reports
to the Bureau upon completion thereof.
c. No reinspection reports will be accepted for credit unless all original
reported violations have been reinspected.
d. The Bureau shall be responsible for notifying Neptune Township when
such reinspections are to be conducted.
e. Neptune Township shall be responsible for any other functions of the
enforcement procedure, which can be undertaken on a local level.
f. Extensions of time to complete abatement shall be granted only by the
Bureau.
a. Neptune Township shall provide the Department of Community Affairs
with such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility
of Neptune Township for funds that may be requisitioned by it,
including, without limitation, copies of past, current and projected
operation budgets and tables of organization for the agency
undertaking inspection and related duties.
b. Neptune Township shall also supply the Bureau with a list of
appropriate totals of those buildings within its boundaries which are
not registered or inspected by the end of each State fiscal year.
a. Neptune Township shall be solely responsible for compliance with local,
State and Federal laws pertaining to the dislocation and relocation of
individuals, families and businesses, provided, however, that Neptune
Township may apply to the Department for relocation assistance as it
may deem necessary.
b. Neptune Township shall perform, within its jurisdiction, inspections of
those buildings that are the subject of complaints received by the
Bureau and/or Neptune Township.
c. Such inspections shall be complete and performed in accordance with
subsection 11-8.3g above and included in the regular cycle of
inspections.
d. However, in the event that the building that is the subject of the
complaint has been issued a valid Certificate of Inspection by the
§ 11-8.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-8.7
1:448
§ 11-8.8. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 11-8.9. Reports. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 11-8.10. Credits to Neptune Township. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
Bureau, the first inspection and reinspection shall be limited to the
subject matter of the complaint.
a. All inspections performed pursuant hereto shall be performed by
inspectors acceptable to the Bureau.
b. Neptune Township shall provide to the Bureau resumes of all inspectors
whom Neptune Township intends to assign to the performance of
inspections pursuant hereto.
c. No inspector disapproved by the Bureau shall perform any inspections
pursuant hereto.
d. Upon request of the Bureau, Neptune Township shall provide to the
Bureau such further information concerning any inspector whom
Neptune Township assigns or intends to assign to perform inspections
pursuant hereto as the Bureau may require.
e. In the event that the Bureau deems the quality of an inspector's work to
be unsatisfactory and so advises Neptune Township, then Neptune
Township shall immediately cease to assign inspections required to be
performed pursuant hereto to the said inspector.
f. All inspectors assigned by Neptune Township to perform inspections
pursuant hereto shall attend, and shall be required by Neptune
Township to attend training sessions scheduled by the Bureau when
such attendance is required by the Bureau and any inspector is not
specifically excused by the Bureau.
a. The Bureau shall supply Neptune Township with a listing of all
buildings within its jurisdiction registered or on file with the Bureau,
and such other information regarding inspection and enforcement
activities of Neptune Township and the Bureau as may reasonably be
required.
b. The Bureau shall furnish to Neptune Township all forms or documents
which are or may become necessary to carry out the duties assumed
hereunder.
c. The Bureau, upon receipt of each inspection report disclosing a
violation or violations, may initiate whatever enforcement or
compliance proceedings as it deems fit and appropriate.
a. The Bureau shall credit Neptune Township in accordance with the
following formulas.
§ 11-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.10
1:449
§ 11-8.11. Requisitions. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
1. Upon formal registration of each building not now registered,
Neptune Township shall be credited with an amount of ten ($10.00)
dollars.
2. In the event of administrative hearings and/or court appearances,
the Bureau shall credit Neptune Township with a maximum of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per full day for each local witness
required to appear. Without prior permission, local attendance at
administrative hearings shall be limited to one person per day.
3. Neptune Township shall be credited with ten ($10.00) dollars for
each transfer of ownership, or creating of a building when Neptune
Township is responsible for such information reaching the Bureau
in the first instance.
4. The Bureau shall annually establish and distribute to Neptune
Township a regular inspection payment schedule which shall set
forth the payments to be made by the Bureau to Neptune Township
for each unit inspected and reinspected and for inspection and
reinspection of common areas. Maximum payments per building or
per project may be established. The regular inspection payment
schedule established each year shall be uniform for all counties and
municipalities and notice of it shall be published annually in the
New Jersey Register.
5. Neptune Township shall be credited with an amount of ten ($10.00)
dollars for each first inspection and ten ($10.00) dollars for each
reinspection when the inspection is performed as a result of a
complaint received by the Bureau, and when the building that is
subject to the complaint has been issued a valid Certificate of
Inspection by the Bureau. In the event that the building complained
of has not been issued a Certificate of Inspection, Neptune
Township will be credited in accordance with the regular
inspection payment schedule.
6. No credit shall be allowed for any work that is not satisfactory to
the Bureau or for inspections by construction or subcode officials of
newly constructed or altered buildings.
a. Neptune Township may from time to time make requisitions against the
reservation, as may be approved by the Bureau, up to but not in excess
of the amount of credits outstanding in said account as of the date of
the requisition. Said requisition shall be expressly limited to
reimbursement to Neptune Township for existing or additional
expenses incurred in carrying out the duties assumed by it hereunder,
or to improve its Housing Inspection Program and to supplement the
locally approved budget dedicated to Local Housing Inspection
Program; provided, however, in the event Neptune Township shows to
the satisfaction of the Bureau that such funds are not needed for the
§ 11-8.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-8.11
1:450
§ 11-8.12. Termination. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
above, requisitions may request payment to the general surplus or
other account designated by Neptune Township.
b. Neptune Township shall submit such data as the Bureau shall from time
to time require and shall from time to time make its books available for
the Bureau's inspection at such times as the Bureau shall require.
c. Neptune Township shall conscientiously enforce all local ordinances
related to housing and shall proceed under such ordinances with
respect to all cases referred by the Bureau for enforcement under such
ordinances.
d. The Bureau expressly reserves the right, at its option, to carry out
inspection and enforcement activities within the boundaries of Neptune
Township as it deems necessary to fulfill the duties imposed upon it by
the Act, or to assure faithful discharge by Neptune Township of its
duties and responsibilities.
e. Neptune Township shall not utilize any funds received pursuant to this
subsection to employ or otherwise compensate any employee of the
Department of Community Affairs who has directly participated in the
negotiation or approval of the authorization.
a. The authorization may be terminated at any time by the Bureau for any
of the following reasons:
1. Failure for any reason of Neptune Township to fulfill in a timely and
proper manner any of the conditions herein set forth.
2. Submission of reports by Neptune Township to the Bureau that are
incorrect or incomplete in any material respect.
3. Improper use of funds provided pursuant hereto.
4. Any conduct on the part of a local employee which would constitute
a violation of the New Jersey Conflict of Interest Law, N.J.S.A.
52:13D-12 et seq., if that conduct were engaged in by a State
employee.
b. In the event of termination, Neptune Township shall deliver to the
Bureau all inspection reports and registration information in its
possession.
c. Any authorization given by the Bureau shall be effective as of the date
stated in the letter of authorization and shall continue in effect until
revoked by the Bureau.
d. Any authorization conferred pursuant to this subsection shall be
deemed to be extended to the territory of one or more other local units
of government upon submission by such other local units of government
§ 11-8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.12
1:451
§ 11-8.13. Liability and Responsibility. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 11-8.14. Discontinuance of Inspections. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
and proof of compliance with the requirements of the Interlocal
Services Act (N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.).
a. Neptune Township, acting under an authorization granted by the
Bureau pursuant to this subsection, shall be solely responsible for, and
shall keep, save and hold the Department of Community Affairs, the
Division of Codes and Standards and the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
and their officers, directors, employees, agents and servants, harmless
from all claims, loss, liability, expense, damage and judgments,
including all legal expenses incurred, resulting from any and all injury,
and damage to agents or employees or anyone connected with
performance pursuant to the authorization or to any other persons
caused by any and all acts of Neptune Township or any of its officers,
directors, employees, agents or any person or persons in connection
with performance under this authorization, or from any and all injury
and damage to any property caused by any and all acts of Neptune
Township or any of its officers, directors, employees, agents and
servants or any other person or persons in connection with
performance pursuant to this authorization.
b. The liability of Neptune Township pursuant hereto shall continue after
the termination of the authorization with respect to any liability, claims,
loss, expense, damage or judgements resulting from acts occurring
prior to termination.
c. Neptune Township shall be solely responsible to defend any and all
suits that may be brought against the Department, the Division or the
Bureau or any of its officers, directors, employees, agents or servants
on account of any and all acts of Neptune Township, and shall make
good to, and reimburse the Department for any expenditures that the
Department may make by reason of such acts.
a. Neptune Township shall not unilaterally discontinue performing
inspections pursuant to the authorization except upon six (6) months'
notice to the Bureau.
b. Neptune Township may not employ a person to perform inspections
stated above unless that person is licensed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:10-B.
c. Neptune Township, should it maintain a local enforcing agency for
purposes of conducting inspections and other enforcement functions
with Neptune Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-13a, shall do so as
provided in these rules. The method of enforcement shall be set forth by
amendment to this ordinance and shall designate a municipal agency to
enforce the Act.
§ 11-8.12 NEPTUNE CODE § 11-8.15
1:452
§ 11-8.15. Local Program Official and Agent of Bureau. [Ord. No.
2015-52]
The Director of Code and Construction in Neptune Township is hereby
designated as the agent of the Bureau of Housing Inspection for the
purposes of inspecting newly constructed or altered hotels and multiple
dwellings in order to enforce the provisions of these regulations.
Responsibility for inspection may be delegated to the appropriate subcode
official(s).
§ 11-8.16. Payment Schedule. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
The payment schedule shall be as set forth and amended by the Department
of Community Affairs, Bureau of Housing Inspection. Attached hereto as
Exhibit "A" is the present payment schedule effective July 1, 2005, but this
ordinance shall be subject automatically to any amendments thereto, which
shall automatically be incorporated therein.38
Chapter 12
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
[Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning property
maintenance, see Chapter 11, Building and Housing.]
§ 12-1. BOCA NATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 12-1.1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [Ord. No. 1494
§ 1; Ord. No. 1633 § 1; Ord. No. 96-35 § 1]
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the Township Clerk, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, Fifth Edition, 1996" as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Neptune, in the State of New Jersey; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection 12-1.2.
38.Editor's Note: Exhibit A may be found on file in the Township offices.
§ 11-8.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:453
§ 12-1.2. Additions, Insertions and Changes. [Ord. No. 1494 § 1;
Ord. No. 1633 § 3; Ord. No. 96-35 § 3; Ord. No. 97-15 § 1; Ord. No.
99-37 § 1; Ord. No. 04-35 § 1; Ord. No. 04-49 § 1; Ord. No. 08-06 § 1;
Ord. No. 08-14 § 3; Ord. No. 10-19; Ord. No. 2014-33; Ord. No.
2015-02; Ord. No. 2016-31 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-16; Ord. No. 2018-21]
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in
the following respects:
Page numbers refer to the location of the amendments in the document
marked and designated as "The BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code, Fifth Edition, 1996," a copy of which is on file in the Office of
the Municipal Clerk, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc. which remains in full affect as authorized
by the adoption of Ordinance No. 96-35, as amended in Ordinance No.
04-35:
a. Section PM-101.1 (Page 1, second line)
Insert: Township of Neptune
b. Section PM-106.1-Unlawful Acts (Page 2)
Repeal and amend as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, seller,
purchaser or occupant to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove,
demolish, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, sell, buy,
convey, transfer, occupy, let to another or occupy or permit another
person to occupy any premises, property, structure, equipment, yard or
vacant land regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, contrary
to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code,
or to fail to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to remove or
deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this code.
c. Section PM-106.2 (Pages 2-3)
Repeal and amend as follows:
Any person, firm, corporation, owner, seller, purchaser or occupant who
shall violate a provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to removal from such property and/or a fine of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, at the discretion
of the Court. Each date that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Furthermore, if an owner or responsible person or persons are duly
notified of a violation under the ordinances of the Township of Neptune
and shall fail to correct any violation, and the code official shall cause
any public agency or by contract or arrangement through private
person(s) to close any structure or remove or clean any equipment,
rubbish, garbage or other unsanitary condition, the cost of such
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:454
closure, removal or clean-up shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the violation exists and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
d. Section PM 107.1 (Page 3)
Add, "If the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore
are a corporation or other business entity, notice herein shall also be
given to the registered agent of the Corporation or business entity.
In the discretion of the code official, notice may also be given to any
tenant, occupant, responsible person, registered agent, in-county agent
or other person(s), corporation or entity if an interested party."
e. Section PM 107.2 (Page 3, Paragraph 4):
Modify as follows: "4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable
time for the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling
unit, structure, exterior property or vacant land into compliance with
the provisions of this code. In the event a reasonable time period
is established by statute, rule, regulation, code or other law, this
Ordinance shall incorporate and adopt the minimum time frame as set
forth in such statute, rule, regulation, code or other law as if the time
frame had been specifically established herein."
f. Section PM-107.3 (Page 3, line 8)
After "in a conspicuous space … notice" add, "and by regular mail to the
owner and/or responsible person or persons at the last known address."
g. Section PM-111.1 (Page 4)
"Board of Appeals" shall be changed to "Township Committee"
h. Sections PM-111.2 (Page 4), PM-111.2.1, PM-111.2.2, PM-111.2.3,
PM-111.2.5, PM-111.2.6 (Page 5)
Shall be deleted in their entirety.
i. Section PM-111.3 (Page 5, second line)
"Chairman" shall be replaced with "Mayor"
j. Section PM-111.4.1 (Page 5, second line)
"Secretary" shall be replaced with "Municipal Clerk"
k. Section PM-202.0 (Pages 7-8)
Add the following definitions:
CORPORATION — The term "corporation" as referred to in this
Ordinance shall not be limited to corporation, as that term may be
defined in a legal sense, but shall also include any business or other
ownership entity, including but not limited to a corporation, limited
liability company, sole proprietorship, partnership, trust or estate. The
term "Corporation" as referred to herein shall also refer to any
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:455
Condominium Association, Co-op, Housing Authority, Homeowner's
Association or other entity that may have control over common areas of
a multi-unit housing development.
REGISTERED AGENT — The person, persons or corporation designated
by law and authorized to accept service on behalf of any corporation,
business entity or other ownership entity, as such designation may
be made by public record or as may be prescribed by statute, rule,
regulation, ordinance, code or other law.
VACANT LOT OR VACANT LAND — Any parcel of real property having
a separate and distinct owner as designated by the tax map of the
Township of Neptune and being unoccupied and having no structures,
equipment, accessory structures or other improvements. Vacant Lot or
Vacant Land shall be included any time the Property Maintenance Code
refers to exterior property.
l. Section PM-301.2 (Page 9, line 1)
Amend as follows: The owner, operator, tenant and occupant of the
premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property .…" In
addition, add after the last sentence, "The owner, operator or occupant
of a structure or exterior property shall be responsible for keeping the
structure or exterior property clean, sanitary and safe, but only to the
extent that the operator or occupant has control over the structure or
exterior property."
m. Section PM-302.1 (Page 9)
Add the following definitions:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that is partially
or totally dismantled or unable to travel on a highway under its own
power.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human
power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads,
runners, or slides and to transport persons or property or pull
machinery and shall include, without limitations, automobile, truck,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
UNLICENSED VEHICLE — A vehicle where the inspection sticker and
or vehicle registration has expired or license plates are missing or
expired.
n. Section PM-301.3 (Page 9) is hereby amended to read as follows:
All vacant structures and premises thereof, or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided
herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect public
health or safety. All structures not in compliance with this section shall
be made secure by having all openings, doors and windows sealed with
one-half inch plywood or other approved material and shall be painted
white.
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:456
o. Section PM-303.4 (Page 10)
Add "In the event an owner or responsible person or persons do not
correct any violation under this provision within ten (10) days after
notice to cut, remove or destroy the same, the code official shall be
permitted to provide for the cutting, removal or destruction of such
condition(s) in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 and may assess a
lien on the premises in accordance with the requirements set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14, and any other statutes, rules, regulations or laws as
may be adopted from time to time and relating thereto. Any subsequent
violation within a one-year period of time from the initial 10-day notice
shall not require any additional 10-day notices, and shall be considered
to be a continuing violation which will allow the code official to provide
for the cutting, removal or destruction of such condition(s) in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 and to assess a lien on the premises
in accordance with the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14,
and any other statutes, rules, regulations or laws as may be adopted
from time to time and relating thereto."
p. Section PM 303.8 (Page 10, line 4)
The section is amended to read as follows:
Except as provided for in other regulations, and subject to § 411.04
of the Land Development Ordinance, entitled, "Motor Vehicle Parking
in Residential Areas," not more than one currently unregistered and/
or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in the state of major
disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed
inside of a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved
for such purposes. [Ord. No. 2016-31]
q. Section PM-304.15 (Page 11, first line and second line)
Insert: May 1 — October 1
r. Section PM-304.19 entitled Graffiti, is hereby added as follows:
No person shall place upon or in any manner deface, post hand bills or
mark with chalk, ink, paint, or any other substance upon any structure,
fence, pole, rock, tree or other object maintaining thereon any words
devices, trademarks, advertisements, graffiti, pictures or notices not
required by law to be posted. The person violating this section, or
the owner if the person violating this section is not known, shall be
responsible to restore the surface defaced to an approved state of
repair as may be required by the code official.
s. Section PM-308.1 is hereby added as follows:
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:457
PM-308.1 Construction/Demolition Sites: All construction/demolition
sites located within the Ocean Grove Historic District shall be enclosed
with temporary safety fencing consisting of chain link fencing properly
supported with posts not less than every eight (8') feet that is not
less than four (4') feet in height and not to exceed six (6') feet in
height, surrounding the perimeter of the construction/demolition site.
This section shall apply to new construction projects, major renovation
projects and demolition projects. Determination of need for fencing
shall be made by the Construction Official. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
t. Section PM-308.2 is hereby added as follows:
PM-308.2 Abutting Street and Sidewalk: The abutting street and
sidewalk shall be kept free from dirt, sand and other materials. A
temporary stone tracking pad, a minimum of twelve (12') feet wide
and fifteen (15') feet long, must be installed from the curb onto the
construction site. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
u. Section PM-308.4 is hereby added as follows:
PM 308.4. Posting Requirement: All construction sites shall post on site
the following information: the block, lot and address of the property;
the name, address and telephone number of the General Contractor,
along with all required permits so as to be visible to all Borough officials
and sub-contractors in a weather-proof manner at all times. [Ord. No.
2017-16]
v. Section PM-405.3 (Page 14):
Add, "Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall comply with
the applicable provisions of this Code and Ordinance, including but not
limited to: light, ventilation, square footage, ceiling height, electrical
receptacles, access, smoke and carbon monoxide detectors and
emergency escape."
w. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 2015-02]
x. Add PM-508.2 as follows:
PM-508.2
Leaders and Drains: No leaders or drains shall be constructed,
installed, or maintained in such a manner as to cast rain water upon the
adjoining property of others.
y. Section PM-602.2 (Page 17, third line)
65 degrees F (18 degrees C) shall be replaced with 68 degrees F (20
degrees C)
z. Section PM-602.2.1 (Page 17, fifth line)
Insert: October 1 — May 1
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:458
aa. Section PM-602.2.1 (Page 17, seventh line)
6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. shall be replaced with 6:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m.
bb. Section PM-602.2.1 (Page 17, eighth line)
60 degrees F (16 degrees C) shall be replaced with 65 degrees F (18
degrees C)
cc. Section PM-602.3 (Page 17, third line)
Insert: October — May 1
dd. Section PM-602.3 (Page 17, fourth line)
65 degrees F (18 degrees C) shall be replaced with 68 degrees F (20
degrees C)
ee. Section PM 603.9 entitled Chimney certification, is hereby added as
follows:
All fuel burning vents must be inspected by a Chimney Safety Institute
of America certified chimney sweep and certification submitted stating
that the chimney/vent is free and clear of obstruction and is
substantially clean of residue and is appropriately lined and sized.
ff. Section PM-603.10 entitled Portable heat, is hereby added as follows:
The installation or use of a portable space heater, as herein defined, is
prohibited in the Township of Neptune. Any moveable space heater that
has a heating device that produces a glowing element, a spark or flame
shall be considered a portable space heater.
gg. Section PM-605.2 (Page 18)
Remove lines 3 & 4 and amend as follows: An electrical receptacle
must be installed within 6 feet of any water source. Such electrical
receptacles must be a GFI or GFCI outlet (Ground Fault Circuit
Interrupter Protector) if located in a residential dwelling, unit,
apartment, boarding house room or hotel or motel room. Any exterior
electrical receptacle must be a GFI or GFCI outlet (Ground Fault Circuit
Interrupter Protector).
hh. Section PM-605.2 (Page 18, fifth line)
Add the following: Any receptacle within 6 feet of water must be GFI
(Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter Protector).
ii. Section PM-705.5—Smoke Detectors (Page 20)
Modify Caption as follows: Section PM-705.5
Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors.
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:459
Add: Before any residential dwelling is sold or leased for purposes of
occupancy, or subject to change of occupancy for residential purposes,
the owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide compliance (CSDCMAC), as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and any other related statutory or administrative code
requirements as may be applicable now or in the future.
Installation of smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors in new
construction, rehabilitation or improvements shall be A/C powered with
battery backup, and shall be interconnected.
jj. Chapter 9—Certificates of Inspections
Modify Caption as follows: Chapter 9 — Certificates of Inspections;
Transfer of Title and Certificates of Occupancy
Section PM 901.1: Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern
the procedures for a Certificate of Inspection, Transfer of Title and
Certificates of Occupancy for the sale, transfer or conveyance of
property; renting or leasing of property and installing or constructing
improvements to all properties within the boundaries of the Township
of Neptune.
Section PM-901.2:
Application forms: Application for Certificate of Inspection, Transfer
of Title, School updates and other inspections as may be applicable
to this Chapter shall be made on the forms prescribed by the code
official and may be obtained by the public at the Office of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The applicant must include the name of the owner,
seller or landlord; the name of the purchaser or tenant; and the number
and names of each occupant, and shall be signed by the Owner(s)/
Landlord(s) or its designated agent and the Purchaser/Tenant or its
designated agent. If the Owner, Landlord, Purchaser or Tenant is a
trustee, estate, corporation or other entity, the applicant shall also
include the current name and address of the trustee, executor/
administrator or registered agent and the registered agent's address
as may be set forth in the legal documents of the entity or formation
papers of the corporation and any amendments thereto. The applicant
shall attach to the application a copy of the legal documents of
formation and any amendments thereto, to show evidence of the
registration and the name and address of the registered agent.
Add Section PM-901.3:
Application: The form or forms prescribed by the municipality or code
officer to request the code enforcement officer or construction officer
to inspect a property, structure, dwelling unit, apartment, office, store,
commercial or industrial building or other space to determine
compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of the BOCA Basic
Property Maintenance Code or any other applicable ordinances of the
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:460
municipality. The Application shall include a check list guide for
violations that the code official will inspect.
Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy: A certificate issued by the
code officer or code enforcement office demonstrating that a property,
structure, dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or
industrial building or space is in full compliance with the provisions of
the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code and any other applicable
ordinances of the municipality, and which also permits occupancy in
such property, structure, dwelling unit, etc. by those person(s) or
entities included in the Application.
Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy:
A certificate issued by the code officer or code enforcement office
demonstrating that a property, structure, dwelling unit, apartment,
office, store, commercial or industrial building or space is in substantial
compliance with the provisions of the BOCA Basic Property
Maintenance Code and any other applicable ordinances of the
municipality; does not impair the habitability of the property, structure,
dwelling unit, etc.; and which also permits occupancy in such property,
structure, dwelling unit, etc. by those person(s) or entities included in
the Application.
Certificate of Transfer of Title: A certificate issued by the code officer or
code enforcement office authorizing the sale or transfer of a property,
structure, dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or
industrial building or space, and which does not permit occupancy
in such property, structure, dwelling unit, etc. by those person(s) or
entities included in the Application until such time as an Application
for, and issuance of, a Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy or
Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy is
issued. An application for a Certificate of Inspection may be modified
to a Transfer of Title (without occupancy permitted), provided both
the Owner/Seller and the Buyer provide a notarized letter to the Code
Enforcement Office requesting a modification of the application.
Certificate of Occupancy: A certificate issued by the construction officer
or construction office indicating that any new construction, addition,
remodel, renovation, demolition or other improvement has been
completed, inspected and certified to comply with the BOCA Basic
Property Maintenance Code and any other applicable ordinances of the
municipality for occupancy.
Section PM-902.0 REQUIREMENTS
PM-902.1 - When Required:
A Certificate of Inspection must be obtained by the owner of real
property prior to the sale, transfer, lease, rental or occupancy of any
structure, dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or
industrial buildings located within the Township of Neptune. The
Certificate of Inspection shall certify that said property is in compliance
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:461
with all of the provisions of the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code
and all other applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune.
PM-902.2
Repeal and Modify as follows:
Prior to the sale, transfer, lease, rental or other conveyance of, or
permission of use, property located in the Township of Neptune that
has any structure dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or
industrial building which is or will be occupied upon the sale, transfer,
lease, rental or other conveyance of or permission to use such property,
the Seller, Landlord and/or Buyer shall obtain a Certificate of Inspection
for Occupancy or a Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection
for Occupancy as may be permitted herein. An application shall be filed
in the form prescribed by the Code Enforcement Department, and shall
be signed by the Seller/Landlord and Buyer/Tenant, or other designated
agents.
1. A Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy shall be issued by the
municipality upon the inspection by the code enforcement officer of
that portion of the property to be occupied and any common area,
exterior property, accessory structures or other improvement affecting
the occupancy, provided such inspection finds that it complies with all
of the provisions of the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code and
all other applicable Ordinances of the Township of Neptune.
Inspections for Condominiums, Cooperative Units, Townhouses or
similar single family housing units shall be limited to the specific unit
only for purposes of issuing a Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy.
If there are any violations in the common areas, notices for such
violations shall be addressed to the Association, Incorporation or other
owner and any interested party or agent, who shall then comply with
the requirements set forth in the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance
Code or any other applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune,
or be subject to fines, penalties and/or costs as permitted by the
Ordinances of Neptune Township.
2. A Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy
may be issued, in the discretion of the Code Officer, for buildings, units
or structures which are not in full compliance with the provisions of
the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code or any other applicable
ordinances of the Township of Neptune, provided that the code
deficiencies do not impair the habitability of the structure or impinge
on the health, safety or general welfare of the owner-occupant. Prior
to the issuance of a Conditional Certificate, the potential owneroccupant(
s) must provide the code officer with a signed and notarized
letter signed by all potential adult occupants, which specifically
enumerates the deficiencies and states that the owner-occupant(s)
accept the deficiencies and agree to correct such deficiencies within
thirty (30) days of closing of title, subject to extensions as may be
permitted under Section PM 902.6 herein.
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:462
For multi-family dwellings, the Code Officer, in his/her discretion, may
issue a Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection for
Occupancy even if there are life safety violations in a particular
apartment or unit, providing that the specific unit will not be occupied
until the life safety violations have been corrected and a Certificate of
Inspection issued, and such violations are not in the common areas and
do not impair the habitability of the remaining apartments or units.
Inspections for Condominiums, Cooperative Units, Townhouses or
similar single family housing units shall be limited to the specific unit
only for purposes of issuing a Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy.
If there are any violations in the common areas, notices for such
violations shall be addressed to the Association, Incorporation or other
owner and any interested party or agent, who shall then comply with
the requirements set forth in the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance
Code or any other applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune,
or be subject to fines, penalties and/or costs as permitted by the
Ordinances of Neptune Township.
3. Certificate of Transfer of Title: Upon the sale or transfer of property
located in the Township of Neptune that has any structure, dwelling
unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or industrial building which
is not occupied by any person other than the Owner at the time of
the inspection, and which will not be occupied upon the closing of
title, the Seller or Purchaser, prior to the closing of title and transfer
of deed, Assignment of Lease or other legal document, may obtain a
Certificate of Transfer of Title or Conditional Certificate of Inspection
without Occupancy in lieu of a Certificate or Conditional Certificate
of Inspection with Occupancy. The purchaser of such a building or
structure shall not permit the building or structure to become
occupied until the Purchaser makes an application under this chapter
for a Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy or a Certificate of
Occupancy, and the Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy;
Conditional Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy or Certificate of
Occupancy is issued by the Code Enforcement or Construction Office,
as may be applicable. The present owner(s) and purchaser(s) must sign
the application for a Transfer of Title and their respective signatures
must be notarized.
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:463
4. Certificate of Occupancy: An owner, agent, corporation or other
responsible person or entity of any property, structure, dwelling,
dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial or industrial
building, or otherwise, shall obtain the appropriate permits whenever
the owner, agent, corporation or other person or entity shall construct,
alter, modify, demolish, erect, add to or improve any property,
structure, dwelling, dwelling unit, apartment, office, store, commercial
or industrial building, and prior to occupancy shall obtain a Certificate
of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the
municipality upon the inspection of the building, structure and
improvements thereof by the code or construction officials and a
finding that the building or structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code and any
other applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune.
PM-902.3 - Certificate of Inspection Amendments; Expiration
Add: An approved Certificate of Inspection will expire within six
months of its issuance if the property has not been sold, leased or
otherwise conveyed to the named occupants listed in the application.
However, such expiration period shall be subject to any changes by
statute or administrative regulation which may require a reinspection
or as shall be established by Ordinance from time to time, or as
may be otherwise authorized by law. Until the expiration date, the
applicants shall be permitted to amend their application to include
other immediate family members, such as children, not originally
named on the application, as long as the original occupants shall also
remain on the reissued Certificate. The cost, if any, for preparation of
any amended or reissued Certificate of Inspection shall be as adopted
from time to time by the Township of Neptune.
In the event the names of occupants have changed, a Certificate
of Inspection shall expire within 45 days from the date it has been
issued. For purposes of this section, and by way of example only, if
an inspection has been completed and approved, and the name of the
Buyer or Tenant has changed after such inspection and approval, a
Certificate of Inspection may be issued to a new Buyer or Tenant within
45 days from the date the original approval had been issued. However,
such expiration period shall be subject to any changes by statute or
administrative regulation which may require a reinspection or as shall
be established by Ordinance from time to time, or as may be otherwise
authorized by law. Before an amended Certificate of Inspection may be
issued, the new Buyer or Tenant must accept the unexpired inspection
by providing a notarized letter to the Code Department.
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:464
For purposes of this Section, a Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy
for Summer Seasonal Rentals shall be made once prior to occupancy
by any Summer Seasonal Tenant. A summer season begins the
Saturday preceding Memorial Day and ends on September 30th. If
the names of the Summer Seasonal Rental occupants will change
at any time during the summer, the applicant, upon submitting the
application, shall state in the application the names of all occupants
known and the time period of each tenant's occupancy. Applicant shall
pay an update fee for each change in occupancy, and if there is any
change to the occupants listed in the application after the application
is submitted, the applicant shall supplement the application form with
such changes and pay the appropriate update fee. The update fee is as
established herein. [Ord. No. 2018-21]
PM-902.4 - Change of Tenant
Within the first 30 days from the application date an owner or agent
may change the names of the occupants, tenants, renters. There shall
be a charge for this change. In the event of changes or additions after
30 days from the application date, a full application must be submitted.
An inspection shall be required each time a renter changes within a
unit or house, unless such inspection has been conducted on the same
unit within the proceeding 30 days. In the event that 30 days has not
lapsed since the last inspection, an additional inspection will not be
required.
PM 902-5 - Special/Emergency Inspections
Inspections may be requested or required to be made during nonregular
business hours (hours in which the Code Enforcement
Department is closed) at an additional fee as described in Section PM
903.0 FEES.
PM 902.6
Change Heading to Section PM-902.6 - Conditional or Temporary
Certificate of Inspection; Expiration
Modify as follows, "The Code Officer may, in his or her discretion, issue
a Conditional or Temporary Certificate of Inspection upon written
notarized application by the occupant(s) in accordance with Section
PM-902.2. Any conditional or temporary Certificate of Inspection with
Occupancy issued pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance shall expire
within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance thereof. Conditional or
Temporary Certificates of Inspection are renewable with an additional
notarized letter conforming to the requirements of Section PM-902.2
and approvable by the code official, in his or her discretion. The
Code Officer may only issue a Conditional or Temporary Certificate of
Inspection for any property where the Purchaser or Owner and his/her
immediate family will be the only occupant.
Section PM 903.0 FEES
PM 903.1 - Where and when payable:
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:465
All fees are payable to the Township of Neptune and are paid in the
Code Enforcement Department during regular business hours.
PM 903.2 - Fees for Initial Certificate of Inspection; Conditional or
Temporary Certificate of Inspection; or Transfer of Title, including
Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Compliance
(CSDCMAC):
Modify as follows:
1. For applications for a Certificate of Inspection; Conditional or
Temporary Certificate of Inspection or Transfer of Title, the fees shall
be as follows:
(a) If the application is received more than ten (10) days prior to
the anticipated closing date, occupancy date or requested inspection
date:
Commercial Uses $100.00 per unit
Single-Family Dwellings $100.00
2-family and multifamily
dwelling
$100.00 for the first unit + $65.00 for
each additional unit
Hotels/Motels/Rooming
Houses and Boarding
Houses
$125.00 plus
$15.00 per room, rooming unit or office
Day Care Facilities $100.00
Nursing Homes and
Health Care Centers
$125.00 plus
$15.00 per room
Transfer of Title $65.00
Summer Seasonal
Rental
$65.00 per unit, per summer month or
thirty (30) day period as defined in
Section 902.3. In addition, an update fee
of $15.00 shall be payable each time the
occupants change within a summer
month or thirty day period.
(b) If the application is received between ten (10) and five (5) days
prior to the anticipated closing date, occupancy date or requested
inspection date, the fees under paragraph (a) above, shall be
increased by $25.00 for each required inspection.
(c) If the application is received four (4) or less days prior to the
anticipated closing date, occupancy date or requested inspection
date, the fees under paragraph (a) above shall be increased by
$50.00 for each required inspection.
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:466
PM 903.3 - Reinspection:
Modify as follows:
1. Reinspections shall be limited to violations set forth in the prior
inspection report and any additional life safety, habitability or
statutorily mandated inspections that may be evident or mandatory at
the time of the reinspection. If the prior violations are not corrected,
or life safety, habitability or statutorily mandated code requirements
are evident, the Code Officer shall note the violations on the inspection
form and fail the inspection. The applicant would be required to
complete the repairs and apply for another reinspection.
2. Reinspection fees: A reinspection application shall be filed and the
fee shall be charged for each and every time a code officer is scheduled
to reinspect a property to determine whether cited violations have
been corrected. Reinspection fees shall be required issuance of a
Certificate of Inspection after a Conditional or Temporary Certificate
of Inspection was issued, or to determine whether there is compliance
with the Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide
Compliance (CSDCMAC).
The fees for each reinspection shall be as follows:
Commercial Uses $35.00 per unit
Single-Family 2-family and
multi-family dwellings
$20.00 per unit to be inspected (Sales and
Rentals)
Hotels/Motels/Rooming
Houses and Boarding
Houses
$35.00+ $10.00 per room, rooming unit
or office to be inspected
Day Care facilities $35.00
Nursing Homes and
Health Care Centers
$35.00 + $10.00 per room to be inspected
Summer Seasonal Updates $15.00 per update, per unit
PM 903.4 - Fees for inspections during non-business hours (in
addition to regular permit or applications fees as described in PM
903-2 and PM 903-3):
Minimum fee - $125.00
Each man hour in excess
of 2 man hours
- $50.00 per man hour.
(Any fraction of a man hour shall be considered one man hour)
PM 903.5 — Certificate of Inspection Update for Child's Entry into
Neptune Township Public Schools (School Update Inspection)
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:467
a. The code official shall be authorized to act as a liaison between
the code enforcement department and the Neptune Township Public
School System to adopt rules and regulations governing the issuance
of a certificate of inspection for the Public School System to ensure
pupils entering into the Public School System reside in the Township
of Neptune. The application and inspection procedure is the same as
that for a Certificate of Inspection with Occupancy. The scope of the
inspection for issuance of a Certificate of Inspection Update (School
Update Inspection) shall be as follows:
1. Compliance with the certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide compliance (CSDCMAC), as required by N.J.A.C.
5:70-4.19, N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and any other related minimum statutory
or administrative code mandates or inspections as may be applicable
now or in the future.
2. Compliance with Section PM 405.0 et al.—Occupancy Limitations
3. Any statutorily mandated inspections that may exist now or in the
future for the sale or lease of residential property to be occupied.
4. Permitted use of the property for residential purposes in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Neptune,
and/or that the use of the property is a permitted, preexisting,
nonconforming use.
5. Determination that the property is used by the persons named in
the application.
b. The code enforcement officer shall provide a list of applicable
requirements to each applicant. The fee for a School Update
Inspections shall be $15.00 for inspections and $15.00 for
reinspections, if necessary.
c. If the school inspection is for a tenant, the Landlord, Owner or
designated agent must also authorize the inspection.
d. All violations set forth in a School Update Inspection shall be
completed no later than ten (10) days from the date of inspection
to ensure the safety of those persons living in the premises and
compliance with minimum statutory mandates.
PM-904.0 — AUTOMATED TRASH/RECYCLING CONTAINERS
PM-904.1 — Requirements
The Certificate of Inspection requirements shall include a provision
that the applicant for a Certificate of Inspection shall be responsible to
ensure that at least one automated trash container and one automated
recycling container for each housing unit will remain with the property.
The Code Enforcement Department Certificate of Inspection checklist
shall include verification that at least one trash container and one
recycling container exist for each dwelling unit.
1. A Certificate of Inspection for Occupancy shall be issued by the
municipality upon the inspection by the code enforcement officer of
§ 12-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-1.2
1:468
§ 12-1.3. Saving Clause. [Ord. No. 1494 § 4; Ord. No. 1633 § 4; Ord.
No. 96-35 § 4]
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired
or affected by this chapter.
§ 12-2. COMMUNITY CLEANUP; LITTERING; ILLEGAL DUMPING.39
§ 12-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1491 § II]
As used in this section:
ASHES — Shall mean residuals from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible materials.
BACKFILL MATERIAL — Shall mean materials used to restore an excavated
area to subgrade condition.
BUILDING — Shall mean any structure, either temporary or permanent,
heretofore or hereafter constructed and designed or used for commercial,
residential, industrial or other use or occupancy.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Shall mean any material, raw or finished,
including but not limited to lumber, brick, plaster, gutters, roofing shingles
or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing
structures.
that portion of the property to be occupied and any common area,
exterior property, accessory structures or other improvement
affecting the occupancy, provided such inspection finds that it
complies with all of the provisions of the BOCA Basic Property
Maintenance Code and all other applicable Ordinances of the
Township of Neptune.Inspections for Condominiums, Cooperative
Units, Townhouses or similar single family housing units shall be
limited to the specific unit only for purposes of issuing a Certificate
of Inspection for Occupancy. If there are any violations in the
common areas, notices for such violations shall be addressed to
the Association, Incorporation or other owner and any interested
party or agent, who shall then comply with the requirements set
forth in the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code or any other
applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune, or be subject
to fines, penalties and/or costs as permitted by the Ordinances of
Neptune Township.
39.Editor's Note: For additional regulations, See Chapter 3, Police Regulations. For
regulations concerning Inoperable or Unlicensed Motor Vehicles, see Section 3-3.
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.1
1:469
BUNDLES — Shall mean normally loose items which shall be collected if
organized into bundles of not more than four (4') feet in length and tied
with heavy twine, rope, wire, etc. Bundles shall be organized so as to be
conveniently handled by one (1) person. No bundle shall exceed fifty (50)
pounds in weight.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Shall mean those areas of the Township wherein
it is impossible to perform solid waste and recycling collection functions
without detrimental effect on the area or its businesses. Designation is at
the sole discretion of the Township Committee and may involve fees for
collection.
BUSINESS TRASH — Shall mean any waste accumulation of dirt, dust, food,
paper, cardboard, excelsior, rags or similar materials other than household
trash, which is attendant to the operations of stores, offices or similar
businesses.
CARTWAY — Shall mean that area of a roadway which lies between the
curblines, having a hard surface and used for vehicular traffic.
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND PROFESSIONAL PROPERTIES — Shall
mean any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, governmental, or other
nonresidential establishments, including both buildings and grounds.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the work required to be performed under
the permit.
CONTAINER — See Receptacle.
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean the individual, group, partnership, or
corporation undertaking to do work for payment.
COORDINATOR — Shall mean the Solid Waste, Recycling and Clean
Community Coordinator for the Township.
CURB — Shall mean that construction of concrete, bituminous concrete,
brick and/or wood products with a vertical face, which is placed and defines
where the pavement and planting strip meet.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Township Public Works Department.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — Shall mean and include the Township
Director of Public Works and his or her appointees.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean and include that portion of a right-of-way which
provides access to an off-street vehicular facility through a depression in the
constructed curb; or, when there is no constructed curb, that area in front
of such vehicular facility as is well defined or as is designated by authorized
signs or markings.
DRIVEWAY APRON — Shall mean that area of the driveway between the
sidewalk and the curb or curbline; or, where there is no sidewalk, that area
between the property line and the curbline.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean when an existing utility is leaking, broken,
blocked or otherwise malfunctioning in such a way that the health, safety,
§ 12-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-2.1
1:470
welfare or interest of the public is endangered and immediate action is
required.
EXCAVATED MATERIAL — Shall mean all material removed or disturbed
from its original location.
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and/or vegetative waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, consumption or cooking of food,
including any fecal waste from any animal or bird (when fecal matter has
been separated from other waste and is double bagged prior to placement
for collection).
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean any waste or combination of wastes
which pose a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms
or the environment, including, but not limited to, waste material that is
toxic, carcinogenic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, biologically infectious,
explosive, flammable or radioactive and any waste so designated by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
HOSPITAL/RED BAG WASTE — Shall mean and include but is not limited
to all instruments, supplies, containers, bandages, tubing, gloves, etc. used
by health care practitioners and facilities as described in the New Jersey
Department of Health regulations and New Jersey law, Section 306 of the
Manual of Standards for Hospital Facilities, and N.J.S.A. 2A:170-25.17.
HOUSEHOLD TRASH — Shall mean any waste accumulation of paper,
sweepings, dirt, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other
than garbage, attendant to housekeeping.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean any waste, including solids, semi-solids,
sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other
manufacturing enterprises.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES — Shall mean any non-taxable (exempt)
property, whether religious, educational, service facilities/organizations or
institutional establishments, residential or non-residential, at which
garbage or trash may be generated.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material. This definition excludes waste
from primary processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging,
saw-milling, farming or manufacturing (Section 6d: All citations are from
P.L. 1986, c. 187).
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any building or structure and
land appurtenant thereto containing two (2) or more apartments or rented
or offered for rent to two (2) or more tenants or family units.
§ 12-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.1
1:471
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLANTING STRIP — Shall mean that area between the property line and
the curb or edge of pavement, the area between the sidewalk and property
line and the area between the sidewalk and the curb or edge of pavement.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
municipal or private parking lots, alleys, or other public ways, and any and
all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, buildings and recreational areas.
RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container constructed of such material and in
such a manner as to hold solid waste and trash and other such items without
breaking or collapsing. Receptacles shall have handles and covers so that
contents are not exposed to the weather, animals and vermin. A disposable
plastic bag shall constitute a receptacle if it is of sufficient strength to hold
its contents without breaking when collected. The receptacle shall be of
such design and weight as to be able to be conveniently handled by one (1)
person. No container shall exceed thirty-five (35) gallons in a capacity nor
weigh more than fifty (50) pounds when loaded. Receptacles which, in the
opinion of the Department, are broken or fail to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall be classified as "garbage."
RECONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the removal and replacement of an
existing structure, facility, area or appurtenance as required under the
permit.
Recyclable materials40 — Shall mean any waste materials which can be
returned, through processing, to their former or alternate use. Recyclable
materials include, but are not limited to:
Aluminum cans shall mean beverage or food containers constructed or
fabricated of aluminum or its alloys.
a.
Bimetal cans shall mean beverage or food containers which are
composed of an aluminum top and steel sides and bottoms.
b.
Cardboard/corrugated paper shall mean and include Kraft corrugated
which has a brown liner made from Kraft paper and regular corrugated
which is gray or tan and is made from other types of paper such as
newspapers.
c.
Glass shall mean and include all products made from silica or sand,
soda, ash and lime, the product being transparent or translucent and
being used as packaging.
d.
Hi-grade and mixed papers shall mean and include, but is not limited
to, computer printouts, office paper and stationery.
e.
Newspapers shall mean papers of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at periodic intervals. Expressly excluded,
f.
40.Editor's Note: See also Section 21-6 for regulations concerning recycling.
§ 12-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-2.1
1:472
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid and industrial wastes.
REGULATIONS — Shall mean such rules, schedules, and the like,
promulgated by the Director of Public Works and adopted by the Township
Committee to carry out the purpose of this section.
REPAIR — Shall mean restoring, patching and the like of both a temporary
and permanent nature as may be required for the protection of the public
and the structure, facility, area and/or appurtenance.
REPLACEMENT — Shall mean the placing back of an existing structure,
facility, area or appurtenance in accordance with Township specifications.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean that area which is dedicated to the common
benefit or use of the public.
RUBBISH — Shall mean all nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, including but not limited to paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings/wastes, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean that area designated for pedestrian traffic having
a hard surface.
SINGLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Shall mean any dwelling place occupied by
one (1) family.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean all garbage and rubbish normally generated
by the occupants of residential and other property, disposed of by private
and/or public collection and defined as "solid waste" by the New Jersey Solid
Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-3). Items classified as recyclables
shall be prohibited from being placed commingled with other materials.
The Township is licensed by solid waste permit to collect three (3) types of
waste:
however, are all magazines, or other glossy surfaced periodicals and all
other paper products, e.g., wrappings from food products.
Waste oil shall mean and include used oil drained from automobiles,
motorcycles, lawnmowers, etc.
g.
Yard waste shall mean and include, but is not limited to, leaves, grass
clippings, plant residue, tree limbs, branches and trunks.
h.
Type 10, Municipal Waste; Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
a.
Type 13, Bulky Waste; Large items of solid waste which because of
their size or weight require handling other than normally used for
Municipal waste. Bulky waste includes, but is not limited to, such
items as tree trunks, parts of auto bodies, demolition or construction
materials, appliances, furniture and drums.
b.
§ 12-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.1
1:473
STREET — Shall mean any right-of-way, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way which is:
STORM DRAINS — Shall mean those pipes and appurtenances which carry
storm water and/or ground water, including roof drains, underdrains, yard
drains and sump pump discharge pipes within the right-of-way.
SUPERINTENDENT/SUPERVISOR — Shall mean the Superintendent/
Supervisor of Public Works Department of the Township.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune.
YARD WASTE — See Recyclable Materials. Yard waste shall be free of
dirt, rocks, and other bulky and noncombustible materials and shall be
separated for purposes of collection into grass clippings and leaves, and
other materials.
§ 12-2.2. Littering Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1491 § III]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
place litter of any nature upon any public cartway, road, street, avenue,
highway, planting strip, park and recreation area or right-of-way of the
Township or any private property, other than in a litter receptacle or
container.
§ 12-2.3. Illegal Dumping Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1491 § IV]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump on or along any public
or private street or road or right-of-way, any household or commercial
solid waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires,
appliances, furniture, or private property, except clean fill with written
consent of the owner of the property, in any place not specifically
designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 12-2.3A. Maintenance of Brush, Hedges, Trees and Any Plant Life.
[Ord. No. 1698 § 1; Ord. No. 12-28]
Type 23, Vegetative Waste; Includes but is not limited to, tree limbs,
branches, leaves, grass clippings, plant and flower residue.
c.
a. An existing State, County or Municipal roadway; or
Shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment and built in accordance with Township standards, and
which may be either public or private; or
b.
Shown on a plat filed with the Office of the County Clerk prior to the
creation of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township; and
c.
Not dedicated, in whole or in part, as a parking area or driveway which
provides access to any building or structures.
d.
§ 12-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-2.3A
1:474
§ 12-2.4. Appointment of Clean Communities Officials. [Ord. No.
1491 § V]
§ 12-2.5. Litter in Public Places. [Ord. No. 1491 § VI]
No person shall throw, drop, discard, or otherwise place litter in or upon
any public place within the Township except in authorized receptacles
provided for collection; provided, however, that public receptacles shall not
be used by persons owning or occupying property in the vicinity of the
public receptacles for the deposit of domestic, commercial, or industrial
litter arising from the conduct of the activities.
§ 12-2.6. Use of Litter Receptacles. [Ord. No. 1491 § VII]
Placement of litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the
following public places which exist in the Township: sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active, commercially zoned retail areas, at a minimum of two
hundred (200') foot intervals; buildings held out for public use, including
schools, government buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; drivein
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
a. Any owner/tenant/occupant of any land within the boundaries of the
Township of Neptune shall keep all brush, hedges, bushes, trees, and
any other plant life growing within twenty-five (25') feet of the
intersection of two (2) roadways cut to a height of thirty (30") inches.
b. Any owner/tenant/occupant shall maintain the trees, shrubs of that
premises to a minimum clearance of twelve (12') feet from the street at
the curb measured vertically at road grade.
a. The Township Committee shall appoint a Clean Communities
Coordinator and Deputy selected from the Public Works Department
supervisory personnel to act as liaison with Monmouth County and
State of New Jersey Clean Communities officials, to keep records,
reports and to perform administrative functions associated with the
grant application and reporting process.
b. The Township Committee shall also appoint a Clean Communities
Advisory Committee. The Committee shall consist of no fewer than four
(4) members who shall represent the following groups:
1. Business community.
2. Municipal government.
3. Private nonprofit sector (neighborhoods, civic organizations, etc.).
4. Schools.
c. Combination or use of previously established commissions or advisory
committees is permitted, providing that each group is represented.
§ 12-2.3A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.6
1:475
parking lots; campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and
fueling stations; boat launching areas; piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas, and at special events to which the public is
invited, including but not limited to sporting events, parades, carnivals,
circuses, and festivals. The proprietors and vendors of such places and the
sponsors of such events shall be responsible for providing and servicing
receptacles such that adequate containerization is available. Responsibility
for paper containerization, source separation, policing and processing rests
with the proprietor, vendor and/or sponsor. Items placed out for collection
by the Township Public Works Department shall be processed so as to meet
the requirements of Township Ordinance No. 1441.41
§ 12-2.7. Containerization of Sweepings Required. [Ord. No. 1491
§ VIII]
No person shall cause to be deposited into any gutter, street, catch basin
or other private place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall
keep the sidewalk, planting strip and curb in front of his or her premises
free of all litter and vegetative growth. All litter shall be cleaned, swept,
removed, collected, properly containerized for disposal and shall be
disposed of in accord with policies specified in Chapter 21 of this Code.
§ 12-2.8. Open or Overflowing Waste Disposal Containers/Bins.
[Ord. No. 1491 § IX]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal containers/bins on his or her
property.
§ 12-2.9. Uncovered Vehicles. [Ord. No. 1491 § X]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked,
on any public roadway unless such vehicle is constructed, altered or loaded
so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping. Any person operating a vehicle from which any materials which
constitute litter have fallen or escaped, which can cause an obstruction,
damage a vehicle, or otherwise endanger or inconvenience travelers or
public property, shall be issued a verbal order which shall immediately
require the person to clean the public property and pay the costs of cleanup.
If cleanup does not occur within twenty-four (24) hours, a summons shall be
issued to the violator.
§ 12-2.10. Construction/Demolition Sites. [Ord. No. 1491 § XI]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or immediately following completion of any construction or
41.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1441 is codified as Chapter 21, Solid Waste Management, of
this Code.
§ 12-2.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-2.10
1:476
demolition project. It shall be the duty of such owner, agent or contractor
to furnish containers adequate to accommodate all debris or trash at areas
convenient to construction areas, and to maintain and empty the
receptacles so as to prevent spillage of solid wastes. Should violation occur
cleanup must occur within twenty-four (24) hours or a summons shall be
issued to the violator.
§ 12-2.11. Commercial Establishments and Residences. [Ord. No.
1491 § XII]
It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant
or person in charge of any building to keep sidewalks, planting strips,
areaways, backyards, sideyards, courts and alleys free from litter,
obstructions, and nuisances of any kind.
§ 12-2.12. Distribution or Posting of Handbills. [Ord. No. 1491
§ XIII]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cause to be placed, or hire
another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material
of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, planting strip, tree, pole, building
or vehicle within the community in such a manner that it may be removed
by natural forces.
§ 12-2.13. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1491 § XIV]
This section shall be enforced in Municipal Court upon a complaint signed
by Health, Building, Code Enforcement, Police, Public Works official(s) and/
or officers of the Township, or by a private citizen. Further, once a complaint
has been signed and issued, the responsibility for correction shall lie with
the violator, and/or shall be processed as a lien against the property and in
accordance with the law.
§ 12-2.14. Fees for Non-Compliance. [Ord. No. 1491 § XV]
Property owners of record shall be responsible for the cleaning, sweeping,
collection, source separation and properly containing litter; purchase and
placement of litter containers; and processing of litter materials for the
collection as specified in the Solid Waste Services Ordinance, Chapter 21 of
this Code. In the event that the owner shall refuse or fail to abate or remedy
a condition which constitutes a violation of this section within twentyfour
(24) hours [one (1) work day] of receiving the notice of violation, the
Township may cause the condition to be abated and remedied. Upon the
removal of any materials prohibited to be stored or abandoned on lands
by this section by or under the direction of an appointed official, and/or
officer of this jurisdiction, in cases where the owner or tenant shall have
refused or neglected to remove the materials, such official and/or officer
shall certify the cost(s) of corrective action thereof to the Township Business
Administrator for collection.
§ 12-2.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.15
1:477
§ 12-2.15. Collection of Assessed Fees and/or Fines. [Ord. No. 1491
§ XVI]
Fees not paid by the violator within thirty (30) days of assessment shall
constitute a lien against the property which shall be collected via an action
at law, and solid waste collection services shall cease until full payment has
been made.
§ 12-2.16. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1491 § XVII; New]
§ 12-3. FALLEN TREES AND BRANCHES PROHIBITED IN DEAL
LAKE.
§ 12-3.1. Prohibited Conditions. [Ord. No. 08-46]
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity that owns or possesses
property which is contiguous or adjacent to the banks of Deal Lake or in
its watershed, to cause any tree or branch therefor to fall, such that any
portion of the tree or branch comes in contact with the water of Deal Lake.
§ 12-3.2. Time Period to Abate Violation. [Ord. No. 08-46]
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity that owns or possesses
real estate which is contiguous or adjacent to the banks of Deal Lake or in
its watershed, to allow a condition to exist where any tree or branch from
said real estate or the banks of Deal Lake contiguous or adjacent thereto,
shall have fallen, such that said tree or branch contacts the water of Deal
Lake or its watershed for more than thirty (30) days.
§ 12-3.3. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. No. 08-46]
The Governing Body of the Township of Neptune, its agents or designees,
shall have the power to issue a complaint and summons to cause the
offending individual or public entity to order the condition described
aforesaid to be abated, ameliorated or removed as appropriate.
§ 12-3.4. Violation from Natural Causes Not Exempted. [Ord. No.
08-46]
It shall not be a defense that the tree or branch thereof which has fallen
such that any portion thereof contacts the water of Deal Lake or its
watershed, that the said condition was caused by a storm, hurricane, or any
a. Each violation of this section, and each day a violation or neglect is
committed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be
punishable as such.
b. Any person as defined herein who violates or fails to comply with any
provisions of this section or any rule, regulation or directive
promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 12-2.15 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-3.4
1:478
act of God or that the tree or branch shall have fallen as a consequence of
disease or of the natural aging process.
§ 12-3.5. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 08-46]
Any person or entity who violates this section or fails to comply with any
of its requirements, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum
fines and penalties established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 and as same may be
amended from time to time. Each and every day a violation of this section
shall exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 12-4. TREE REMOVAL AND TREE CUTTING.
§ 12-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 10-04]
Indiscriminate, uncontrolled, and excessive destruction, as well as the
removal and cutting of trees on lots and tracts of land within the Township,
may cause:
a. Increased drainage control cost;
b. Increased soil erosion and sedimentation;
c. Decreased fertility of the soil;
d. Degradation of water resources;
e. Decreased groundwater-recharge;
f. Increased buildup of atmospheric carbon;
g. The establishment of a heat island effect;
h. Increased dust and pollution.
§ 12-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.1
1:479
§ 12-4.2. Establishment of Conservation Officer. [Ord. No. 10-04]
There shall be appointed and designated, an official whose formal title shall
be that of Conservation Officer or designee of the Township of Neptune.
This official shall be charged with the inspection of sites upon which there
is an application for site plan approval or for subdivision approval in regard
to the provisions of this section, and with the inspection and enforcement of
the tree removal and protection requirements of this section.
§ 12-4.3. Cutting or Removal Restricted. [Ord. No. 10-04]
Subject to the exemptions set forth, no person shall cut or remove, or cause
to be cut or removed, any tree with a diameter at point of measurement
(DPM) of four (4") inches or greater upon any lands within the Township,
unless the cutting or removal is accomplished in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 12-4.4. Tree Removal. [Ord. No. 10-04]
The singular or cumulative effect of any of the foregoing could adversely
impact the character of the Township, decrease property values, render the
land unfit and unsuitable for its most appropriate use and negatively affect
the health, safety and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township.
The Township desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and excessive
cutting of trees within the Township. The Township strives to preserve the
maximum possible number of trees in the course of development of a site as
well as protect larger, older specimens of trees. Additionally, the Township
seeks to encourage innovative design and grading, promote the preservation
of existing trees and provide a plan for replacement of trees. It is recognized
that there is a strong relationship between the integrity of the Township's
water resources, development on steep slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance,
stormwater management and the general use of the land resources. Therefore,
the Township finds that the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern.
Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and economic
resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its maintenance
and result in economic returns. A management program is intended to meet
the objectives of preserving, protecting, enhancing and maintaining trees and
providing opportunities for the continued use of forest resources and are
compatible with the maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished
by ensuring management of forest and trees through the application of sound
management practices.
a. Permit Required.
1. No person shall remove or destroy or cause to be or allow to be
removed or destroyed any tree without first obtaining a tree
removal permit. Tree removal permits shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer or designee after appropriate inspection by the
§ 12-4.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-4.4
1:480
§ 12-4.5. Inspection Required. [Ord. No. 10-04]
The Conservation Officer or designee shall inspect the trees which are the
subject of the application, the drainage incidental thereto, other physical
conditions existing on the property, and the impact upon adjacent
properties.
Conservation Officer. A permit is required for the removal of all
trees of four (4") inch caliper or larger.
2. Existing single-family residential property shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section, provided that said homeowner is
clearing one (1) acre or less of area.
b. Permit Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning
Officer and shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
tree(s) are to be removed.
3. Location on the property of the tree(s) to be removed, indicated on
a plan as follows:
4. The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to be removed, specifically by an
assigned number, and the caliper of each tree.
5. The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to remain, specifically by an
assigned number.
6. The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line (i.e., where the
four (4') foot high standard wood snow fence will be erected if
required by the Conservation Officer).
7. For any clearing greater than (3) three acres, a representative five
(5%) percent of the wooded areas proposed to be cleared shall be
inventoried. The representative five (5%) percent shall be
determined by agreement between the Conservation Officer and
the applicant. Where less than (3) three acres is proposed to be
cleared, all trees to be removed shall be inventoried.
8. All trees greater than twenty (20") inches in caliper or any
specimen trees (i.e. any unique or remarkable tree or species) to be
removed shall be indicated on the plan. All reasonable efforts shall
be made to preserve such trees, including but not limited to, if
feasible, relocation of infrastructure, roadways, and buildings.
Removal of such trees shall require the specific written approval of
the Conservation Officer.
9. Any other information which may reasonably be required to enable
the application to be properly evaluated.
§ 12-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.6
1:481
§ 12-4.6. Zoning Permit Requirements. [Ord. No. 10-04]
Where an application is made in connection with the construction of a
building or other land use improvement, no zoning permit shall be issued
until the tree removal permit has been granted, or an exemption granted.
§ 12-4.7. Replacement Tree Requirements. [Ord. No. 10-04]
a. Existing Residential Property. If the application is on behalf of an
existing homeowners' association and it is disclosed that the total
number of trees to be removed or destroyed on the property or open
space area in question, which are the subject of the application, is ten
(10) or less, the permit shall be issued without replacement trees
required. Within a one (1) year period, permits may be used for removal
of no more than ten (10) trees on the same property without
replacement trees being required. Any tree removal occurring where a
homeowners' association exists must obtain formal approval by the
ruling body of the association prior to obtaining a tree removal permit.
b. New Residential Development.
1. If the application is for a new residential development (subdivisions
or site plans), up to fifty (50%) percent of the trees may be removed
for the sole purpose of clearing for the building envelope,
driveways and yard space for said building lots only without
replacement trees required.
2. For new residential development where tree removal is to occur
within public or private roadways or rights-of-way, drainage
facilities, parking areas or proposed open space, all trees are not
subject to replacement in accordance with this section.
c. Agricultural Operations. Agricultural operations are exempt from
replacement requirements providing the property in question is farmed
for a minimum of five (5) years after the date of clearing. An application
must be submitted prior to clearing. If the property is developed for any
other use before the five (5) years expire, the replacement obligation
shall be enforced according to the new use of the property.
d. Nonresidential Development. All commercial and industrial
developments are required to replace all trees removed in accordance
with this section.
e. Sparse Land/Major Subdivisions and Site Plans. In regard to major
subdivisions and site plans, lots with tree cover less than thirty (30%)
percent shall be required to plant a minimum of 1.5 trees per ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or less of open field. The owner/applicant
shall have a qualified professional calculate the total required trees to
be distributed in accordance with a landscape plan of the entire project,
which shall be approved by the Conservation Officer.
§ 12-4.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-4.7
1:482
f. Tree Escrow Fund Established. Tree Escrow Fund shall be established
by the Township to promote environmental enhancement programs
such as tree planting, tree preservation, park development, landscaping
and/or other related projects on or within municipality-owned
properties or facilities. A separate trust account shall be established for
this purpose under the supervision of the Township Treasurer.
Appropriations from the Tree Escrow Fund shall be authorized by the
Mayor and Township Committee and shall be used for a municipal
purpose pursuant to the recommendations of the Zoning Officer, the
Conservation Officer, the Township Planner and/or the Shade Tree
Commission.
g. Replacement Tree Value Calculations.
1. The replacement value of all trees to be removed where
replacement trees are required by this section shall be calculated
as follows:
Table 5.11: Replacement Tree Calculations
Replacement Trees
Trees to be
Removed: Caliper Number Caliper
Dollar
Amount
Greater than 6" & up
to 12"
1 2-2-1/2" $240.00
Greater than 12" &
up to 18"
3 2-2-1/2" $660.00
Greater than 18" &
up to 24"
6 3" $2,440.00
Greater than 24" 8 3" $3,680.00
2. Dead and diseased trees are not counted as trees to be replaced.
3. The applicant will receive a one and one-half (1 1/2) for one (1)
replacement tree credit should stands of eight (8) or more trees
greater than four (4") inches in caliper be preserved within tree
removal areas.
4. All replacement trees shall be planted on site unless one or more of
the following conditions exist: (A) the site in question cannot
physically accommodate the total replacement amount of trees.
The applicant shall contribute an amount equal to the calculated
monetary value of the removed trees minus the value of the
proposed landscaping to the Township Tree Escrow Funds, as
required herein; (B) due to unique site conditions, the Conservation
Officer and applicant agree in writing that the applicant shall make
payment to the Township Tree Escrow Fund based upon the above
chart.
§ 12-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.7
1:483
§ 12-4.8. Fees. [Ord. No. 10-04]
Upon application for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall be charged
the following fees:
§ 12-4.9. Time Limit. [Ord. No. 10-04]
All tree removal permits shall be limited to one (1) year from the date of
issuance. If the approved tree removal has not occurred within one (1) year,
a new permit must be applied for and is subject to the payment of new fees.
§ 12-4.10. Criteria for Tree Removal. [Ord. No. 10-04]
The Conservation Officer may approve the removal of a tree if any of the
following criteria apply:
§ 12-4.11. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 10-04]
The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the Conservation
Officer, who shall inspect or require adequate inspection of all sites upon
which there is an application for site plan or subdivision, all applicable
tree removal or destruction and soil removal incidental thereto, and for
compliance with other pertinent conditions of approval from the Planning
Board/Zoning Board. Upon ascertaining a violation of this section, the
Conservation Officer shall refer charges in the Municipal Court as provided
in this section. In addition to other remedies, the Director of Code
Enforcement and Construction, Zoning Officer or other proper municipal
official may institute any appropriate legal action to prevent a continuing
violation of the terms of this section.
§ 12-5. VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTIES.
h. Trees replaced according to the foregoing calculations shall not be
construed to satisfy other street tree and landscaping quantity
requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter.
a. For new resident building lots: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree up to a
maximum of three hundred ($300.00) dollars per lot.
b. For all other properties: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree up to a
maximum of six hundred ($600.00) dollars for each acre.
a. The tree is located in a parcel for which preliminary or final subdivision
approval has been obtained, and it unreasonably restricts the economic
enjoyment of the property and cannot be relocated on the site because
of its age, type or size.
b. The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, interferes with
existing utility service, created an unsafe condition, or conflicts with
any other ordinances or regulations.
§ 12-4.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.1
1:484
§ 12-5.1. Findings, Declaration Relative to Abandoned Properties.
[Ord. No. 2014-36]
§ 12-5.2. Definitions Relative to Vacant and Abandoned Property,
Actions Concerning Repair and Closing and Relating to This
Section. [Ord. No. 2014-36; Ord. No. 2015-26; Ord. No. 2016-40;
Ord. No. 2018-17]
a. The Township Committee finds and declares that:
1. Abandoned properties, particularly those located within urban
areas or in close proximity to occupied residences and businesses,
create a wide range of problems for the communities in which they
are located, fostering criminal activity, creating public health
problems and otherwise diminishing the quality of life for residents
and business operators in those areas.
2. Abandoned properties diminish the property values of neighboring
properties and have a negative effect on the quality of life of
adjacent property owners, increasing the risk of property damage
through arson and vandalism and discouraging neighborhood
stability and revitalization.
3. For these reasons, abandoned properties are presumptively
considered to be nuisances, in view of their negative effects on
nearby properties and the residents or users of those properties.
4. The continued presence of abandoned properties in New Jersey's
communities acts as a significant barrier to urban revitalization
and to the regeneration of the State's urban centers.
5. Abandonment is a local problem that must be addressed locally and
the most important role of State government is to provide local
governments, local community organizations, citizens, and
residents with the tools to address the problem.
6. The responsibility of a property owner and in some cases the
lienholder to maintain a property in sound condition and prevent it
from becoming a nuisance to others extends to properties which
are not in use and "demolition by neglect", leading to the
deterioration and loss of the property, or failure by an owner and in
some cases the lienholder to comply with legitimate orders to
demolish, stabilize or otherwise repair his or her or its property
creates a presumption that the owner and in some cases the
lienholder has abandoned the property.
7. Many abandoned buildings still have potential value for residential
and other uses and such buildings should be preserved rather than
demolished wherever feasible, particularly buildings that have
historic or architectural value, or contribute to maintaining the
character of neighborhoods or streetscapes, or both, as the case
may be.
§ 12-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.2
1:485
a. As used herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Shall mean any property that is
determined to be abandoned pursuant to this section.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
LIENHOLDER OR MORTGAGE HOLDER — Shall mean any person
or entity holding a note, mortgage or other interest secured by the
building or any part thereof.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Neptune.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of title to a vacant and/or
abandoned property.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in building and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
PROPERTY — Shall mean any building or structure and the land
appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
municipality relating to health, fire, building regulations, or to other
activities concerning buildings in the municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer, officers, board or body who
is or are authorized by ordinances adopted hereunder to exercise the
powers prescribed by such ordinances and by this section. In this case,
the person so designated by Neptune Township pursuant to this section
shall be the Director of Code and Construction or his or her designee.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the law to the contrary, nothing
shall prevent the municipality from designating more than one public
officer for different purposes as provided by law. Wherever "Director
of Code and Construction" is cited in this section, it will be with the
understanding that it is the "Director of Code and Construction or his
or her designee," unless State or Federal Law limits due to licensing or
other means the action of a "Director of Code and Construction.[Ord.
No. 2018-17]
SUMMER SEASON — Shall mean for purpose of this section, May 15th
through September 15th of each year.
THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OF NEPTUNE TOWNSHIP — Shall
mean the Committee, or other legislative body, charged with governing
a municipality.
§ 12-5.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.2
1:486
§ 12-5.3. Determination That Property Is Abandoned. [Ord. No.
2014-36]
§ 12-5.4. Determination of Property as a Nuisance. [Ord. No.
2014-36]
VACANT PROPERTY — Shall mean any building to be used as a
residence or for commercial or industrial purposes, which is not legally
occupied or used for its accustomed and ordinary purpose for a period
of six (6) months or more. In the case of the use of residential property,
"used for its accustomed and ordinary purpose" means as a place of
abode. (Black's Law Dictionary) Property which is used for the summer
season (seasonal basis) as defined above, shall not be deemed vacant
for purposes of this section. Property determined to be "abandoned"
under this section must be determined to be "vacant" for purposes of
this section. The date that the Public Officer reports as the date he or
she determines vacancy shall be the commencement date for the six (6)
month vacancy period.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any property that has not
been legally occupied for a period of six (6) months or more and which
meets any one of the following additional criteria may be deemed to be
abandoned property upon a determination by the Public Officer that:
1. The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the Public Officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that 6-month period;
2. Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six (6) months as of
the date of a determination by the Public Officer pursuant to this
section;
3. At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of the Revised Statutes as of the date of determination by the
Public Officer pursuant to this section; or
4. The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Public
Officer in accordance with local ordinances and State Statute.
a. A property may be determined to be a nuisance if;
1. The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to State Statute and/or local ordinance;
2. The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the
risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
3. The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner and in some cases the
§ 12-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.4
1:487
§ 12-5.5. Property Not Deemed Abandoned, Conditions. [Ord. No.
2014-36]
§ 12-5.6. Action Concerning Repair, Closing or Demolition -
Identification of Abandoned Property, Listing. [Ord. No. 2014-36]
lienholder has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to
secure the property; or the municipality has secured the property
in order to prevent such hazards after the owner and in some cases
the lienholder has failed to so do;
4. The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds
have created potential health and safety hazards and the owner has
failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remove the
hazards; or
5. The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of
the residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the
owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to
remedy the conditions.
6. A Public Officer who determines a property to be nuisance
pursuant to subsections 12-5.2 through 12-5.5 of this section shall
follow the notification procedures set forth in P.L. 1942, c.112
(C.40:48-2-3 et seq.).
a. If an entity other than the municipality has purchased or taken
assignment from the municipality of a tax sale certificate on an
unoccupied property, that property shall not be deemed to be
abandoned if (1) the owner of the certificate has continued to pay all
municipal taxes and liens on the property in the tax year when due; (2)
the owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six (6) months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure and (3) the Public Officer has determined that the property
is not a nuisance pursuant to Ordinance or that in the discretion of the
Public Officer, the owner of the certificate has acted in good faith to
repair and/or rehabilitate the property by its actions and through
applications where necessary before this Historic Preservation
Commission, Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment and/or
Zoning Department.
1. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional
criteria set forth in this section. (Subsection 12-5.3a, 1-4).
2. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of this section shall not constitute a finding that the use
of the property has been abandoned for purposes of municipal
zoning or land use regulation.
§ 12-5.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.6
1:488
a. This section hereby appoints the Director of Code and Construction as
the Public Officer and directs the Public Officer to identify abandoned
property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list
throughout the municipality, or within those parts of the municipality as
the Governing Body may designate by resolution. Each item of
abandoned property so identified shall include the tax block and lot
number, the name of the owner of record, if known, and the street
address of the lot.
b. The Public Officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." The
municipality may add properties to the abandoned property list at any
time, and may delete properties at any time when the Public Officer
finds that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property. An interested party may request that a property be included
on the abandoned property list following that procedure set forth by
this section and/or Statute N.J.S.A. 55:19-105. An abandoned property
shall not be included on the abandoned property list if rehabilitation is
being performed in a timely manner, as evidenced by building permits
issued and diligent pursuit of rehabilitation work authorized by those
permits. A property on which an entity other than the municipality has
purchased or taken assignment from the municipality of a tax sale
certificate which has been placed on the abandoned property list may
be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section or N.J.S.A.
55:19-103.
c. The Public Officer, within ten (10) days of the establishment of the
abandoned property list, or any additions thereto, shall send a notice,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the
owner of records and all lienholders of every property included on the
list and shall cause the list to be published in the official newspaper of
the municipality, which publication shall constitute public notice. The
published and mailed notices shall identify property determined to be
abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if known, the tax lot and
block number and street address. The Public Officer, in consultation
with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular mail to
any mortgagee, servicing organization or property tax processing
organization that received a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to
subsection d of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. When the owner of record and/or
lienholder is not known for a particular property and cannot be
ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector,
notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in
the manner as provided in Section 5 of P.L.1942, c.112 (C.40:48-2-7).
The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for the Public Officer's
finding that the property is abandoned property as that term is defined
in Section 35 of P.L.1996, c.62 (C.55:19-54) and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, specifying the information relied
upon in making such finding. In all cases a copy of the mailed or
opposed notice shall also be filed by the Public Officer in the office of
the county clerk or register of deeds and mortgages, as the case may
§ 12-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.6
1:489
be, of the county wherein the property is situate. This filing shall have
the same force and effect as a Notice of Lis Pendens under N.J.S.A.
2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of the property owner
and lienholders as defendants and the name of the municipality as
plaintiff, as though an action had been commenced by the municipality
against the owner and/or lienholder.
d. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list determined pursuant of paragraph b of this
subsection by appealing that determination to the Public Officer within
thirty (30) days of the owner's receipt of the certified notice or forty
(40) days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An owner
whose identity was not known to the Public Officer shall have forty (40)
days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the Public Officer shall
accept a late filing of an appeal. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice pursuant to
paragraph c of this subsection, the Public Officer shall schedule a
hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the
list shall be presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner and/
or lienholder, through the submission of an affidavit or certification by
the property owner and/or lienholder averring that the property is not
abandoned and stating the reasons for such averment, can demonstrate
that the property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or
certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation, such
as but not limited to photographs, repair invoices, bills and construction
contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be the property in question
is not abandoned property as that term is defined by this section and/or
State Statute. The Public Officer shall decide any timely filed appeal
within ten (10) days of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the
property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
e. The property owner and in some cases the lienholder may challenge an
adverse determination of an appeal with the Public Officer pursuant to
paragraph d of this subsection, by instituting, in accordance with the
New Jersey Court Rules, a summary proceeding in the Superior Court,
Law Division, sitting in the county in which the property is located,
which action shall be tried de novo. Such action shall be instituted
within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice of decision mailed by
the Public Officer pursuant to paragraph d of this subsection. The sole
ground for appeal shall be that the property in question is not
abandoned property as that term is defined by this section and/or State
Statute. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the court may extend
the deadline for instituting the action.
§ 12-5.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.6
1:490
§ 12-5.7. Removal from Abandoned Property List; Conditions. [Ord.
No. 2014-36]
If a property, which an entity other than the municipality has purchased or
taken assignment from the municipality of a tax sale certificate, is placed
on the abandoned property list, the property shall be removed from the
list if the owner of the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due
on the property within thirty (30) days after the property is placed on the
list; provided, however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate
foreclosure proceedings within six (6) months after the property was first
placed on the list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned property
list.
§ 12-5.8. Requirements of Owners and in Some Cases Lienholders
of Vacant Property. [Ord. No. 2014-36; Ord. No. 2015-43; Ord. No.
2016-40]
f. The Public Officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined not to be abandoned
on appeal.
g. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the
municipality shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with
respect to properties on the abandoned property list at such time as any
one property has been placed on the list in accordance with the
provisions of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal
with respect to that property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by
the property owner.
a. The owner and in some cases the lienholder of any building that has
become vacant property, and any person maintaining, operating or
collecting rent for any such building that has become vacant, shall,
within thirty (30) days:
1. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Municipal Code and per
the direction of the Public Officer.
2. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for
the purpose of service of process and the person responsible for
day-to-day supervision and management of the building, if such
person is different from the owner holding title or the authorized
agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a location so as
to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever
is nearer, but shall be no smaller than eighteen (18") inches by
twenty-four (24") inches.
3. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign
until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until
repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
§ 12-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.8
1:491
4. Ensure that the vacant property is inspected on a monthly basis by
the owners authorized and prepare inspection reports, which shall
be forwarded to the Public Officer not later than the end of each
month.
5. Ensure that the property is maintained in accordance with the
property maintenance regulations of the Township, including but
not limited to that of the interior and exterior of all structures,
including yards, fences, sidewalks, walkways, right-of-way, alleys,
retaining walls, swimming pools, attached or unattached accessory
structures and driveways are well maintained and free from trash,
debris, loose litter, grass and weed overgrowth.
6. The owner or agent and in some cases the lienholder of any vacant
property shall acquire and otherwise maintain liability insurance,
in an amount of not less than $300,000.00 for the building,
designed primarily for residential use and not less than
$1,000,000.00 for any other building, including but not limited to
buildings designed for manufacturing, industrial, storage or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any
property caused by the physical condition of or in the building or
property subject to the provisions of this section. Any insurance
policy acquired or renewed after the building has become vacant
shall provide for a written notice to the Township of Neptune's
Public Officer within thirty (30) days of any lapse, cancellation or
change in coverage. The owner, or in some cases the lienholder,
shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration
statement. Any registration statement submitted that does not
include such evidence shall be deemed to be an invalid registration.
b. Registration Required; Period of Validity; General Regulations.
1. The owner of any vacant property, as defined herein, shall, within
thirty (30) days after the building becomes vacant property as
defined in subsection 12-5.2a, or within thirty (30) days after
assuming ownership of the vacant property, whichever is later, file
a Registration Statement for each such vacant property with the
Public Officer on forms provided by the Township for such
purposes. The registration shall remain valid until the designated
renewal date, which shall be January 2nd of each year. The owner
shall be required to renew the registration January 2nd of each
year, as long as the building remains vacant property, and shall pay
a registration fee or renewal fee in the amount prescribed herein
for each vacant property registered.
2. Any owner of any building who meets the definition of "vacant
property" prior to the effective date of this section shall file a
Registration Statement for that property within thirty (30) days of
the date of this adopted section. The Registration Statement shall
include the information required in this section, as well as any
§ 12-5.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.8
1:492
additional information that the Public Officer may reasonably
require.
(Section 12-5 was adopted September 8, 2015.)
3. The owner shall notify the Public Officer within thirty (30) days of
any change in the registration information by filing an Amended
Registration Statement on a form provided by the Public Officer for
such purposes.
4. The Registration Statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of
the statements therein contained in any administrative
enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the
Township against the owner or owners of the property.
c. Registration Requirements, Property Inspection.
1. After filing a Registration Statement or a renewal of a Registration
Statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide access
to the Township to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of
the building to determine compliance with the Municipal Code,
following reasonable notice, during the period covered by the
initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
2. The Registration Statement shall include the name, street address
and telephone number of a natural person, 21 years of age or over,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of Code violations and for receiving process, in
any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement
of any applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the
State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey. The
Registration Statement shall also include the name of the person
responsible for maintaining and securing the property, if different.
The Registration Statement shall also include the name, street
address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the subject
property as the necessary contact person should there be a
problem in reaching the owner(s)' authorized agent.
3. An owner who is a natural person or who meets the requirements of
this section as to location of residence or office may designate
himself or herself as agent.
4. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of Code
violations concerning the registered, vacant property and all
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
registered building by service of the notice or process on the
authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to
consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for the
§ 12-5.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.8
1:493
§ 12-5.9. Administration. [Ord. No. 2014-36; Ord. No. 2016-40]
The Public Officer may issue rules and regulations for the administration of
the provisions of this section.
§ 12-5.10. Action That May Be Taken by the Municipality. [Ord. No.
2014-36]
purposes of this section until both the owner notifies the Public
Officer of a change of authorized agent, or until the owner files
a new annual Registration Statement. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases the owner from any
requirement of this section.
d. Lienholders.
1. All lienholders who have filed and served a Foreclosure Summons
and Complaint arising from vacant property needs to comply with
all the registration requirements of this section in addition to the
property owners as an additional requirement to that already set
forth under subsection 12-5.11.
e. Registration Fees.
1. The initial Registration Fee for each building shall be $500.00.
2. The registration shall be renewable on January 2nd of each year at
a fee of $500.00; unless a violation exists. The initial registration
fee shall be prorated for Registration Statements received less than
10 months prior to the January 2nd anniversary renewal date. If
there is a violation of any Municipal Code cited during the first
renewal period, the registration fee shall be doubled ($1,000.00). If
a violation of the Municipal Code is cited during the second
renewal period, the registration fee shall triple ($1,500.00). If there
is a violation of the Municipal Code during the third renewal
period, or any time thereafter, the registration fee shall quadruple
($2,000.00).
a. In the event that the owner or in some cases the lienholder fails to meet
the requirements of maintaining a vacant property pursuant to
subsection 12-5.8, then the Public Officer in his/her sole discretion may
issue a Notice of Violation against the property owner or in some cases
the lienholder requiring compliance within thirty (30) days of the
Notice of Violation, said Notice shall be issued to the appropriate
parties as set forth above; and upon non-compliance with the Notice of
Violation, the Public Officer may in his/her sole discretion issue a
Summons concerning the violation of this section to be heard in the
Municipal Court of Neptune Township, or secure the subject structure
itself, or by agreement with a third party to restore the subject building
to a non-nuisance level. The costs incurred by the municipality in so
§ 12-5.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.10
1:494
§ 12-5.11. Enforcement Against Certain Lienholders. [Ord. No.
2014-36; Ord. No. 2015-19]
proceeding, including reasonable administrative charges, shall be
assessed against and be a lien upon the subject property.
b. The Public Officer in his/her sole discretion may postpone any such
action aforesaid if he/she believes that the property owner and in some
cases the lienholder is acting in good faith to repair and/or rehabilitate
the subject property through his, her or its actions, including but not
limited to applications made where necessary to the Historic
Preservation Commission, Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of
Adjustment and/or Zoning Department.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 et al., all creditors or lienholders to
property subject to this section have ten (10) days from the date that a
foreclosure action is filed to serve the foreclosure Summons and
Complaint as notification only upon the Municipal Clerk when a
foreclosure action has been initiated. This notice must contain all
information set forth in the aforesaid statute, including but not limited
to the full name and contact information of the representative for the
creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property
maintenance and code violations, the street address and block and lot
number of the property. Where the creditor is an out-of-State creditor,
the full name and contact information of the in-State representative or
agent is required to be provided in the notice to the Municipal Clerk.
b. Any out-of-State creditor subject to this section who is found by the
Municipal Court of Neptune Township to be in violation of the
requirement of the notification and appointment of an in-State
representative or agent provided to the Municipal Clerk shall be subject
to a fine of two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on the creditor for the failure to
appoint and notify the Clerk of the appointment of an in-State
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the ten-day
period, as set forth above. Any in-State creditor who fails to provide
contact notification to the Municipal Clerk of a representative or agent
to be contacted pursuant to this section, and the creditor is found to be
in violation by the Municipal Court of Neptune Township, the creditor
shall be subject to a fine of one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars per day for each day of the violation, commencing on the day
after the ten-day period as set forth above.
c. All creditors who have filed foreclosure proceedings pursuant to the
aforesaid State Statute and prior to transfer of said title at Sheriff's
Sale, shall be equally responsible for maintaining the subject property
in compliance with this section, and shall receive notice of violations
which need to be corrected within thirty (30) days of receipt of said
notice, or within ten (10) days of receipt of said notice if the violation
presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. All creditors
who are found in violation of this section with regard to the
§ 12-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.11
1:495
§ 12-5.12. Effect on Uniform Construction Code. [Ord. No. 2014-36;
Ord. No. 2016-40]
No provision hereof shall be construed as restricting or otherwise
abrogating the enforcement and other powers of the Township's Public
Officer or Construction Official under the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, including, without limitation, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq. (collectively, the Code). The provision herein shall be
construed as consistent with the enforcement and other powers of the
Township's Public Officer and Construction Official under the Code.
§ 12-5.13. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-36; Ord. No.
2015-43]
maintenance of the subject property shall be subject to the penalties
and fines found under subsection 12-5.13 below. In addition, if the
municipality expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation on residential property, the situation being such that
the creditor is given notice pursuant to the provisions of this section,
but fails to abate the nuisance or correct the violation as directed,
the municipality shall have the same recourse against the creditor as
it would have against the title owner of the property, including but
not limited to the recourse provided under subsection 12-5.10 of this
section.
d. No less than twenty (20%) percent of any money collected pursuant to
subsection 12-5.11 shall be utilized by the municipality for Municipal
Code enforcement purposes.
a. Any owner or applicable lienholder who is not in compliance with this
section or who otherwise violates any provision of this section or the
rules and regulations issued hereunder, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or a period of community
service not exceeding ninety (90) days or imprisonment of a term not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination of the aforesaid
penalties for each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this
section shall be recoverable from the owner and in some cases the
lienholder and shall be a lien on the subject property.
b. Any Court verdict or Plea Agreement which requires compliance with
this Ordinance shall limit compliance to no more than thirty (30) days
from the date of the verdict or agreement with enhanced penalties in
the discretion of the Court for non-compliance.
c. Any owner or applicable lienholder who is in violation of subsection
12-5.8b, c, d and/or e shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth
in subsection 12-5.13a and b in addition to compliance with the
payment of all registration fees required in subsection 12-5.8e, entitled
Registration Fees.
§ 12-5.11 NEPTUNE CODE § 12-5.14
1:496
§ 12-5.14. Discontinuation of Certain Utility Services. [Ord. No.
2014-47]
§ 12-6. INVASIVE PLANTS.
§ 12-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health
through the control of the growth of invasive plant species.
§ 12-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
As used in this section:
INVASIVE PLANTS — Shall be defined as all native and non-native vines
and vegetation that grow out of place and are competitive, persistent,
and pernicious. These plants may damage trees, vegetation, or structures.
Examples include but are not limited to bamboo (spreading or running
type), ragweed, multi flora rose and kudzu-vine.
§ 12-6.3. Control of Growth. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
All persons must control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control
the spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of both residential and
commercial property is a violation of this section.
§ 12-6.4. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
All places and premises in the Township of Neptune shall be subject to
inspection by the enforcing officer. Such inspections shall be performed
by such person, persons, or agency duly authorized and appointed by the
a. The Public Officer appointed by the Township of Neptune may act upon
the Vacant and Abandoned Property Ordinance, and may initiate a
request of any utility to take all necessary steps to enter the premises
listed on the Abandoned Property List established pursuant to
subsection 12-5.6 of the Vacant and Abandoned Properties Ordinance
and this section for the discontinuance of the utility services and the
removal of utility equipment from said property, or any property that is
determined by the Public Officer to meet the definition of abandoned
property, and shall accompany representatives, agents and/or
employees of said utility companies, along with any law enforcement
officer the Public Officer considers appropriate upon the property at the
time of discontinuance of utility service, removal of utility equipment or
any action associated therein.
b. Any owner or applicable lienholder who interferes or takes action to
prohibit such entry and discontinuance of service shall be subject to the
violations and penalties set forth more fully in subsection 12-5.13 of this
section.
§ 12-5.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6.4
1:497
Township of Neptune. Such inspection shall be made if that official has
reason to believe that any section of this chapter is being violated.
§ 12-6.5. Removal or Abatement. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
§ 12-6.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
Any person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation or other
entity who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 for the first offense and
not more than $2,000.00 for subsequent offenses, or community service as
determined by the Municipal Court. The continuation of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of such violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 12-6.7. Plantings of Invasive Plants Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2017-15]
All new in-ground plantings of invasive plants are strictly prohibited. All
existing plantings must be contained by appropriate physical barriers to
prevent growth or spread of existing invasive species beyond the
boundaries of a resident's property.
Chapter 13
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
a. Whenever an invasive plant, as defined by this section, is found on any
plot of land, lot or any other premises or place, and is found to lack
appropriate physical barriers to prevent the spread or growth of the
species, or is found to have spread beyond the boundaries of a property,
a violation notice shall be given to the owner, in writing to remove or
abate the same within such time as shall be specified in such notice. If
the property owner fails to abate the violation, a municipal summons/
complaint may be issued charging the owner with violating the
provisions of this section. Abatement of violation shall be defined as
removal of all invasive plants found to have spread beyond the
boundaries of the subject property, to the satisfaction of the enforcing
officer.
b. The cost of abatement shall be borne by the property owner.
c. If an owner fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the enforcing official may, in addition to issuing a summons/
complaint as set forth above, remove or otherwise control the invasive
plant species and the Township may thereafter recover the costs of such
removal from the property owner by placing a lien against the property
to recover the cost of the invasive plant removal.
§ 12-6.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-1
1:498
§ 13-1. EXCAVATION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.42
§ 13-1.1. Definition of Department of Engineering & Planning. [Ord.
No. 2016-19]
Whenever in this section reference is made to the "Department of
Engineering & Planning" or their designated representative," this shall also
mean that in the event there is no Director of Engineering & Planning, this
shall then refer to the Assistant Director of Engineering & Planning.
§ 13-1.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
No person, firm or corporation shall excavate, dig up or disturb any rightof-
way, street, avenue, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, or any public place
whatsoever in the Township of Neptune, in the County of Monmouth for
the purpose of laying, installing, replacing or repairing of water, gas and
sewer pipes and mains, and telephone and electrical conduits, storm sewer,
curbing, driveways, or for any other purpose whatsoever without obtaining
a permit therefore from the Director of Engineering & Planning or their
designated representative.
§ 13-1.3. Application Information and Fee. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Application forms shall be obtained from the Director of Engineering &
Planning, or their designated representative, and shall contain the name
and address of the person, firm or corporation making the application, and
signed by the applicant or a duly authorized agent, and shall set forth the
location where work is to be performed, the character of the work, and the
time within which it is to be completed, together with scaled drawings of
the proposed work.
§ 13-1.4. Excavation of Streets Not Permitted During the Summer
Season in the Ocean Grove Historic District. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
A road excavation permit issued for any street within the Ocean Grove
Historic District shall only be valid between September 16th and April 30th.
No excavation of streets shall be permitted within the Ocean Grove Historic
District between May 1st and September 15th. A road excavation permit
may be issued for a road excavation during the prohibited time period in
a. For proposed openings less than ninety (90) square feet/ten (10) square
yards a non-refundable application fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars payable
to the Township of Neptune is required;
b. For proposed openings greater than ninety (90) square feet/ten (10)
square yards a non-refundable application fee of twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars per one hundred (100) square feet of proposed opening is
required.
42.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances history: Ordinance Nos. 680, 1072, 1361, 1654, 1671,
97-28, 03-30, 13-07, 2015-10.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.4
1:499
the event of emergency circumstances as determined by the Director of
Engineering & Planning.
§ 13-1.5. Insurance Required; Amount. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Before a permit is issued the applicant shall be required to deliver to
the Director of Engineering & Planning or their designated representative,
a certificate of insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand
($100,000.00) dollars to two hundred fifty thousand ($250,000.00) dollars
for bodily injury, and twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars property
damage for the purpose of indemnifying the Township of Neptune, in the
County of Monmouth for any personal injuries or property damage that may
be sustained during the progress of the work.
§ 13-1.6. Bond Requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Before a permit will be issued for work requiring a street opening permit
that exceeds ninety (90) square feet or ten (10) square yards, a street
opening performance bond in favor of the Township shall be posted in
the amount of four thousand ($4,000.00) dollars for a term of five (5)
years to guarantee the cost of replacing or repairing any street, road,
avenue, highway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, alley or driveway or any other
public place whatsoever to its original condition where the work has been
performed. Permanent restoration shall be made within three (3) months
after completion of the work, subject to the provisions of subsection 13-1.10
herein relating to permanent restoration of road surfaces and subject to
the approval of the Director of Engineering & Planning or their designated
representative. The said Township may undertake the permanent
restoration if the permittee so requests provided the permittee shall pay, in
advance, the prevailing cost in cash or by certified check as determined by
the Director of Engineering & Planning or their designated representative.
§ 13-1.7. Tunneling or Boring Requires Special Permission. [Ord.
No. 2016-19]
Tunneling or boring will be permitted in special cases, subject to the
approval of the Director of Engineering & Planning or their designated
representative, with the filing of a performance bond in an amount and
term required by the Township Committee, and in accordance with the
specifications approved by the Township Committee.
§ 13-1.8. Traffic and Pedestrian Protection. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Any person, firm or corporation undertaking any work pursuant to any
permit shall keep the area where the work is performed open to traffic at
all times, barricading every excavation on all sides and posting warning
signs during the day and one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and one-half (1/2)
hour after sunrise; lights shall be placed around such excavation, in addition
to the aforesaid barricades. Provisions for the protection of pedestrians
and vehicles shall be in such manner as shall be satisfactory to the Police
§ 13-1.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-1.8
1:500
Department of the Township of Neptune pursuant to the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). If the excavation extends the full width of
the street, avenue, road, etc., only one-half (1/2) of the road shall be opened,
and this is to be backfilled before the other half is opened to permit the free
flow of traffic at all times. Any road closures or detours shall be coordinated
with the Neptune Township Police Department Traffic Safety Officer and the
Department of Engineering and Planning.
§ 13-1.9. Public Utilities; Corporations; Bond Required. [Ord. No.
2016-19]
§ 13-1.10. Backfilling; Restoration of Surface. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
The permittee shall assume all responsibility and hold the Township
harmless for any property damage or bodily injury which may occur as a
result of the work performed from the time the work commences until the
permanent restoration has been made by the permittee. The permittee shall
immediately backfill the opening with excavated material if such material
is suitable, in layers not exceeding two (2') feet in thickness if heavy
compacting equipment is used or in layers not exceeding one (1') foot in
thickness if hard or light compacting is used. This fill shall be brought to
an elevation of six (6") inches below the permanent surface. If the Director
of Engineering & Planning, or their designated representative, determines
that the excavated material is not suitable for backfilling as specified, then
it shall be removed from the site and the opening backfilled as herein
specified with suitable material, then six (6") inches of road gravel of
a grade satisfactory to the Director of Engineering & Planning, or their
a. Any corporation which is a public utility, subject to regulation by the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey, or a
municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey, may, in lieu of the
provisions of subsection 13-1.5 hereof, post a bond of the public utility
corporation or municipal corporation, as the case may be, in the penal
sum of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars. Such bond shall be
conditioned upon the compliance with the applicable provisions of this
section in respect to any work which shall be hereafter performed by
such a public utility corporation or municipal corporation in the
Township of Neptune, and the obligation of such bond shall be a
continuing obligation to the full amount thereof for any and all work
performed.
b. A public utility corporation or municipal corporation, during the period
while such bond is in full force and effect, may in lieu of filing a
certificate of insurance for bodily injury and property damage in the
amounts as set forth in this section, file with the Director of
Engineering & Planning or their designated representative, a
certificate certifying that it is a self-insurer and exempt from the
necessity of obtaining an insurance policy pursuant to the provisions of
the statutes of the State of New Jersey, and that the Township of
Neptune is completely indemnified thereby.
§ 13-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.10
1:501
designated representative, shall be applied and thoroughly compacted. This
temporary restoration shall be checked for settling and all holes shall be
filled evenly with the surface of the adjoining pavement.
Once the excavation work area has been properly saw cut, and the backfill
tamped and compacted, the permittee shall install no less than six (6")
inches of bituminous stabilized base course to the trench surface. If the
distance from the edge of the excavation work area to the existing curb is
less than two (2') feet, the permittee shall be required to excavate to the
curb and evenly install six (6") inches of bituminous stabilized base course
in the entire area.
The partially restored pavement shall be allowed to settle for no less than
ninety (90) and no more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If at any
time during the settlement period, the trench becomes unacceptable as
determined by the Director of Engineering & Planning, the permittee shall
be notified of the condition requiring repair, and such repair shall be
performed within twenty-four (24) hours of such notification by the Director
Engineering & Planning. If the repair is not made in the time specified, the
Township may make the repair and any cost thereof will be charged against
the permittee's cash repair deposit and/or maintenance bond. At the end of
the period of time of settlement required by the Department of Engineering
& Planning, an inspection shall be performed by the Department.
At this time, the permittee shall be required to mill the excavation work
area surface to a width equal to one (1') foot wider on each side of the
initial repair and install no less than two (2") inches of FABC surface course.
The permittee shall also be required to provide a tack coat on all existing
bituminous and concrete surfaces and a hot-poured, rubber asphalt joint
sealer (per current DOT Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges).
Unless authorized by the Department of Engineering & Planning, any
excavation less than ninety (90) square feet/ten (10) square yards shall
require milling and restoration of the excavation work area extending a
minimum of one (1') foot beyond the edge of excavation to the nearest
curb. Any excavation equal to or greater than ninety (90) square feet/ten
(10) square yards shall require milling and restoration of the excavation
work area extending from the center line of road to the curb and extending
a minimum of one (1') foot beyond the outer edges of the excavation. If
the excavation work area will be within two hundred (200') feet or less of
previous excavations occurring within one (1) year of the subject excavation
(by same permittee along the same side of the road), the permittee shall
be required to mill and restore the roadway between the outer most
excavations.
The permittee shall be required to replace any facilities including, but not
limited to, curb, pavement, sidewalk, line striping, etc., that is affected by
the excavation and restoration work, at the permittee's expense. Such work
shall be performed according to Township standards.
§ 13-1.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-1.10
1:502
With Department of Engineering & Planning approval, center line of road
milling and restoration may be offset by the distance necessary to avoid
disturbing existing line striping or markers.
Work that is completed in the public right-of-way, but outside of the cartway,
should be restored to existing conditions. If the work contains curb and
sidewalk then the area shall be restored with curb and sidewalk in
accordance with the Township Engineer's review and recommendations on
specifications.
If the work was other than sidewalk, such as slate or pavers, then it shall be
restored to slate or pavers or the material that existed prior to excavation.
§ 13-1.11. Engineering Inspection and Construction Administrative
Escrow Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
The permittee shall establish an engineering inspection escrow account
with the Township Finance Officer unless specifically waived by the
Township of Neptune, by and through the Department of Engineering &
Planning, for any proposed permit for over ninety (90) square feet or ten
(10) square yards. In the event of a multiple repairs/replacements on the
same street or within three (3') feet the openings shall be cumulative and
not submitted as separate permits in order to avoid the inspection fee. The
account shall be for five (5%) percent of the estimated cost of the project,
or five hundred ($500.00) dollars, whichever is greater. The escrow shall be
used by the Township for the reimbursement of engineering fees, inspection
fees and other reasonable fees associated with the permittee's project.
In the event that charges deplete the escrow account by more than fifty
(50%) percent of the original submission, the permittee shall be notified
and requested to submit additional escrow sums in sufficient amount to
restore the escrow account to not less than seventy-five (75%) percent of
the original escrow deposit.
§ 13-1.12. Emergency Permits. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
In case of emergency, an emergency permit may be issued by the Police
Department of the Township of Neptune, after which an application for
a permit, as hereinbefore required, shall be made to the Director of
Engineering & Planning, or their designated representative, within fortyeight
(48) hours after the work has been commenced.
§ 13-1.13. Notice Required Prior to Paving Streets. [Ord. No.
2016-19]
When a Township street, right-of-way is to be paved or improved, the
Township Engineer's office, or said utility or company completing work,
shall first give notice to all persons owning property abutting the street
about to be paved or improved and to all public utilities and authorities
operating in the Township, and/all such persons, utilities and authorities
shall make all connections as well as any repairs thereto which would
§ 13-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.13
1:503
necessitate excavation of the street within sixty (60) days of the giving of
such notice. The time shall be extended if permission is requested in writing
and approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 13-1.14. Excavation of Newly Paved Streets. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
No street opening permit shall be issued by the Director of Engineering &
Planning to any person given notice under this section or their assignees
or successors which would allow an excavation or opening in paved and
improved street surface less than three (3) years old unless the applicant
can clearly demonstrate that public health or safety requires that the
proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
If determined that the roadway needs to be opened in the event of an
emergency the penalty shall apply.
The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale determined as follows:
a. Penalty assessment = $1,000
b. Area of road cut in S.F. x $5 = Varies
Total a and b = Varies
Penalty factor is three (3%) percent of the above total for each unelapsed
month or fraction thereof of the three (3) year (36 months) restricted
period. Maximum penalty shall be one hundred eight (108%) percent of
above total and minimum penalty shall be five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
Inspection and permit fees are payable in addition to the penalty charges
set forth herein pursuant to subsection 13-1.13. No portion of the penalty
charge shall be refundable and penalty charges do not relieve the permit
holder from the required performance cash bond or the required
insurance. Restoration of all road openings in "new street" pavement shall
be to a "newly paved" condition. The restoration shall be according to
subsection 13-1.10.
§ 13-1.15. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, suffer and be subject to a fine not exceeding
the amount authorized in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, a term of imprisonment not
exceeding the term authorized in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or a period of community
service not exceeding the period authorized in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or any
combination thereof.
§ 13-2. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
§ 13-2.1. Responsibility for Removal; Time. [Ord. No. 1369 § 1; Ord.
No. 2015-27]
The owners and tenants of lands abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks
of the public streets and highways in the Township shall remove, or cause to
§ 13-1.13 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-2.1
1:504
be removed, from sidewalks in front of or bordering on their lands, all snow
and ice within twelve (12) hours of daylight after the same shall be formed
or fallen thereon.
§ 13-2.2. (Reserved)43
§ 13-2.3. (Reserved)44
§ 13-2.4. School Zones. [Ord. No. 1448 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-27]
The school areas are designated by signs:
a. Montessori.
1. Sign 1 on Asbury Avenue, facing east, just west of Vanada Drive.
2. Sign 2 on Asbury Avenue, facing west, east of Colgate Avenue.
b. Jumping Brook Fields.
1. Sign 1 on Jumping Brook Road, facing south, south of Country
Drive.
2. Sign 2 on Jumping Brook Road, facing north, south of Route 66.
c. Shark River School.
1. Sign 1 on Brighton Avenue, facing north at the foot of Schock
Avenue.
2. Sign 2 on Brighton Avenue, facing south, just north of Lakewood
Road.
d. Summerfield School.
1. Sign 1 on Route 33, facing each, at Hawthorne Avenue.
2. Sign 2 on Green Grove Road, facing north at Squirrel Road.
e. Neptune Senior High; Neptune Junior High; Gables School; Monmouth
Vocational School.
1. Sign 1 on Route 33, facing west, west of Stanley Avenue.
2. Sign 2 on Route 33, facing east, just east of Taylor Avenue.
3. Sign 3 on Heck Avenue, facing east, 150 feet off Taylor Avenue.
4. Sign 4 on Bangs Avenue, facing west, just before intersection of
West Lake Avenue and Bangs Avenue.
43.Editor's Note: Subsection 13-2.2, Township May Remove, containing portions of Ordinance
No. 1369, was deleted by Ordinance No. 2015-27.
44.Editor's Note: Subsection 13-2.3, Cost of Removal by Township; Lien Against Property,
containing portions of Ordinance No. 1369, was deleted by Ordinance No. 2015-27.
§ 13-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.4
1:505
§ 13-2.5. Penalty in School Zones. [Ord. No. 1448 § 2; Ord. No.
2015-27]
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section in the abovedesignated
school zone areas shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
at least $100.00, but not exceeding $2,000.00 for each and every violation,
or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days or any
combination thereof.
§ 13-2.6. Authorized Officers. [Ord. No. 2015-27]
The following shall be declared Authorized Officers for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this section:
All Township Law Enforcement Officers;
5. Sign 5 on Wakefield Road, facing south on Brixton Place.
f. Holy Innocents.
1. Sign 1 on West Bangs, facing East Shore Brook Circle, east section,
north side of street.
2. Sign 2 on Route 33, facing west, at Old Corlies Avenue.
g. Green Grove School.
1. Sign 1 on Route 66, facing east, just east of Yale.
2. Sign 2 on Route 66, facing west, after Mancino's Lodge.
3. Sign 3 on Green Grove Road, facing south, north of Bangs Avenue.
h. Midtown Community Elementary School.
1. Sign 1 on SH 33, facing eastbound traffic, just east of the Ridge
Avenue intersection.
2. Sign 2 on SH 33, facing westbound traffic, just east of the Atkins
Avenue intersection.
3. Sign 3 on Atkins Avenue, facing southbound traffic, just north of
Heck Avenue.
4. Sign 4 on Atkins Avenue, facing northbound traffic, just south of
10th Avenue.
i. Children's Center of Monmouth County.
1. Sign 1 on Green Grove Road, facing northbound traffic, just north
of SH 66.
2. Sign 2 on Green Grove Road, facing southbound traffic, just south
of Jumping Brook Road.
§ 13-2.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-2.6
1:506
All Township Public Works Employees;
All Township Code Enforcement Officers;
All Township Construction Department Inspectors and Subcode Officials.
§ 13-2.7. General Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-27]
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section outside of a school
zone shall be fined $50.00 per day, for each and every date the violation
exists, for the first occurrence, $100.00 for each and every day the violation
exists for a second occurrence and $150.00 per day for each and every day
the violation exists for a third occurrence and $500.00 per day for each and
every day the violation exists for all subsequent violations. The Court can
also impose a period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days or
any combination thereof.
§ 13-3. OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
§ 13-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 151 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to display, exhibit,
deposit or maintain or cause to be displayed, exhibited, deposited or
maintained in or on any of the streets, avenues, highways or sidewalks
of the Township any goods, wares, merchandise, building materials,
encroachments, encumbrances or obstructions of any kind or character
without first obtaining from the Township Committee, or its duly authorized
agent, a permit so to do.
§ 13-3.2. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 151; New]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 13-3.3. Portable Basketball Hoops/Structures. [Ord. No. 04-11 § 1;
Ord. No. 06-21 § 1]
Portable basketball hoops/structures shall be permitted on the roads,
streets, avenues and roadways of the Township under the following
conditions:
a. A basketball hoop/structure shall be permitted on a road, street, avenue
and roadway only if immediately adjacent to the real property owned,
rented or leased by the owner of the basketball hoop/structure.
b. A basketball hoop/structure shall not be permitted on any road, street,
avenue and roadway between the period from dusk to 9:00 a.m.
c. At least one (1) side or point of the base of said hoop/structure must be
in contact with the curbline.
§ 13-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.3
1:507
§ 13-4. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
§ 13-4.1. Construction, Reconstruction or Repair Required. [Ord.
No. 177 § 1]
The owner or owners of the lands thereon are hereby directed to construct,
reconstruct, pave, repave, curb, recurb, improve and repair, at his or her
cost and expense, the sidewalks and curbs on both sides of each and every
street in the Township.
§ 13-4.2. Specifications for Sidewalks. [Ord. No. 177 § 2]
All sidewalks shall be constructed and laid at a width of five (5') feet; the
center line of the sidewalk shall be midway between the lot line and curbline
of the respective lots bordering on the aforesaid streets, and in accordance
with the specifications prepared by the Township Engineer and on file in the
office of the Township Clerk.
§ 13-4.3. Conformity to Established Grade. [Ord. No. 177 § 3]
All improvements herein contemplated shall conform to the grade
established by the Township Engineer.
§ 13-4.4. Supervision of Township Engineer. [Ord. No. 177 § 4]
All improvements contemplated shall be done under the supervision and
direction of the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer is hereby
authorized to appoint some suitable person as supervisor. All materials used
for improvements shall be inspected by such supervisor.
§ 13-4.5. Improvements by Township. [Ord. No. 177 § 5]
If any owner or owners shall neglect, after notice given to make such
improvements, it shall be lawful for the Township Committee to cause
such improvements to be made under the direction and supervision of the
supervisor herein before mentioned, or to award a contract for the making
of such improvement.
d. When not in use, a basketball hoop/structure must be removed from the
road, street, avenue or roadway and placed on private property (private
property does not include the sidewalk area or any pedestrian
walkways).
e. When roads are snow covered, basketball hoops/structures are not
permitted on any road, street, avenue or roadway at any time.
f. When a basketball hoop/structure is in use, any and all individuals
participating in its use or otherwise playing ball on a road, street,
avenue or roadway shall yield to vehicular traffic by immediately
moving to the curbline upon sighting the approach of a vehicle.
§ 13-3.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 13-4.6
1:508
§ 13-4.6. Notice to Owners; Action by Township Committee. [Ord.
No. 177 § 6; New]
Before proceeding to make any such improvement or award any contract
for the making thereof, notice shall be given to the owner or owners of the
lands, which notice shall contain a description of the property and of the
improvements required to be made, and that unless the improvement be
completed within thirty (30) days after the service of the notice it is the
intention of the Township Committee to make or cause the same to be made.
Such cost of the improvement shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
§ 13-4.7. Sidewalks or Curbs Already in Good Repair. [Ord. No. 177
§ 7]
Nothing herein shall be construed to affect any sidewalk or curb now in
good repair and constructed at the grade and slope established by the
Township Committee.
Chapter 14
(RESERVED)
Chapter 15
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 15-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
[10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-3045]
§ 15-1.1. Purpose; Statutory Authorization.
a. The Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (P.L. 1983, c.
383), was enacted for the purpose of establishing a system for the
enforcement of minimum fire safety standards throughout the State of
New Jersey.
b. The Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to provide for
local enforcement and to establish local enforcement agencies for that
purpose.
c. It is in the best interest of the Township to have the Uniform Fire Safety
Act enforced locally.
d. The Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District Nos. 1 and 2 have
agreed to the plan, which is set forth herein, for the administration and
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance amended in its entirety former Ch. 15, Fire Prevention,
comprised of Art. I, District No. 1 of the Township of Neptune, adopted by Ord. No. 1262,
as amended; and Art. II, Ocean Grove Fire District No. 1, adopted by Ord. No. 1263, as
amended.
§ 13-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1.1
1:509
§ 15-1.2. Local Enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983 c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and all standards adopted herein shall
be enforced locally within the established limits of Fire District Nos. 1 and
2 in the Township of Neptune.
§ 15-1.3. Agency Designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention specific
to Fire District lines as defined below:
§ 15-1.4. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it and herein adopted in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of Fire
District Nos. 1 and 2 other than owner-occupied one- and two-family family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 15-1.5. Life Hazard Uses.
The local enforcing agencies established by Subsection 15-1.3 shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 15-1.6. Organization.
enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., as
amended.
a. Neptune Fire District No. 1, which will enforce the Code (each) within
the limits of the fire district which are all that portion of the Township
which lies to the west of the center line of Main Street (Route 71).
b. Neptune Fire District No. 2, within the limits of the Fire District which
is known as Ocean Grove and is bordered on the west by the center line
of State Highway Route 71, on the south by the Borough of Bradley
Beach, on the north by Wesley Lake, and on the east by the Atlantic
Ocean.
a. The local enforcing agencies established by Subsection 15-1.3 shall
establish a Bureau of Fire Prevention, which shall be staffed by a Fire
Official and such other permanent, temporary, full-time and/or parttime
inspectors and staff as the local enforcing agency deems
appropriate.
b. The local enforcing agencies shall provide such supplies, equipment,
machinery, and vehicles as they deem appropriate to carry out the
requirements of this section.
§ 15-1.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 15-1.7
1:510
§ 15-1.7. Appointments; Supervision; Duties; Removal.
a. Appointment and Supervision.
1. The Fire Official of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by and shall
answer directly to the Board of Fire Commissioners of the local
enforcing agency.
2. Inspectors and staff shall be appointed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners of the local enforcing agency and shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Official.
b. Duties.
1. The Fire Official's duties shall be those adopted by N.J.A.C.
5:71-3.3(a) and shall include supervision of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention including inspectors and staff, making inspections
required by this section, reporting to the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 on a regular basis or as more
often required by the Board of Fire Commissioners, keeping
records and making such written reports as may be required by law
or the Board of Fire Commissioners, and such other duties as may
be assigned by the Board of Fire Commissioners.
2. Inspectors' duties shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:71-3.3(c)
and shall include to make inspections and reports and to perform
such other duties as may be assigned by the Fire Official of Fire
Prevention.
3. Staff duties shall include such clerical, administrative, and office
duties and such other duties as may be assigned by the Fire Official
of Fire Prevention.
c. Term of Office and Removal.
1. Temporary or Part-Time Position. All temporary or part-time
employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Fire
Commissioners. Either hiring for less than an eight-hour work day
or employment which does not exceed 364 consecutive days shall
be considered temporary or part time.
2. Permanent Position.
(a) Appointment to any permanent position shall be for an initial
probationary period of one year during which period the
employee may be discharged without cause. The Board may in
writing waive a probationary period.
(b) After completion of probationary period, or after waiver by the
Board of the same, an employee of a permanent position may
only be disciplined or discharged for cause including but not
limited to: failure to perform and/or adequately perform the
duties of the position; failure to cooperate with co-employees;
§ 15-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1.7
1:511
§ 15-1.8. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19 of the Uniform Fire Code, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency (or agencies) shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Monmouth
County.
§ 15-1.9. Additional Required Inspections Schedule and Fees.
In addition to the inspection schedule and fee required pursuant to the Act
and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections schedule and fees shall be required. All non-lifehazard
uses shall register and be inspected annually, as follows:
failure to maintain a clean, neat and orderly appearance;
failure to act in a civil and respectful manner; failure to obey
directives of the Board or a superior; failure to report for duty
on time; consumption of alcoholic beverage during working
hours; being on duty with breath smelling of alcoholic
beverage; being under the influence of any intoxicant or mindaltering
illegal substance; any violation of any criminal or
disorderly persons law; any conduct which may bring
embarrassment or disrepute to the Board or which in any
manner adversely affects the employee in carrying out the
duties of the position; solicitation of or receipt of any gifts,
services, gratuities, or payment from any member of the public
for any act, omission or forbearance in performance of the
duties of the position; any employment not authorized by the
Board; such other causes as allowed by law.
(c) Discipline may be loss of sick leave and/or vacation time,
suspension from employment without pay, termination of
employment and such other discipline as allowed by law.
d. Salaries; Benefits; Conditions of Employment. The salaries, benefits and
conditions of employment for all positions created under this section
shall be determined by the Board of Fire Commissioners of the local
enforcing agency as it deems appropriate.
a. All structures, businesses and activities required to secure a mercantile
license in accordance with Chapter 4 of the Code of the Township of
Neptune and all structures or part thereof occupied by any professional
activity or use license or for which a permit is issued by any
department, branch, division or agency of the State of New Jersey shall
be inspected pursuant to this section prior to issuance of a mercantile
license or in the case of a nonmercantile licensed structure, business or
activity as aforesaid, there shall be an annual inspection. The owners
and occupants of all structures shall register and be inspected annually
and shall within two weeks of a written request supply such information
as may be required by the Fire Official of Fire Prevention for the
enforcement of this section.
§ 15-1.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 15-1.9
1:512
b. Registration fees under this section shall be $55 for up to two 2,500
square feet and $25 for each additional 2,000 square feet or fraction
thereof to be inspected. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, a not-for-profit
organization shall not be charged an inspection fee greater than $55 for
a building which does not have a life hazard use required to be
registered under the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey. The
registration fee shall be paid by the occupant of the structure or area to
be inspected.
c. Inspections During Non-Regular Business Hours.
1. For inspections requested or required to be made during nonregular
business hours, in addition to the regular permit and/or
application fee, the following fee schedule shall apply:
(a) A minimum fee of $100.
(b) For each man hour more than two man hours, an additional
$50 per man hour.
2. "Regular business hours" shall mean the hours the Bureau of Fire
Prevention is normally open. A "man hour" shall mean the time up
to one hour for one inspector. Any fraction of a man hour shall be
considered one man hour.
d. Permit fees and fire code status fees shall be charged according to the
following fee schedule.
1. Type 1 permit: $54.
2. Type 2 permit: $214.
3. Type 3 permit: $427.
4. Type 4 permit: $641.
5. Fire code status fee: $25.
e. The enforcement and penalty provisions which govern life hazard uses
(N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12, Penalties, and N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12A, Dedicated
Penalties) are hereby incorporated herein and any party failing to
obtain any inspection required, failing to furnish requested registration
information, failing to pay registration fee or failing to comply with any
orders issued as a result of such inspection shall be subject to the
enforcement and penalty provisions.
f. False Fire Alarm. A "false fire alarm" shall be defined as either a signal,
message or warning transmitted to the Township's Fire
Communications central dispatch indicated a fire condition, or the
emission of an audible, visual or electronic transmission of any signal,
message or warning intended to summon the services of the Township
fire-fighting personnel or apparatus, which signal, message, or warning
is activated by a cause other than one for which the transmitting system
§ 15-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1.9
1:513
§ 15-1.10. Adoption of Additional Standards.
is specifically designed to respond, at a time when no fire exists. The
alarm shall not be considered false if caused by a power or telephone
line interruption. The Fire Official may assess penalties for violations
herein as follows:
1. Three false fire alarms within a thirty-day period: $100.
2. Fourth and subsequent false fire alarms within one calendar year:
$200 per occurrence, in addition to remedies available within the
NJUFC and the UCC.
a. In addition to the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383), the
National Fire Protection Association Code and all amendments and
supplements thereto are hereby adopted wherein a higher or more
restrictive standard is set forth than in the Uniform Fire Safety Act or
where the same supplements the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
b. In addition, the following are hereby adopted, violation of which shall
be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383) as the same may be amended from
time to time.
1. Candles. Open-flame burning candle or candles shall not be used,
permitted or suffered at any meeting or gathering in any place of
assembly or gathering without first obtaining approval of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention which shall base such approval or
nonapproval on whether the proposed open-flame burning of
candle or candles is to be done in a safe manner and with provision
for safety in the event of a mishap.
2. Fire Lanes. All fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
3. Open-flame cooking devices and outdoor fireplaces.
(a) Any portable device designed to cook, using charcoal, wood,
ignitable liquid, liquefied petroleum, and/or natural gas or any
portable device designed or used to cook, that produces an
open flame upon ignition or under cooking conditions and
outdoor fireplaces shall not be stored or used:
(1) On any porch, balcony or any other portion of a building;
(2) Within any room or space of a building;
(3) Within five feet of any combustible construction;
(4) Within five feet vertically or horizontally of an opening in
any wall; or
(5) Under any building overhang.
§ 15-1.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 15-1.10
1:514
(b) When the device is in use, it must always be attended to. Oneand
two-family dwellings shall be included in the enforcement
of this provision.
4. Opening Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor
Fireplaces. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and
approved in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Code and/or the State Forest Fire Service.
(a) Open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions
or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
(b) Opening burning shall be allowed without prior notification to
the fire official for recreational fires provided the following
requirements are meet:
(1) Must be in an approved container with an embersuppressing
lid.
(2) Use of only clean dry wood: no brush, leaves, trash,
treated or wet wood.
(3) Do not use any flammable liquids to ignite the fire.
(4) Approved containers must be a minimum of 15 feet away
from any combustibles: not on decks or near structures.
(5) Must always be attended to.
(6) Must have a means to extinguish the fire. Garden hose
stretched and/or a working portable fire extinguisher.
(7) If complaints are received, and the above conditions are
not met, the local enforcing agency will require that the
fire be extinguished immediately.
(8) If multiple calls to an address are received and the above
is not abided by, a citation with possible fines will be
issued.
5. Secured Key Access.
(a) Neptune Township Emergency Services utilize the Knox Rapid
Access System.
(1) Key Box Access System Required. All buildings except oneand
two-family homes which have a fire alarm system or a
fire suppression system or when access to or within a
structure or an area is restricted because of secured
openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving
or fire-fighting purposes are required to have a key
§ 15-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1.10
1:515
Chapter 16
SEWERS
box access system (Knox-Box®) at an entry location to be
approved by the Fire Code Official.
(2) Key Box Contents. The key box shall contain: 1) keys to
locked points of egress whether on the interior or exterior
of the building; 2) keys to locked mechanical rooms, fire
alarm/sprinkler control rooms, electrical rooms and
elevator controls; 3) keys to other secured areas as
required by the Fire Code Official.
(3) The operator of the building shall immediately notify the
Fire Code Official and provide the new key where a lock is
changed or rekeyed. The key to such lock shall be secured
in the Knox-Box®.
(b) All standards adopted in Subsections a and b above shall be
enforced and carry the same penalties as set forth in the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383).
§ 15-1.10 NEPTUNE CODE § 15-1.10
1:516
ARTICLE I
NEPTUNE TOWNSHIP SEWER DISTRICT
§ 16-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWER DISTRICT.
§ 16-1.1. Consolidation of Two Districts. [Ord. No. 1112 Preamble]
The Township of Neptune heretofore established two (2) sewerage districts
in the Township known as the Mid-Town Sanitary Sewer System and the
Western Sanitary Sewer System.
Sewage from users in each district was treated and disposed of in separate
treatment plants located within the District.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection instituted a suit in
the Superior Court of New Jersey requiring that the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority construct central sanitary sewerage plants and outfall;
and requiring all other treatment plants located in the Neptune region to
cease and desist operation, including the treatment plant servicing the Mid-
Town Sanitary Sewerage System.
In order to service the Neptune region, Water Pollution Control Plan #2 was
expanded.
The Township of Neptune is under a contract with the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority under the terms of which generally the Authority
accepts, transmits, treats and disposes of sewage from all the sewer users
in the Township and the Authority renders one (1) sewer bill to the Township
therefor for all such usages, which is paid by the Township on a quarterly
basis.
The Western Sanitary Sewerage System was recently extended.
It is anticipated that the sewers in the Mid-Town Sanitary Sewerage System
would be rehabilitated.
It is in the best interests of the sewer users in the Township to consolidate
the two (2) present sewer districts into one (1) district thereby gaining
the economic advantage of a larger number of users sharing operation,
maintenance and debt service costs.
The sewer rent established under the terms of this chapter represents
the monies necessary to pay the cost of the Township in operating and
maintaining the present sewer collection system and payment to the
Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority for its service charge to the
Township for accepting, treating, transmitting and disposing of sewage.
§ 16-1.2. Boundaries of District. [Ord. No. 1112 § 1]
All of that portion of the Township formerly known as the Western Sanitary
Sewerage System of the Township and that formerly known as the Mid-
Town Sanitary Sewerage System of the Township shall be known as the
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.2
1:517
Neptune Township Sewer District and is hereby consolidated into one (1)
sewer district comprising and including all of the land and territory within
the following described boundaries, to wit:
Beginning at a point in the northerly boundary of the Borough of Bradley
Beach, where the same is intersected by Main Street and running from
said beginning point (1) Along the northerly and westerly boundary of the
Borough of Bradley Beach to its intersection with the northerly boundary of
the Borough of Neptune City, thence, (2) Along the boundary of the Borough
of Neptune City to the westerly boundary of the Borough of Avon-by-the-
Sea, thence, (3) Along said westerly boundary to the northerly boundary of
the Borough of Belmar, thence, (4) Along said northerly boundary and along
the northerly boundary of the Township of Wall to the easterly boundary
of Tinton Falls Borough; thence, (5) Along the boundary of the Tinton Falls
Borough to the southerly boundary of the Township of Ocean, thence, (6)
Along the boundary of the Township of Ocean to the westerly boundary of
the City of Asbury Park, thence, (7) Along the boundary of the City of Asbury
Park to Main Street, thence, (8) southwesterly along Main Street to the
point or place of beginning.
§ 16-1.3. Neptune Township Utility. [Ord. No. 1112 § 2]
The Township Committee shall operate and maintain as the Neptune
Township Utility all sewerage facilities located in the districts formerly
known as Mid-Town and Western Sanitary Sewerage Districts.
§ 16-1.4. Powers of Township Committee. [Ord. No. 1112 § 3]
The Township Committee shall have power and authority, in its discretion,
to construct such additions, extensions, repairs and modifications to
existing facilities as it shall deem necessary for the public good and health,
and/or as required by the contract with the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 16-1.5. Outstanding Debts. [Ord. No. 1112 § 4]
All outstanding debts, notes or bonds authorized by previous ordinances
for the Mid-Town Sanitary Sewerage District and the Western Sanitary
Sewerage District shall continue as an obligation of the Neptune Township
Sewerage District and shall be paid in accordance with the terms thereof by
the Neptune Township Sewerage District.
§ 16-1.6. Costs of Establishment. [Ord. No. 1112 § 5]
a. That the costs of the creation and establishment of the Neptune
Township Sewer District (including its predecessors, Mid-Town
Sanitary Sewerage District and Western Sanitary Sewerage District)
and the cost of such sewerage system (including its predecessors Mid-
Town Sanitary Sewerage District and Western Sanitary Sewerage
District) shall be assessed against the lands and real estate benefited
§ 16-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-1.6
1:518
§ 16-1.7. Expense of Operation. [Ord. No. 1112 § 6]
The expenses of the operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewerage
system, disposal works and pumping stations and other necessary adjuncts
shall be met by a levy against all of the lands and real estate within the
Neptune Township Sewerage District.
§ 16-1.8. Future Actions by Township Committee. [Ord. No. 1112
§ 7]
That all future actions and proceedings which may be necessary to be taken
by the Township Committee in carrying out and executing the works and
purposes contemplated under the provisions of this section and all orders
relating thereto may be done and made by resolution.
§ 16-2. SEWER RENTAL CHARGES.
§ 16-2.1. Schedule of Rates. [Ord. No. 1112 § 8; Ord. No. 1207 § 1;
Ord. No. 1383; Ord. No. 1536; Ord. No. 1597 § 1; Ord. No. 00-5 § 1;
Ord. No. 07-02 § 1; Ord. No. 07-30 § 1; Ord. No. 08-12 § 1; Ord. No.
11-13 § 1; Ord. No. 13-42; Ord. No. 2017-10]
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Single Family private
dwelling with no
rental rooms
$450.00 $460.00
Single Family private
dwelling and garage
apartment with no
rental rooms or
apartments
$900.00 $920.00
thereby and such assessment shall bear interest and penalties for the
same time and at the same rate as assessments for local improvements
in the District and from the date of confirmation shall be a first and
paramount lien upon the respective lands and real estate assessed
to the same extent, and shall be enforced and collected in the same
manner, as assessments for local improvements.
b. All costs for the creation and establishment of the Mid-Town Sanitary
Sewerage District and the Western Sanitary Sewerage District and for
the cost of construction of the sanitary sewerage systems hereto-fore
assessed against the lands and real estate benefited thereby and such
other assessments shall be preserved and shall from the date of
confirmation be a first and paramount lien on the respective lands and
real estate assessed, to the same extent, and shall be enforced and
collected in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.
§ 16-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.1
1:519
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Single Family with
Mother/Daughter
unit with common
Entry door
$900.00 $920.00
Two Family private
dwelling with no
rental rooms or
apartments
$900.00 $920.00
Two Family private
dwelling and garage
apartment with no
rental rooms or
apartments
$1,350.00 $1,380.00
Multi-family (more
than two) dwellings
with no rental rooms
or apartments - each
family unit
$450.00 $460.00
Structures with
apartment — each
apartment
$450.00 $460.00
Hotels and Motels $450.00 $460.00
Plus for each rental
room
$338.00 $345.00
With bar — up to
100 occupancy
$1,920.00 $1,965.00
Each additional 100
or fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Rooming House $450.00 $460.00
Plus for each
approved rental
room
$338.00 $345.00
Rooming House with
congregate
bathrooms
$450.00 $460.00
Plus for each
approved rental
room
$225.00 $230.00
Barber and Beauty
Shop
$450.00 $460.00 $460.00
§ 16-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-2.1
1:520
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Plus for each chair
[Ord. No.
2017-10]
$338.00 $345.00 $100.00
Commercial Business
One toilet $450.00 $460.00
Each additional four
(4) toilets or
fractions thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Industrial (Exclusive
of Industrial Wastes)
One toilet $900.00 $920.00
Each additional four
(4) toilets or
fractions thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Churches $450.00 $460.00
Service Stations $900.00 $920.00
Automotive Repair /
No Fuel
$900.00 $920.00
Service Station with
garage
$1,350.00 $1,380.00
Service Station and
garages with wash
rack
$1,800.00 $1,840.00
Bar — up to 100
occupancy
$1,920.00 $1,965.00
Each additional 100
or fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Nursing Homes
(including
convalescent centers,
etc.)
$450.00 $460.00
Plus for each
hospital or nursing
home bed
$338.00 $345.00
Restaurant /No Bar
First 25 occupancy $900.00 $920.00
§ 16-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.1
1:521
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Each additional 25
occupancy or
fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Restaurant with Bar
Up to 100
occupancy
$1,920.00 $1,965.00
Each additional 100
or fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Laundries
Plus $7.00 per
1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof
based on 65% of
water gallonage
consumed
$450.00 $460.00
Laundromats
Plus $7.00 per
1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof
based on 65% of
water gallonage
consumed
$450.00 $460.00
Hospitals (including
extended care
facilities)
Plus $7.00 per
1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof
based on 65% of
water gallonage
consumed
$450.00 $460.00
Soda Bottling
Companies
Plus $7.00 per
1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
§ 16-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-2.1
1:522
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Schools (Public,
Parochial, etc.)
Plus $8.30 per
student based on
average daily
enrollment on
November 30 of
prior year. All
charges based on
each individual
school building so
occupied
$450.00 $460.00
Automatic Car Wash
Plus $7.00 per
1,000 gallons of
water used or
fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Car Wash with
Recycling System
Plus $3.50 per
1,000 gallons of
water used or
fraction thereof
$450.00 $460.00
Utility
Plus $12.00 per
1,000 gallons of
metered flow into
sewer system plus
costs of calibration
and reading of
meter
$3,600.00 $3,680.00
§ 16-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.1
1:523
Use
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
14
Rate –
Effective 1/1/
15
Rate – Effective
3/27/17
Buildings or facilities
used by various nonprofit,
public, private
and civic
organizations,
including but not
limited to fire
companies, first aid
squads, veterans'
organizations, Social
clubs, lodges and
fraternal
organizations, etc.
(Per annum)
$450.00 $460.00
Said organizations
holding a liquor
license an additional
sum of:
$900.00 $920.00
§ 16-2.2. Additional Rate Regulations. [Ord. No. 1112 § 8; Ord.
11-13 § 2]
a. Where the annual rate to be paid for use of the sewer system is based
on the number of gallons of water consumed then said annual rate is to
be determined by the number of gallons of water used up to and
including December 31 of the preceding year.
The number of gallons used in the preceding year is to be certified by
the user to the Township on or before January 15 of each year.
Whenever the certification required by this subsection is not given by
the user to the Township by January 15, the Tax Collector may estimate
the basis for this calculation at a rate of one hundred fifty (150%)
percent of the previous year certification, in addition to assessing a
penalty for failure to submit certification in the amount of one hundred
($100.00) dollars which shall be added as a service charge to the sewer
bill of that particular user.
b. Where the annual rate to be paid for the use of the sewer system is
based on the number of beds contained in a particular hospital, nursing
home and/or convalescent center, the number of beds is to be certified
to the Township by the hospital, nursing home or convalescent center
involved on or before January 15. When the certification is not obtained
on or before January 15, the Tax Collector may estimate the basis for
this calculation at a rate of one hundred fifty (150%) percent of the
previous year certification, in addition to assessing a penalty for failure
§ 16-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-2.2
1:524
§ 16-2.3. Payment of Charges; When Due; Partial Charges. [Ord. No.
1112 § 9; Ord. No. 11-13 § 3]
to submit certification in the amount of one hundred ($100.00) dollars
which shall be added as a service charge to the sewer bill of the
particular user.
c. Where the annual rate to be paid for use of the sewer system is based
on the number of pupils the rate is determined by the average number
of pupils located in an individual school building on November 30 of the
preceding year. The number of pupils is to be certified to the Township
on or before January 15. When the certification is not received by
January 15, the Tax Collector may estimate the basis for this calculation
at a rate of one hundred fifty (150%) percent of the previous year
certification, in addition to assessing a penalty for failure to submit
certification in the amount of one hundred ($100.00) dollars which shall
be added as a service charge to the sewer bill of that particular school
building.
d. The sewer charge, in all cases not covered by this subsection or where
the use of property is not permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township or where a special use permit is required or for any industrial
use which produces a waste material to be discharged into the sewer
system, shall be established by the Township Committee by separate
contract and in such amount as would be proportionate to its use of the
sanitary sewer system.
e. All use charges set by this section shall be reviewed and revised
periodically to reflect the actual costs of the treatment works operation.
f. The terms and conditions of any agreement or contract between the
Township and a sewer user that pertains to the reservation of capacity
or to the charges to be collected that are inconsistent with Federal
regulations shall be disregarded and shall be of no legal effect.
g. The cost of operation and maintenance for the flow not attributable to
the user (that is, due to infiltration and/or inflow, if any), shall be
distributed among the various classes of users and shall be included in
the charges set by this section.
a. The sewer rental shall be payable to the Collector of Taxes; semiannually
in advance, on or before March 1 and September 1 of each
year.
b. If the sewer rental imposed hereby is not paid within thirty (30) days
from the date due, the same shall become delinquent and shall bear
interest thereon at the same rate charged against delinquent taxes in
the Township and shall become a lien on the property and shall be
collectible as in the case of other municipal taxes, charges or liens.
§ 16-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.3
1:525
§ 16-2.4. Billing. [Ord. No. 1128 § 1]
At least annually each user shall be sent a bill for the annual sewer rental or
charge for the use of the sewerage system of the Township, which shall set
forth that portion of the user charge attributable to waste water treatment
services (operation and maintenance) costs.
§ 16-2.5. Maintenance of Sanitary Sewerage Facilities. [Ord. No.
1128 § 1]
The Township will maintain sanitary sewerage facilities for the minimum
period of time required under the United States Environmental Protection
Agency Rules and Regulations by raising money to maintain the system
during this period.
§ 16-2.6. User Charge System; Proportionate Share. [Ord. No. 1128
§ 1]
The Authority's present user charge system is uniform for each class of
users and further provides uniformity among the various classes of users
so that each class of users pays its proportionate share of operation and
maintenance (including replacement costs) of the sanitary sewerage
facilities. All of the charges for each separate class is based upon that class
of users proportionate contribution to the total waste water loading from all
users and is proportionately equal.
§ 16-3. SEWER USE REGULATIONS; NEPTUNE TOWN-SHIP SEWER
DISTRICT.
See subsection 11-5 of this Code for provisions concerning payment of
delinquent sewer rentals as a condition for issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
c. Whenever sewer service to any property begins after the first day or
terminates before the last day of any semi-annual period, the charge
will be for that portion of the period during which the property is
served. Sewer service charges are effective as of the date of issuance of
the original Certificate of Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy.
d. Upon termination or change of sewer service as a result of demolition of
a structure or the abandonment or change of use, sewer rent shall be
payable for the balance of the semi-annual period in effect as of the date
of confirmation of service termination or change by the Neptune
Township Sewer Department to the Neptune Township Tax Collection
Department. It is incumbent upon the property-owner to schedule an
inspection with the Neptune Township Sewer Department to confirm
termination or change of service. Failure to attain this inspection will
result in continued charges until an inspection is conducted.
§ 16-2.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.1
1:526
§ 16-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1069 Preamble; Ord. No. 1520
Preamble]
The Township is a member of the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority
and as a member thereof, is subject to the rules and regulations of said
Sewerage Authority.
The Township, with the aid of Federal and State funds, has constructed
sewer lines, force mains and pumping stations as part of its municipal sewer
system.
It is necessary for the Township to regulate the use of its municipal sewer
system by residential, commercial and industrial users in order to insure
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority and the Statutes, rules and regulations of the State and
Federal Governments.
§ 16-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1069 A. I; Ord. No. 1335 § 1; Ord.
No. 1520 A. I]
As used in this section:
BUILDING DRAIN — Shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5') feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean the extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.
ESTABLISHED LOT — Shall mean a subdivided parcel of land which is
shown and numbered as a separate on the official Tax Map of the Township
and for which a sewer assessment was originally established and paid.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Shall mean the wastewater from industrial
processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SEWER UNIT — Shall mean any unit, residential or commercial, being
established as the result of construction upon any parcel not previously
assessed for sewer construction within the Municipal Sewer Collection
System, or sewer units created on any parcel as the result of a major
or minor subdivision, variance, or site plan approval which expanded the
permitted use as established at the time of the original sewer construction
assessment.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
§ 16-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.2
1:527
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM — Shall relate to the entire Neptune Sewer
Collection System, excepting that system located within the Historic
District of Ocean Grove, and including all pipes, connections, rights-ofway,
pumping facilities, maintenance equipment necessary to convey
neighborhood sewage to the facilities of the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority for treatment.
SEWER CONNECTION FEE/INITIAL SERVICE CHARGE — Shall mean that
initial payment to be paid to the Neptune Sewerage Utility owned,
maintained and operated as a separate sewer utility by the Township.
SEWER UNIT — Shall mean and be defined as follows:
Residential.
Residential dwelling with kitchen facilities shall include:
(a) Single family dwelling;
(b) Multi-family dwelling (each unit);
(c) Mobile home (does not include transient or campgrounds).
1.
Residential dwelling without kitchen facilities shall include for each
unit:
(a) Hotel;
(b) Motel;
(c) Boarding house;
(d) Cottage;
(e) Tourist cabin.
2.
Churches, fraternal organizations, service organizations, public
buildings and schools.
3.
A unit is defined as consuming seventy-five thousand (75,000)
gallons of water per year. Each separate establishment shall, in the
minimum, equal one (1) unit.
4.
a.
Commercial.
A unit is defined as consuming seventy-five (75,000) gallons of
water per year. Each separate unit shall, in the minimum, equal one
(1) unit.
1.
b.
c. Industrial.
§ 16-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.2
1:528
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED STORM SEWER) — Shall mean
a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or
unpolluted water from any source.
WASTEWATER — Shall mean the spent water of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater that may be present.
§ 16-3.3. Adoption of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1069 A. II;
Ord. No. 1520 A. II; Ord. No. 96-11 A.I-X; Ord. No. 97-30 §§ 1, 2]
The rules and regulations established by the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority for use of its facilities and the wastewater treatment
plant by municipalities and/or customers that supply sewerage for
treatment is hereby enacted and established for the Township of Neptune
together with all amendments and supplements thereto. A copy of rules and
regulations together with any amendments and supplements are attached
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of text thereof herein.
Three (3) copies of the rules and regulations entitled "Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority, Monmouth County, New Jersey, Sewer Use, Rules and
Regulations" together with the amendments and supplements similarly
entitled have been placed on file in the Office of the Township Clerk upon
the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in such office for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 16-3.4. Sewer Fees; Annual Rent. [Ord. No. 1207; Ord. No. 1383;
Ord. No. 1536 § 1; Ord. No. 08-12 § 1]
Use
Rate – Effective 1/
1/08
Rate – Effective 1/
1/09
Single-family private dwelling
with no rental rooms
$400.00 $410.00
Single-family private dwelling
and garage apartment with no
rental rooms or apartments
$800.00 $820.00
Two-family private dwelling
with no rental rooms or
apartments
$800.00 $820.00
Two-family private dwelling and
garage apartment with no
rental rooms or apartments
$1,200.00 $1,230.00
Multi-family (more than two)
dwellings with no rental rooms
or apartments—each family unit
$400.00 $410.00
A unit is defined as consuming seventy-five thousand (75,000)
gallons of water per year. Each separate industrial establishment
shall, in the minimum, equal one (1) unit.
1.
§ 16-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.4
1:529
Use
Rate – Effective 1/
1/08
Rate – Effective 1/
1/09
Structures with
apartment—each apartment
$400.00 $410.00
Hotels and Motels, plus
$312.00 for each rental room
with bar
$400.00 $410.00
Up to 100 occupancy $1,700.00 $1,750.00
Each additional 100 or
fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Rooming House, plus $312.00
for each rental room
$400.00 $410.00
Barber and Beauty Shop, plus
$312.00 for each chair
$400.00 $410.00
Commercial Business
One (1) toilet $400.00 $410.00
Each additional four (4) toilets
or fractions thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Industrial (Exclusive of
Industrial Wastes)
One (1) toilet $800.00 $820.00
Each additional four (4) toilets
or fractions thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Churches $400.00 $410.00
Service Stations $800.00 $820.00
Automotive Repair/No Fuel $800.00 $820.00
Service Station with garage $1,200.00 $1,230.00
Service Station and garages
with wash rack
$1,600.00 $1,640.00
Bar
Up to 100 occupancy $1,700.00 $1,750.00
Each additional 100 or
fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Nursing Homes (including
convalescent centers, etc.), plus
$295.00 for each hospital or
nursing home bed
$400.00 $410.00
Restaurant/No Bar
Up to 25 occupancy $800.00 $820.00
§ 16-3.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.4
1:530
Use
Rate – Effective 1/
1/08
Rate – Effective 1/
1/09
Each additional 25 occupancy
or fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Restaurant with Bar
Up to 100 occupancy $1,700.00 $1,750.00
Each additional 100 or
fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Laundries Plus $6.10 per 1,000
gallons or fraction thereof
based on 65% of water
gallonage consumed
$400.00 $410.00
Laundromats plus $6.10 per
1,000 gallons or fraction
thereof based on 65% of water
gallonage consumed
$400.00 $410.00
Hospitals (including extended
care facilities) plus $610 per
1,000 gallons or fraction
thereof based on 65% of water
gallonage consumed
$400.00 $410.00
Soda Bottling Companies plus
$6.10 per 1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Schools (Public, Parochial, etc.)
plus $7.50 per student based on
average daily enrollment on
November 30 of prior year. All
charges based on each
individual school building so
occupied
$400.00 $410.00
Automatic Car Wash plus $6.10
per 1,000 gallons of water used
or fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Car Wash with Recycling
System plus $3.05 per 1,000
gallons of water used or
fraction thereof
$400.00 $410.00
Utility plus $9.35 per 1,000
gallons of metered flow into
sewer system plus costs of
calibration and reading of
meter
$3,200.00 $3,280.00
§ 16-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.4
1:531
Use
Rate – Effective 1/
1/08
Rate – Effective 1/
1/09
Buildings or facilities used by
various non-profit, public,
private and civic organizations,
including but not limited to fire
companies, first aid squads,
veterans' organizations, social
clubs, lodges, and fraternal
organizations, etc. (per annum)
$400.00 $410.00
Said organizations holding a
liquor license an additional sum
of:
$800.00 $820.00
§ 16-3.5. Use of Public Sewers Required. [Ord. No. 1069 A. III; Ord.
No. 1360 § 2; Ord. No. 1520 A. III; Ord. No. 10-23 § 1; Ord. No.
10-44]
a. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the Township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in future be located a public sanitary sewer
is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within
ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that
the public sewer is within one hundred (100') feet of the property line.
If the property is an existing residential home that is currently
connected to a septic system, the owner shall have one (1) year after
the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer system.
1. Exception. An exception to the aforesaid provision requiring
connection to the Township facilities is for single-family residences
who have toilets now installed prior to the date of this ordinance
(Ordinance No. 10-44, adopted November 22, 2010) and where
such single-family residences are too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer and a public pumping station is not available for
the sewer to be lifted to the sewer main and where a private pump
or lift purchased by the homeowner would cause an undue
hardship as determined by the Township. In such cases, aforesaid,
use of public sewers are not required, though permitted, as long as
existing sewer disposal through private septic system is provided in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the local Board of
Health and are not in violation of regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
b. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Township in any area under the jurisdiction of the Township of Neptune
§ 16-3.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.5
1:532
§ 16-3.6. Subsurface Disposal System. [Ord. No. 1069 A. IV; Ord.
No. 1520 A. IV]
Sewerage Authority, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
c. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Township or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
e. All connections directly or indirectly to the local municipal sanitary
sewer lines, for sump pumps, roof leaders, areaway drains, swimming
pools, ornamental ponds, water cooled refrigeration and air
conditioning units, fire sprinkler systems and any other similar
connections, are prohibited.
f. All existing connections, directly or indirectly to the local municipal
sanitary sewer lines as heretofore stated above, shall be disconnected
and physically cut off no later than May 1, 1979.
g. An application on an approved form and plans to disconnect and to
physically cut off the connections as heretofore stated above to the local
municipal sewer lines shall be filed with the Plumbing Subcode Official
of the Township. The application and plans shall be reviewed by the
Plumbing Subcode Official and after approval thereof, the permit shall
be issued. A fee shall be set as established by ordinance. All work shall
be performed in accordance with applicable State codes and municipal
rules, regulations and ordinances.
a. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
subsection 16-3.5a above, the building sewer shall be connected to a
subsurface disposal system complying with the provisions of this
subsection, and constructed and installed in compliance with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. "Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sanitary Disposal Systems."
b. Before commencement of construction of a disposal system, the owner
shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Health Officer.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the Township, which the applicant shall supplement with any plans,
specifications or other information as are deemed necessary by the
Township Engineer. A permit and inspection fee as established by
ordinance shall be paid to the Township at the time the application is
filed.
§ 16-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.6
1:533
§ 16-3.7. Building Sewers and Connections. [Ord. No. 1069 A.V;
Ord. No. 1335 § 2; Ord. No. 1360 § 3; Ord. No. 1520 A. V; Ord. No.
97-1 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 07-06 § 1; Ord. No. 10-23 § 2]
c. A permit for a subsurface disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Health
Officer. The Health Officer or his authorized agent shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Health Officer when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of
the receipt of the notice by the Health Officer.
d. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a subsurface disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey. No permit shall be
issued for any subsurface disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
e. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a subsurface disposal system, as provided in paragraph a above, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60)
days in compliance with this subsection and any septic tanks, cesspools,
and similar subsurface disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and
filled with suitable material.
f. The owner shall operate and maintain the subsurface disposal facilities
in a properly operating manner at all times, at no expense to the
Township.
g. No statement contained in this subsection shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the
Health Officer or the Plumbing Subcode Official.
a. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining approval from the Collection System
Operator.
b. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1. For
residential and commercial service; and 2. For service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
owner(s) or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the Township. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Plumbing Subcode Official. A permit and inspection fee
as established by ordinance for residential or commercial building
sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the Township at the time the application is filed.
§ 16-3.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.7
1:534
c. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the Township from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
d. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway,
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one (1) building sewer, but the Township does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by
or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
e. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and tests, by the Collection
System Operator, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
f. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building's
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Township. In the absence of Code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing
and Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.
g. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is
too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted up by an approved means
and discharged to the building sewer.
h. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such
connection is approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official for purposes
of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
i. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Township, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing
and Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Plumbing Subcode Official before installation.
§ 16-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.7
1:535
j. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Collection
System Operator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be
made under the supervision of the Collection System Operator or his
representative with a minimum of a twenty-four (24) hour notice.
k. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
l. 1. For application where sewer mains are present, the following
procedures shall apply:
(a) Prior to the Township allowing a new connection into its street
sewer or lateral or other sewerage facility, there shall be filed
with the Township Construction Department for each new
sewer unit an application for a connection, together with a
remittance in payment of the initial service fee as follows:
(1) For a residential dwelling with kitchen facilities, the initial
connection fee shall be the sum of $1,500.00 per unit for
each of the following units:
[a] Single family dwelling;
[b] Multi-family dwelling (per unit);
[c] Mobile home (does not include transient or
campgrounds).
(2) For residential dwelling units without kitchen facilities,
the initial connection fee shall be the sum of $750.00 per
unit for each of the following units:
[a] Hotel;
[b] Motel;
[c] Boarding house;
[d] Cottage;
[e] Tourist cabin.
In the event that any of the aforesaid units have kitchen
facilities, the connection fee shall be at the rate of $1,500.00
per unit.
(3) For churches, fraternal organizations, service
organizations, public buildings and schools, the initial
connection fee shall be the sum of $1,500.00 for each
separate structure. Each separate church, fraternal
§ 16-3.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.7
1:536
organization, service organization, public building or
school, shall, in the minimum, equal one (1) unit. One
(1) unit shall equal 75,000 gallons of water consumption
per year. In the event that water consumption will exceed
75,000 gallons per year, then the connection fee shall
be $1,500.00 (one (1) unit) for each 75,000 gallons of
water consumption per year. The number of excess units
shall be calculated in tenths of a unit. Water consumption
shall be determined by an Architect, Engineer or Plumbing
Contractor licensed and/or registered by the State of New
Jersey.
(4) For all commercial or industrial uses or for uses not
covered as set forth in above paragraphs (1), (2) and (3),
the initial connection fee shall be the sum of $1,500.00 for
each separate commercial, industrial or other
establishment. Each separate commercial, industrial, or
other establishment, shall, in the minimum, equal one (1)
unit. One (1) unit shall equal 75,000 gallons of water
consumption per year. In the event that water
consumption will exceed 75,000 gallons per year, then the
connection fee shall be $1,500.00 (one (1) unit) for each
75,000 gallons of water consumption per year. The number
of excess units shall be calculated in tenths of a unit. Water
consumption shall be determined by an Architect,
Engineer or Plumbing Contractor licensed and/or
registered by the State of New Jersey.
(b) The initial service fee shall be paid by remitting the full charge
with the sewer connection application in conjunction with or
prior to the submission of the application for building permit.
In the event that the initial service fee is not paid within ten
(10) days from its due date, then interest will accrue and be
due to the Municipality on the unpaid balance at the rate of one
and one-half (1 1/2%) percent per month from the due date
until such initial service fee, and the interest thereon, shall be
fully paid to the Municipality. All charges and interest shall be
transmitted to the Neptune Tax Collector to be deposited in the
Neptune Sewerage Utility Account.
2. For applications where sewer mains are not present, the following
procedures shall apply:
(a) Prepayment of the initial service fee shall be allowed so long as
tentative approval of the application has been granted by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment considering the
recommendations of the Township Engineer and the
Engineer's recommendation has been adopted by the approval
authority. If prepayment is made, it shall be conditioned upon
the issuance of a building permit by the Township for the
project in question. This building permit must be issued within
§ 16-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.7
1:537
§ 16-3.8. Use of the Public Sewers. [Ord. No. 1069 A. VI; Ord. No.
1520 A. VI]
one (1) year of the prepayment date. The applicant must pay
any increase in the amount of the initial service fee in effect
at the time of connection of the unit to the sewer collection
system in excess of that which was in effect at the time the
prepayment was made.
3. For applications where sewer mains are not present and a NJDEP
Permit to Construct Sanitary Sewers has been issued, the following
procedures shall apply:
(a) The initial service fee shall be in the amount set forth in
subsection 16-3.7b. The initial service charge may be paid
immediately upon the receipt by the Municipality of a permit to
construct sanitary sewers from NJDEPE for the application in
question, but may be paid prior to obtaining a building permit.
Under no circumstances shall a building permit be issued until
the related sewer connection fee or initial service fee is paid.
(b) In the event that the initial service fee is not paid within ten
(10) days from its due date, then interest will accrue and be
due to the Township on the unpaid balance at the rate of one
and one-half (1 1/2%) percent per month from the due date
until such initial service fee, and the interest thereon, shall be
fully paid to the Township.
4. For applications where a residential structure is currently on a
septic system and sewer mains have been installed, the following
procedures shall apply:
(a) All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply except that the
owner of such residential dwelling shall have the option to pay
the initial connection fee as promulgated in subsection
16-3.7l,1(a)(1) under the following installment plan: one-third
(1/3) at the time of application to connect to the public sewer
system, one-third (1/3) within one (1) year of the date of the
Township permit to connect to the public sewer system, onethird
(1/3) within two (2) years of the date of the Township
permit to connect to the public sewer system.
a. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from
limited areas which may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the
sanitary sewer by permission of the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority.
b. Stormwater other than that exempted under paragraph a above and all
other unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers as are
§ 16-3.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.8
1:538
specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved
by the Plumbing Subcode Official and any other regulatory agencies.
Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Health Officer, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
c. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 8.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but
not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
d. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall
be limited in discharge to Neptune's municipal system to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers,
wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Township of
Neptune Sewerage Authority may set limitations lower than the
limitations established in the regulations below if in its opinion as to the
acceptability, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. The Plumbing Subcode Official and the Collection
System Operator will give consideration to such factors as the quantity
of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree
of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
§ 16-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.8
1:539
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Sewer
Authority are as follows:
1. Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
(150°F) degrees Fahrenheit [sixty-five (65°C) degrees Celsius].
2. Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per
liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or product of
mineral oil origin.
3. Wastewater from industrial plants or food establishments of any
size containing floatable oils, fat or grease.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, where
the particles cannot be carried freely under the flow of conditions
normally prevailing and where the particles are greater than one
and one-half (1 1/2") inches in any dimension. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places
where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens
for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by
caterers.
5. Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Sewer
Authority for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by Sewer Authority.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Sewer Authority in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a "slug"
that is any discharge of water or wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or a quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment
works.
9. Waters or waste containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
§ 16-3.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.8
1:540
10. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
e. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in paragraph d and which in the
judgment of the Plumbing Subcode Official, Collection System
Operator, Health Officer and/or the Sewer Authority, may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Plumbing Subcode Official, Collection
System Operator, or Health Officer may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charged.
When considering the above alternatives, the Plumbing Subcode Official
and/or Health Officer, shall give consideration to the economic impact of
each alternative on the discharger. If the Plumbing Subcode Official
permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority.
f. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Plumbing Subcode Official and/or the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as
specified in subsection 16-3.8d3, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Subcode
Official and the Sewer Authority and shall be located so as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The owner(s) shall be
responsible for the maintaining of these interceptors, and for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal
which are subject to review by the Plumbing Subcode Official and/or
the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority. Any removal and hauling
of the collected materials not performed by owner(s)' personnel must
be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 16-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.8
1:541
g. Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or
required by the Plumbing Subcode Official, Collection System Operator
or the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority for any water or waste,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
h. When required by the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes, shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary
meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, testing and measurement of the wastes. Such
structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Plumbing Subcode Official, the Collection System Operator and the
Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority. The structure shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
i. The Plumbing Subcode Official, the Collection System Operator and/or
the Sewerage Authority may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. The
requirements may include:
1. Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
2. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
3. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
4. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil solvents, or
other materials important to sewer use control.
5. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
6. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
7. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
j. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined by standard methods of a New Jersey certified laboratory.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval.
k. No statement contained in this subsection shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Sewer
Authority and any industrial concern whereby any industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Sewer Authority
for treatment.
§ 16-3.8 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-3.9
1:542
§ 16-3.9. Destruction of Wastewater Facility Property Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 1069 A. VII; Ord. No. 1520 A. VII]
No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s)
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 16-3.10. Power and Authority of Inspectors. [Ord. No. 1069 A.
VIII; Ord. No. 1520 A. VIII]
§ 16-3.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1069 A. IX; Ord. No.
1335 § 2; Ord. No. 1520 A. IX]
a. The Plumbing Subcode Official, the Health Officer, the Collection
System Operator, and other duly authorized employees of the Township,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
b. The Plumbing Subcode Official, the Health Officer, the Collection
System Operator and/or the Sewer Authority or any duly authorized
personnel thereof, are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may
withhold information considered confidential. The industry must
establish that the revelations to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
c. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in paragraph a above, the Health Officer, the Collection System
Operator, the Plumbing Subcode Official and other duly authorized
employees of the Township shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Township holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of but not limited to, inspections,
observations, measurements, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in
pertaining to the private property involved.
a. Any persons, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5. Further, each day that a violation exists, shall constitute
a separate violation under the terms of this chapter.
b. Liens and Enforcement.
1. In the event that an initial service charge related to any parcel of
real property owned by any person, corporation or other entity
§ 16-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.11
1:543
§ 16-4. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPAL STORMWATER
SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
§ 16-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 05-46 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Neptune, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 16-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 05-46 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Neptune, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
other than the State or any agency or subdivision thereof shall not
be paid as and when due as hereinabove stated, the unpaid balance
thereof and all interest accruing thereon shall be a lien on such
parcel, and all such liens shall become enforceable with and as any
other municipal lien on real property in the Township in addition to
the other remedies of civil foreclosure or any other remedies which
may be available to the Township.
2. In the event that any service charge of the Township with regard to
any parcel of real property shall not be paid as and when due, the
Township may enter upon such parcel and cause the connection
thereof to be cut and shut off until such service charge and any
subsequent service charge with regard to such parcel and all
interest accrued thereof, together with a nine hundred ($900.00)
dollar reconnection fee, shall be fully paid to the Township, or may
avail itself of any and all other remedies.
§ 16-3.11 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-4.2
1:544
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Neptune or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 16-4.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 05-46 § 1]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Neptune any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 16-4.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 05-46 § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the Neptune Township Police Department
and the Sewer Department Supervisor of the Department of Public Works
or his designee.
§ 16-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4.5
1:545
§ 16-4.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 05-46 § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
§ 16-5. (RESERVED)
§ 16-4.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-5
1:546
ARTICLE II
OCEAN GROVE SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
§ 16-6. SEWER AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED.
§ 16-6.1. History and Creation. [Ord. No. 1219 Preamble; Ord. No.
1670 Preamble]
The Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division, on November 27,
1972, in the matter of State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection vs. Township of Neptune under Docket No. C-133-72, ordered
the Township to regionalize its sewerage system for the benefit of those
municipalities located in the Neptune drainage basin.
In accordance with said Order, the Township on December 12, 1972, did
enact Ordinance #873 creating the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority pursuant to R.S. 40:14A-1 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the
Authority.
On April 11, 1973, the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association entered into
a Service Agreement with said Authority and the surrounding municipalities
of Neptune, Neptune City, Bradley Beach, and Avon wherein the Authority
was to provide secondary sewerage treatment for the sewerage of the
several municipalities and in consideration thereof, the several
municipalities and Ocean Grove were to pay the Authority their share of the
capital improvement and their share of the operation and maintenance of
the Authority.
The Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association in conjunction with the
Authority and the several municipalities aforesaid, agreed to abide by the
regulations of the Federal E.P.A. and the New Jersey D.E.P. in consideration
of grant moneys to upgrade its internal collection system.
The Superior Court, Chancery Division by Order entered on June 24, 1983,
in the case of Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association vs. Township of
Neptune, et al., Docket No. C-508279, determined that the Township
succeeded to the municipal functions formerly performed by the Ocean
Grove Camp Meeting Association and as such, the operation and
maintenance of the sewerage system of Ocean Grove is now the obligation
of the Township of Neptune.
It has been determined by the Township that the operation and maintenance
of the Ocean Grove Sewerage System can be preserved and adequate
revenues more readily assured by establishing Ocean Grove as a separate
sewerage authority within the Township.
§ 16-6.2. Boundaries Designated. [Ord. No. 1219 § 1; Ord. No. 1670
§ 1]
There is hereby created and established for the area known as Ocean Grove
within the Township of Neptune, a sewerage authority, a body corporate
§ 16-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6.2
1:547
and politic under the name of "The Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority"
hereinafter referred to as the Sewerage Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 14A-1
et seq.
§ 16-6.3. Purpose of Authority. [Ord. No. 1219 § 2; Ord. No. 1670
§ 2]
The purpose of the Sewerage Authority is to assure the proper collection of
sewerage and other wastewater originating in Ocean Grove, the treatment
thereof by the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority and to provide for
payment of the cost and expense in connection therewith.
§ 16-6.4. Commissioners; Number; Appointment; Term;
Organization. [Ord. No. 1219 § 3; Ord. No. 1670 § 3; Ord. No. 04-07
§ 4]
a. The governing body of the Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority shall
consist of five (5) members called Commissioners, who shall be
residents of the Ocean Grove section of the Township of Neptune and
who shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years by resolution of the
Township Committee.
b. The members first appointed shall be designated to serve for a term
respectively expiring on the first day of the first, second, third, fourth
and fifth Februaries next ensuing after the date of their appointment.
c. Thereafter on January 1 or at the annual reorganization meeting as
scheduled by the Township Committee, in each year after such first
appointments, one (1) person shall be appointed as a member of the
Sewerage Authority to serve for a term commencing on February 1, in
each year and expiring on February 1 in the fifth year after his
appointment.
d. In the event of a vacancy in the membership of the Sewerage Authority
occurring during an unexpired term of office, a person shall be
appointed as a member of the Sewerage Authority to serve for such
unexpired term.
e. The members of the Sewerage Authority on or after February 1 in each
year, shall elect annually from among its members, a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary who shall hold office until February 1 next
ensuing and until their successors have been appointed and have
qualified. The Sewerage Authority may also appoint and employ an
Executive Director, an Engineer, and an Attorney, and it shall determine
their qualifications, terms of office, duties and compensation.
f. The Sewerage Authority shall cause an annual audit to be made of its
accounts and for this purpose shall employ a registered municipal
accountant of New Jersey. The audit shall be completed and a copy filed
with the Sewerage Authority, the Township of Neptune, the Township of
Neptune Sewerage Authority and with the Director of the Division of
§ 16-6.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-6.4
1:548
§ 16-6.5. Compensation of Commissioners. [Ord. No. 1219 § 4; Ord.
No. 1670 § 3; Ord. No. 04-10 § 2; Ord. No. 06-41 § 1; Ord. No. 10-03
§ 1]
All Commissioners shall serve without compensation. Commissioners shall
also be ineligible for enrollment in any New Jersey State Health Benefits
Program, any other health benefits program, any drug prescription program
or any dental program.
§ 16-6.6. Powers of Commissioners. [Ord. No. 1219 § 5; Ord. No.
1670 § 5]
The Commissioners of the Sewerage Authority shall have all the rights
and powers within said Sewerage Authority which are conferred upon a
township relative to the establishment of and the maintenance and repair
to sewers and sewerage systems subject nevertheless to the terms and
conditions of the Service Agreement with the Township of Neptune
Sewerage Authority dated April 11, 1973, the amendments thereto dated
February 18, 1975, the agreement with the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority dated March 8, 1976 to abide by the conditions of the Grant
Agreement with the Federal EPA and the New Jersey DEP; the agreement
between the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association and the Township
of Neptune dated March 27, 1980 and the agreement between the Ocean
Grove Sewer District and the Township of Neptune dated March 7, 1994
relative to the cost of operation, maintenance and capital expenditures for
the Pennsylvania Avenue Pumping Station. All of said agreements aforesaid
together with the amendments and supplements thereto are incorporated
herein by reference as though fully set forth at length.
§ 16-6.7. Costs for Improvements and Creation of Authority. [Ord.
No. 1219 § 6; Ord. No. 1670 § 6]
Local Government Services in the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs in the form and in the time required by the Local
Authorities Fiscal Control Law, Chapter 313, Laws of 1983.
g. The prohibition of employment practices (Chapter 9, subsection 9-1.22
of this Code) shall be added to the Code governing the Ocean Grove
Sewerage Authority, so that the foregoing shall apply to the
appointment of members to the Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority as
made by the Neptune Township Committee and/or Mayor of Neptune
Township, and to all hiring or appointments of any and all employees
within the Authority made by the members of the Authority.
a. The cost for capital improvements within the Sewerage Authority or as
mandated by terms of the Service Agreement with the Township of
Neptune Sewerage Authority or the contracts with the Township dated
March 27, 1980 and March 7, 1994, shall be assessed against the lands
and real estate benefited thereby in proportion to and not in excess of
the benefits conferred as a local improvement in the manner provided
§ 16-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6.7
1:549
§ 16-6.8. Collection of Sewer Charges; Disposition of Funds. [Ord.
No. 1219 § 7; Ord. No. 1670 § 7]
The Sewerage Authority is hereby authorized to charge, collect rents, rates
or user charges and shall certify to the Treasurer of the Township of
Neptune, the amount of money to be raised adequate to operate and
maintain its sewerage system and to fulfill its contractual obligation for debt
service, operation and maintenance to the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority and to the Township of Neptune in regard to the Pennsylvania
Avenue Pumping Station and to establish the rate at which the users within
the Sewerage Authority are to be assessed. The Authority shall bill each
person within the said Authority's area contracting for such sewer
connection or use or service or the owner, lessee or occupant or all of them
of any real property which directly or indirectly is connected to the system
and the owner, lessee or occupant of any such real property, shall be liable
for and shall pay such user charge to said Authority in the same manner as
the Authority sewer use charges are assessed and paid, and the money shall
be assessed, levied and collected in the same manner as other municipal
charges.
Further, all funds shall be maintained with the accounts established for the
Authority. All interest earned on investments of funds from the Authority
shall remain in the account established for that purpose.
§ 16-6.9. Authority to Set Sewer Rates. [Ord. No. 1219 § 8; Ord. No.
1670 § 8]
The Sewerage Authority shall prescribe a schedule of rates and shall review
and revise the same in accordance with and in the manner set forth in its
Service Agreement with the Township of Neptune Sewerage Authority and
the Rules and Regulations of the Federal EPA and New Jersey DEP.
The Sewerage Authority shall assess, levy and charge said users of the
Ocean Grove Sewerage System for the period from January 1, 1994 to
in N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq. and such assessments shall bear interest
and penalties for the same time and at the same rate as assessments
are provided by law for local improvements in the district where they
are imposed and from the date of confirmation shall be a just and
paramount lien upon the respective lands and real estate assessed, to
the same extent and shall be enforced and collected in the same manner
as assessment for local improvements. No assessments shall be invalid
by reason of failure to receive notice or other informality.
b. The cost for the creation and establishment of the Sewerage Authority,
the cost of operation and maintenance of the pumping station and
sewerage facilities which term includes sewer lines, gravity trunk lines,
the comminuter and chlorinators installed or to be installed which are
necessary to maintain the sewerage system, shall be met by a user
charge assessed and levied against the properties lying and being in the
Sewerage Authority in the manner authorized by law.
§ 16-6.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 16-6.9
1:550
September 30, 1994 at one-half (1/2) the amount assessed, levied and
charged said users for the year 1993; that at the end of the nine (9) months'
period, the rate for the year 1994 shall be adjusted upward or downward
to conform to the 1994 rate as finally determined and the users of the
Sewerage Authority shall be billed and the users remit payment thereof in
accordance therewith.
Revenue bonds may be authorized by the Authority to provide funds for the
construction, acquisition, repair, improvement or extension of the facilities
of the Authority or for the refunding of any bonds theretofore issued for
such purposes. Such revenue bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the
Authority.
§ 16-6.10. Copy on File with County Clerk. [Ord. No. 1670 § 11]
A copy of this section creating and establishing the boundaries of the Ocean
Grove Sewerage Authority together with a map showing the location thereof
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Monmouth County.
§ 16-7. OCEAN GROVE SEWER RENTAL CHARGES AND USE
REGULATIONS.46 [Ord. No. 10-03 § 2]
The Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority Rules and Regulations as adopted,
from time to time amended, by the Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority, are
made a part of this chapter by reference and shall be applicable with the
Ocean Grove Sewerage Authority jurisdiction as if fully set forth at length
therein.
A copy of the Rules and Regulations entitled "Ocean Grove Sewerage
Authority Rules and Regulations" together with the amendments and
supplements similarly entitled have been placed on file in the Office of
the Municipal Clerk and will remain on file in such office for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 16-8. (RESERVED)47
46.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1232 and 1248.
47.Editor's Note: Former Section 16-8, Sewer Use Regulations; Ocean Grove Sewerage
District, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1233 and
1521.
§ 16-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-8
1:551
Chapter 17
EMERGENCY AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
§ 17-1. NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
§ 17-1.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 06-04 § 1]
§ 17-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 06-04 § 1]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
COORDINATOR — Shall mean the Coordinator of the Neptune Township
Office of Emergency Management, appointed as prescribed in this chapter.
DISASTER — Shall mean and include but is not limited to actual or
threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm,
epidemic, accident, chemical spill or other impending or actual calamity
endangering or threatening to endanger health, life or property of
constituted government.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — Shall mean and refer to the basic
government functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety
during an emergency. This term includes plans and preparations for
protection and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from effects of an attack
by the forces of an enemy nation or the agents thereof, or a disaster as
defined herein. It does not, however, include any activity that is the primary
responsibility of the military forces of the United States.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — Shall mean the employees,
equipment and facilities of all Township departments, agencies, boards,
councils, institutions and commissions; and in addition, it shall include all
volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained
a. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to formally recognize the
National Incident Management System (NIMS) and adopt the principles
and policies of the NIMS that will insure the complete and efficient
utilization of all of the Township of Neptune's resources to combat
disaster resulting from enemy actions or other disasters as defined
herein.
b. The purpose of the NIMS is to provide a consistent nationwide
approach for Federal, State, territorial, tribal, and local governments to
work effectively and efficiently together to prepare for, prevent,
respond to, and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of cause,
size, or complexity.
c. The NIMS provides a common foundation for day to day operations,
training and other preparedness efforts; communicating and sharing
information with other responders and with the public, ordering
resources to assist with a response effort, and for integrating new
technologies and standards to support incident management.
§ 16-8 NEPTUNE CODE § 17-1.2
1:552
from, volunteer persons or agencies that are assigned the duties of
responding to emergencies within Neptune Township.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM (ICS) — Shall mean the combination of
facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures, and communications
operating within a common organizational structure, designed to aid in
domestic incident management activities as outlined in the NIMS Document
under Appendix A.
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) — Shall mean a
document produced by the Department of Homeland Security under the
direction of Presidential Directive-5 that strengthens response capabilities
through a balance between flexibility and standardization, and use of
common doctrine, terminology, concepts, principles, and processes.
NIMS INTEGRATION CENTER (NIC) — Shall mean the Federal agency
established to provide strategic direction and oversight of the NIMS,
supporting both routine maintenance and continuous refinement of the
system and its components. NIC develops and facilitates national standards
for the NIMS.
§ 17-1.3. Adoption of NIMS. [Ord. No. 06-04 § 1]
§ 17-1.4. Appointment and Duties of Coordinator. [Ord. No. 06-04
§ 1]
a. The Township formally adopts NIMS as its system of response to a
disaster and to provide a common foundation for training and other
preparedness efforts, for communicating and sharing information with
other responders and with the public, for ordering resources to assist
with a response effort and for integrating new technologies and
standards to support incident management.
b. NIMS principles and policies are to be adhered to by all emergency
management forces and across all functional disciplines within
Neptune Township.
c. Neptune Township shall institutionalize the use of the ICS as outlined in
Appendix A of NIMS in order to enhance command, control and
communications capabilities.
a. The Neptune Township Emergency Management Coordinator shall
serve as the Coordinator of NIMS operations pursuant to this chapter.
b. The Coordinator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. To consult with other agencies, municipalities, and affected
organizations in Neptune Township to recommend levels of NIMS
training. However, it shall be the responsibility of each agency to
implement said training and to ensure its own commitment to
NIMS.
§ 17-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.4
1:553
§ 17-1.5. Applicability Extension. [Ord. No. 06-04 § 1]
The municipal organizations listed below are hereby directed to ratify this
chapter and adopt it as their own including all forms and conditions
specified herein.
Neptune Township Fire District # 1.
Neptune Township Fire District # 2 (Ocean Grove Fire District).
Township of Neptune Housing Authority.
Township of Neptune Sewer Authority.
Neptune First Aid Squad.
Hamilton First Aid Squad.
Ocean Grove Fire Department First Aid Squad.
Shark River Hills First Aid Squad.
Chapter 18
HARBOR UTILITY
[Editor's Note: Former Chapter 18, Protection of Trees, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1247 and
03-24, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 06-22. The
Harbor Commission was repealed by Ord. No. 2016-04.]
§ 18-1. HARBOR UTILITY—GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 18-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
This section is adopted to establish the Harbor Utility of the Township
of Neptune and to regulate the use and operation by watercraft in the
Neptune Marina Basin and the waters adjoining it, to set forth rules and
regulations providing for cleanliness of the area, its docks and piers, and for
the safety and comfort of persons using the same; and to regulate the use
and operation of watercraft in, on or along the Neptune Marina Basin and
within any of the yacht basins in that area.
§ 18-1.2. Designation of Neptune Marina Area. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
The Neptune Marina Area is designated as all that area within the municipal
boundary west of State Highway Route No. 35 and east and south of
South Riverside Drive, including all waterways which may be subject to
State or Federal regulations and shall extend to and include all property
owned or leased by the Township lying on or within the Shark River as
2. To oversee Neptune Township's commitment to NIMS through
planning, training, and implementation.
§ 17-1.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-1.2
1:554
presently located and all shore or other facilities used in conjunction with
the operation of said harbor, but shall not extend to any other properties
owned, leased or issued by the Township of Neptune.
§ 18-1.3. Establishment; Budget Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 06-30
§ 1]
a. Pursuant to the Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., and Local
Budget Law, namely N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq., a Harbor Utility is hereby
created and established in the Township of Neptune for the purposes of
collecting expenses, both direct and indirect, and revenue data with
regard to the operation, maintenance and improvement of land and
improvements owned or leased by the Township of Neptune adjacent to
the waterways of the Shark River, including but not limited to the
maintenance, construction, erection, improvement, alteration,
cleanliness, operation, use, management, regulation, control, safety,
supervision and extension of any of the facilities, structures, and
property of wharves, piers, bulkheads, breakwaters, jetties, docks,
slips, basins, docking, facilities, beach, harbors and harbor structures
on said waterways. The Harbor Utility shall regulate, fix and establish
bulkhead and pierhead lines and distances between piers on said
waterways, subject to the regulations of the United States and of this
State, and make or cause to be made soundings and surveys and plans
therefor, and to keep records thereof. The Harbor Utility shall be known
and cited as "The Harbor Utility of the Township of Neptune."
b. The Harbor Utility budget shall set forth the anticipated revenues from
the operation thereof which shall be set forth in a separate section of
the municipal budget.
c. The Harbor Utility budget shall set forth the appropriations and shall
include, as a minimum:
1. Operations;
2. Interest and debt retirement;
3. Deferred charges and statutory expenditures.
d. The appropriate Township officials and employees are directed,
empowered and shall adopt accounting procedures consistent with this
chapter and the aforesaid statutes in the creation and operation of the
Harbor Utility.
e. The membership of the Harbor Utility shall consist of the Township
Committee members who shall supervise and control the Utility and
shall have the power to identify, collect, budget, report and monitor all
expenses and revenues in connection with the operation, maintenance
and improvement of the land and improvements on the waterways
designated herein.
§ 18-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.3
1:555
§ 18-1.4. Dedication of Revenues. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
The Township of Neptune Harbor Utility hereby dedicates all revenues
derived from the sale of dock fees, slip charges, boat ramp fees, leasing
agreements, storage fees, interest or penalties charges, or any other fees
or charges promulgated hereunder toward the payment of costs associated
with the maintenance, supervision and control of the Marina Area
designated here to the Neptune Harbor Utility.
§ 18-1.5. Operation and Conduct. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
All matters with respect to the operation and conduct of the Harbor Utility
not determined by this chapter shall be determined by resolutions to be
hereafter adopted.
§ 18-2. USE AND REGULATION OF THE MARINA BASIN.
§ 18-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
This section is adopted to regulate the use and operation of the Marine
Basin and establish fees and charges for the use thereof.
§ 18-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 13-16; Ord. No.
2016-35 § 2]
For the purposes of this section:
DINGHY SAILBOAT — Shall mean any boat that is not greater than sixteen
(16') feet in length and that is designed and constructed to be powered
primarily by the use of one (1) or more sails.
VESSEL — Shall mean a boat, ship or any other watercraft, regardless
of whether it is, or was, used for recreational, commercial or industrial
purposes or any other purpose other than a seaplane on the water, used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on the water, except a
boat or watercraft, which is subject to the provisions of P.L. 1969, C.264
(C.12:7C-1 et seq.), and includes any trailer used to transport or store it.
WATERCRAFT — Shall mean any ship, vessel, boat, motorboat, or other
vehicle when used on water, including seaplanes when not airborne, jet skis,
and any contrivance, vehicle, object, vessel or matter that can be used both
f. All appropriations in the Harbor Utility budget shall be under the
direction of the Mayor and Township Committee as outlined in the
regular municipal budget.
g. Nothing herein shall be construed to alter, modify or eliminate any of
the responsibilities or powers of the Township Committee with respect
to the operation, maintenance, improvement and management of the
departments, nor are any of the organizational reporting relationships
intended to be altered, modified or amended.
§ 18-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-2.2
1:556
in water and on land, or in water and in air, or any combination of these
uses.
WATERWAY — Shall mean that area of Shark River which is westerly of
State Highway Route No. 35 and the Shark River Bridge on that highway,
within the boundary lines of the Township.
§ 18-2.3. License Requirement. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23
§ 1]
§ 18-2.4. Regulations. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
The regulations herein set forth shall apply to the use of the abovedesignated
waterways within the Township and the use and operation of
watercraft in that area.
§ 18-2.5. Speed. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
a. No person shall operate in the Neptune Marina Area any watercraft
unless properly licensed as required by applicable State and Federal
laws and regulations.
b. All marine contractors/vendors making repairs to any boat on land or
docked in the water are required to obtain a Township Marina Vendor
License. Requirements for obtaining a Township Marina Vendor License
are as follows:
1. Certificate of Insurance displaying a minimum amount of two
million ($2,000,000.00) dollars in liability insurance.
2. Payment of an annual license fee of three hundred fifty ($350.00)
dollars.
a. No person shall operate any watercraft in a reckless manner or at any
excessive rate of speed so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the
life or property of any person, and all watercraft shall be operated with
due regard for the presence of other boats or persons, or other objects
in or on the waterway.
b. No person shall operate any watercraft in the waterway at a rate of
speed which causes waves of a magnitude to damage docks, wharves,
seawalls, or watercraft moored to docks or wharves along said
waterway.
c. No person shall operate any watercraft at a speed in excess of six (6)
m.p.h. miles an hour in the Federal Channel of the waterway, and at a
speed in excess of three (3) m.p.h. miles an hour within any of the yacht
basins in the Neptune Marina Area, or any other place of similar
concentration of craft within that area, except in cases of fire or
extreme emergency. The limitation on speed prescribed by this section
shall not apply to seaplanes in the process of landing or taking off in
proper prescribed areas.
§ 18-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.6
1:557
§ 18-2.6. Equipment and Operation. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
§ 18-2.7. Signs. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-35 § 3]
a. No person shall operate in the Neptune Marina Area any watercraft
which does not meet all applicable equipment requirements of the
United States Coast Guard.
b. No person in charge of any watercraft in operation in the waterway or
moored at any wharf, dock, pier or area in the waterway shall allow the
same to operate or remain during the nighttime unless properly lighted
in compliance with any applicable United States Coast Guard
regulations.
c. No person operating any watercraft in the waterway shall use
searchlights indiscriminately or in such a manner as to annoy or disturb
other persons on land or water or any other watercraft.
d. No person shall run or operate any watercraft engine for the purpose of
charging batteries, running auxiliary equipment or testing, between the
hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:30 a.m., prevailing time, in any day.
e. No person shall operate watercraft with an outboard or inboard motor
unless the same is equipped with an adequately muffled exhaust.
f. No person shall use any bell, siren or other noise-producing or noiseamplifying
instrument on any watercraft in such a manner that the
peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed; provided
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of
whistles, bells or horns as signals as required by any Federal or State
law for the safe navigation of watercraft.
g. No watercraft shall be moored in any channel, except at the edge
thereof, and in no case closer than fifty (50') feet to channel markers,
and in no way to interfere with the full use of the channel by others; nor
shall any watercraft be moored to any private or public seawall, dock or
beach without the permission of the owner or lessee thereof.
h. No person shall operate any watercraft while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, drugs or opiates.
i. No person shall operate any watercraft in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy, frighten or endanger the
occupants of any other watercraft, or throw up a dangerous wake when
approaching another watercraft or any dockage area.
a. No signs of any type, kind or description shall be placed or maintained
upon any vehicle, private or commercial, parked in the Neptune Marina
Area. Lettering of ownership upon the vehicle itself shall not constitute
a sign.
b. No watercraft shall exhibit signs which advertise any product or
service.
§ 18-2.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-2.8
1:558
§ 18-2.8. Parking. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
§ 18-2.9. Prohibited Uses and Areas. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No.
12-29 § 3]
a. No commercial vehicle or busses shall be parked in the Neptune Marina
Area except in specific area or areas designated by the Township
Committee.
b. Passenger vehicles may park only in the specific areas designated for
parking. No vehicles shall park within roadways laid out in the Neptune
Marina Area or within any fire or emergency area.
c. Boat trailers and vehicles attached to the same shall be parked only in
specific areas designated for the same.
d. There shall be no parking of trailers of any type along the riverside
parking areas of the Neptune Marina between South Riverside Drive
and the Shark River on weekends and holidays. Violators will be subject
to the issuance of a summons for the first offense. All subsequent
offenses will be subject to the issuance of a summons and the trailer
being towed from the property. [Added 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-09]
a. No person shall swim or skin-dive in any area of the waterway or from
any of its adjoining docks, piers or walls, or from or within any portion
of the Neptune Marina Area, except where specifically designated for
such use by the Township Committee.
b. No person, except owners of watercraft moored on the low water docks
of the Neptune Marina Area, or their guests, shall be permitted on the
low water docks.
c. No person shall fish or crab from any of the premises, docks, seawalls
or piers of the Neptune Marina Area except in such area or areas as
designated by the Township Committee. Within designated areas all
fishermen must clean up bait, refuse, trash and seaweed, leaving the
pier and dock or seawall clean.
d. No person shall sell or clean fish on any dock, pier or seawall of the
Neptune Marina Area, or any other portion thereof, unless specifically
designated for such use by the Township Committee.
e. No person shall hawk, peddle, vend, distribute, or deliver, any goods,
wares, fish, food products or merchandise of any type and kind in any
part of the Neptune Marina Area. No commercial delivery of any goods,
product or merchandise shall be made by vehicle to the Neptune
Marina Area, except to a designated loading area approved by the
Township Committee and utilized between 8:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.,
and 1:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m.
§ 18-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.9
1:559
§ 18-2.10. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the running
of racing or exhibition watercraft, muffled or unmuffled, during a publicly
announced and properly supervised and adequately patrolled regatta or
speed trial or exhibition having proper authorization in writing from the
Township Committee as to the area to be utilized for those purposes.
§ 18-2.11. Dumping and Littering. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No.
07-23 § 1]
All such goods, products or merchandise shall then be unloaded by
hand and moved by hand or by non-motorized cart to their final
destination.
Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit
customers of commercial vessels or owners and passengers of pleasure
boats from unloading their vehicles in appropriately designated areas.
This paragraph shall not be deemed to apply to municipal employees or
contractors acting on official business.
In the event of any emergency or other special circumstances, the
Harbor Master/Township Administrator or designee may authorize the
delivery of any service and/or part(s) at an appropriate location and
time.
However, the regulations and prohibitions contained in this section
shall not apply to veterans or exempt firemen possessing a valid license
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
f. No person shall grind chum in any part of the Neptune Marina Area
except in the area designated for such use by the Township Committee.
g. Designations of areas for permitted or prohibited uses to be made by
the Township Committee as required by the provisions of this section
shall be made by appropriate resolution of that body.
h. No person shall at any time use any watercraft within the harbor area
for sleeping or living purposes from November 1 to April 1 of the
following year, both dates inclusive; except that the Harbor Master/
Township Administrator or designee may authorize the temporary use
of any watercraft for sleeping purposes if: (1) it is necessary in the
opinion of the Harbor Master/Township Administrator or designee for
the safety and preservation of the watercraft; and (2) the temporary use
for sleeping purposes by transient watercraft fully equipped for no
more than two (2) nights.
a. No person shall litter or dump refuse on any dock, pier or seawall of the
Neptune Marina Area, or any portion thereof, nor shall any garbage,
paper, bottles, cans, refuse, trash or debris be dumped or thrown into
the waterway or any portion of that area.
§ 18-2.9 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-2.11
1:560
§ 18-2.12. Sanitation. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
Persons in charge of or occupying, or being guests or passengers on boats
docked at or moored to land, docks, piers, wharves or areas abutting
the waterway, or sailing or operating in any waters of the Shark River
located in any portion of the Township, shall observe all health and sanitary
regulations of the Township and all ordinances of the Township relating
to the conduct of persons and prohibiting acts contrary to public health,
morals, safety or public peace. All heads, toilets, toilet and washing facilities
shall be locked, closed and not used on any boat while within the confines
of the Township, whether docked or moored or traveling or standing still on
the waterway or any portion of the Shark River within the boundary lines of
the Township. No feces, excrement, tarnished, stained, sullied or putrescent
material or liquid shall be discharged or released or placed in the waterway
or on any land, docks, piers, wharves or areas abutting the waterway, or
in any portion of the Shark River located within the boundary lines of the
Township.
§ 18-2.13. Abandoned or Disabled Vessel/Watercraft. [Ord. No.
06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1; Ord. No. 12-29 § 3; Ord. No. 13-16;
Ord. No. 2016-35 § 1]
b. All persons in charge of or occupying any watercraft shall at all times
keep docks, piers, seawalls and premises adjacent to such watercraft in
a neat and orderly manner and free from all trash, rubbish, repair parts,
machinery, equipment and debris of all kinds.
c. The lessee or sublessee, including any watercraft owner whether
private or commercial, shall maintain his/her lease area in a clean and
sanitary condition, free of all refuse, garbage, trash and debris.
d. Any person in charge of any watercraft moored or docked in or along
the waterway or person renting any pier, dock, slip or wharf in or along
that waterway, and any lessee or sublessee, including private or
commercial watercraft owners, shall dispose of trash and refuse in
dumpsters provided by the Township. Recyclables shall be placed in
designated containers as provided by the Township. Paints shall be
disposed of in designated containers located at the Marina Repair
Facility. Painting of boats below the water line must be in accordance
with the provisions of New Jersey Clean Marina Guidelines.
a. Declaration as Nuisance. Every vessel or watercraft in the waterway,
which is abandoned or which becomes a menace to navigation or is
unseaworthy, or sinks, grounds or becomes otherwise disabled, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and the person in charge thereof shall
abate such nuisance within forty-eight (48) hours after notice thereof
from the Harbor Master or Business Administrator.
b. Notice that Vessel/Watercraft Will Be Removed. After a vessel or
watercraft has been moored, grounded or docked without a Neptune
Township Marina Vendor License for a period of one (1) week, the
§ 18-2.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.13
1:561
§ 18-2.14. Police Authority. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1;
Ord. No. 12-29 § 3]
The Harbor Master and members of the Neptune Police Department shall
have authority to board any watercraft moored in violation of this section, or
abandoned or otherwise disabled as stated in subsection 18-2.13 preceding,
Harbor Master or other designee of the Township Committee may affix
a notice on the vessel or watercraft advising that if the vessel or
watercraft is not removed by the date indicated on the notice, which
shall be no less than seven (7) calendar days following the date that
the notice is affixed, then the vessel, including any trailer upon which
a grounded vessel or watercraft has been placed, will be removed to a
holding area. The Harbor Master and/or Township Administrator shall
designate and appropriately mark an appropriate location in the harbor
area.
c. Power of Township Committee. The Township Committee and its
designee are hereby vested with the power to raise, recover, tow,
remove, store, destroy and dispose of vessels or watercraft that have
been abandoned in the harbor or waterfront as appropriate pursuant to
the procedures applicable to municipal waterways in the Abandoned
and Sunken Vessel Disposition Law (N.J.S.A. 12:7C-7 et seq.) or other
statutory provisions for the disposition of abandoned watercraft and
vessels.
d. Liability for Damages. No agent, servant, employee or authorized
representatives of the Township Committee or the Township shall be
held liable for any damages or loss to any vessel or watercraft or its
contents that is removed to a holding area and stored pursuant to the
authority of this subsection.
e. Violations and Penalties. The owner or operator of the vessel or
watercraft who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be liable
to a penalty of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more
than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars. Each day upon
which the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The
civil penalty imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be collected
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-19 et
seq.) in a summary proceeding in the Township Municipal Court.
f. Issuance of Summons; Disposition of Fines. The Harbor Master or his or
her designee, or other designee as appointed by the Township
Committee or any member of the Township Police Department is
authorized to issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of this
subsection and may serve and execute all process with respect to its
enforcement. A penalty recovered under the provisions of this
subsection shall be recovered by and in the name of the State by the
local municipality and shall be paid into the treasury of the Township of
Neptune.
§ 18-2.13 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-2.14
1:562
and move it or cause it to be moved to another location and to hold such
watercraft for payment of costs incurred in its removal and/or storage.
§ 18-2.15. Recreational Vehicles. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1]
No recreational vehicles ("RV's") campers or other vehicles, trailers or the
like are permitted at the Neptune Marina and related parking areas.
§ 18-2.16. Green Acres Rules and Regulations Applicable. [Ord. No.
07-23 § 1]
All applicable provisions of the New Jersey State Green Acres Program rules
and regulations shall apply to the use, operation and maintenance of the
entire Marina Property.
§ 18-3. DOCKING AND STORAGE RATES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 18-3.1. Docking Rates. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1;
Ord. No. 12-29 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-35 § 1]
The docking rates, the starting and ending dates of each year's season,
and the installment service charge shall be established by resolution of
and approval of the Township Committee. A boat will not be launched
for summer docking if the winter storage area is not maintained in clean
condition as determined by the Harbor Master or his designee.
§ 18-3.2. Miscellaneous Rates and Services. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1;
Ord. No. 12-29 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-35 §§ 1,4]
a. Daily Rates. Daily rates for itinerant pleasure boats, if slips are
available, shall be established by resolution of and approval of the
Township Committee.
b. Boat Ramp—Daily, Weekly, Monthly and/or Seasonal Fees. The fee for
daily boat ramp use (one (1) launch and retrieval) shall be established
by resolution of and approval of the Township Committee.
c. Winter Wet Storage. The winter wet storage fee shall be established by
resolution of and approval of the Township Committee. These rates
shall also apply to itinerant pleasure boats for the purpose of extending
the season, prorated by the week.
d. Prorated Rates. Any initial lease signed after August 1 of any year may
be accepted on payment of one-half (1/2) of the seasonal rate in effect
for pleasure boats. Commercial boat rates shall be determined by
dividing the current rate by three hundred sixty-five (365) days, then
multiplying the result by the number of days remaining in the year.
e. Pleasure Boat Leases. Any pleasure boat lease may be canceled upon
written request of the lessee, but only if the slip is rerented. Upon
receipt of payment in full from the new lessee, the Chief Financial
Officer may refund the rent on the canceled lease, less ten (10%)
§ 18-2.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.2
1:563
percent to be retained as a cancellation fee, provided the canceling
lessee has removed his/her boat from the slip. The Township has no
affirmative objection to seek out a new tenant.
f. (Reserved)
g. Assignment of Existing Lease. Assignment of boat lease is prohibited.
h. Subleasing of Slips. Subleasing of boat slip is prohibited.
i. Mooring Fees. The fee for mooring facility use shall be established by
resolution of and approval of the Township Committee. No person shall
occupy any property or waterway within the Marina or within the
Township's riparian grants without a lease or prior permission.
j. Slip Transfer Fee. The fee for transferring from one slip to another shall
be established by resolution of and approval of the Township
Committee, which fee shall be in addition to any rent increase required
as a result of the transfer. All transfers will be made by the Chief
Financial Officer.
k. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to accept renewals of
existing leases, provided the lessee executes a written lease renewal
agreement and pays the rent for the renewal term in full on or before
December 31st of the current lease year. Execution of winter storage
agreement shall not extend the due date for pleasure boat rents. Failure
to execute a lease renewal agreement and to pay the rent for the
renewal term in full as set forth above will result in a termination of all
rights, and the vessel will be required to leave the marina upon
expiration of the current lease.
l. Boat Ramp—Annual Boat Ramp Pass. The fee for an annual boat ramp
pass shall be established by resolution of and approval of the Township
Committee. A rate for a senior citizen's annual boat ramp pass, for
persons sixty-two (62) years of age or over, veterans, and disabled
persons, may also be established by resolution of and approval of the
Township Committee. All annual boat ramp passes are subject to the
following conditions: passes may only be used for one (1) launch and
one (1) retrieve per day; in order to obtain a pass the person applying
must provide a copy of a current boat/vessel registration; the pass is
only valid for the boat/vessel of the registration presented; anyone
violating these conditions forfeits the use of the ramp pass in
accordance with this chapter.
m. Interest Rates. The rate of interest to be charged for the nonpayment of
slip rental fees, and any other service received from marina is hereby
fixed at eighteen (18%) percent per annum on the delinquency to be
calculated from the date of service or from the scheduled payment date
to the date of actual payment.
n. Dinghy Sailboat Dockage and Moorings. Dinghy sailboats, as defined in
subsection 18-1.3, may be docked or moored subject to the regulations
§ 18-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-3.2
1:564
set forth herein. Dockage and mooring of dinghy sailboats shall be
limited to the season beginning on May 15th of each year and ending
on the following September 15th of each year, unless extended by the
Harbor Master. The dockage and mooring of dinghy sailboats and the
use of the Township's facilities relating thereto shall be subject to such
additional terms and conditions and rules as shall be set forth in a lease
approved by the Township Attorney:
1. The rate for the out-of-water dockage of dinghy sailboats may be
changed by resolution and the approval of the Township
Committee.
2. The rate for the mooring of dinghy sailboats may be changed by
resolution of and the approval of the Township Committee.
3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any owner of a dinghy sailboat that
enters into an agreement with the Neptune Recreation Department
authorizing the Neptune Recreation Department to use his or her
dinghy sailboat in connection with the Neptune Youth Sailing
Program shall be entitled to a reduction of one hundred ($100.00)
dollars from the applicable seasonal fee for dockage or mooring.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the
Neptune Recreation Department to enter into an agreement for the
use of a dinghy sailboat, if the Director of the Neptune Youth
Sailing Program determines in his sole discretion that there is no
need for the use of any particular dinghy boat, or if a boat is for any
reason unsuited for use by the Neptune Recreation Program. As a
further inducement to encourage owners of dinghy sailboats to
authorize the use of the boats by the Neptune Recreation Program,
the Township of Neptune shall agree to indemnify and hold the
owners of the said dinghy sailboat harmless from any liability
relating to the use of the said dinghy sailboat by the Neptune
Recreation Department, and shall further agree to repair any
damage to the said dinghy sailboat, except for such damage as the
Director of the Neptune Youth Sailing Program determines, in his
sole discretion, to constitute normal wear and tear. The agreement
between the Neptune Recreation Department and the owner of
dinghy sailboat shall be subject to such additional terms, conditions
and rules as shall be set forth in an agreement approved by the
Township Attorney.
4. The assignment or subleasing of dockage racks or moorings for
dinghy sailboats is prohibited.
5. The number of dockage racks and moorings available for lease
pursuant to this section shall be determined by the Township
Committee. Spaces shall be made available on a first-come, first
served basis. In the event the demand for the dockage or moorings
exceeds supply, preference shall be given to those owners of dinghy
sailboats who agree to authorize their boats to be used by the
Neptune Youth Sailing Program.
§ 18-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.2
1:565
§ 18-3.3. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1;
Ord. No. 12-29 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-35 § 5]
§ 18-3.4. Priority of Lease Applications; Waiting List. [Ord. No.
06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-35]
The Mayor and Committee hereby establish the following priorities and they
recognize that it may be necessary to regulate the number and type of
vessels:
o. With the consent and approval of the Neptune Township Committee,
and/or the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Neptune may
enter into any other leasing or other agreements in connection with the
purposes established herein.
a. Anchorage or mooring of any vessel in the Marine Basin or any waters
subject to Township jurisdiction.
b. Docking of any vessel at any location or in any slip without prior
consent of the Harbor Master/Township Administrator or designee.
c. Docking for more than fifteen (15) minutes in designated areas.
d. Docking, mooring or anchorage in emergencies without immediate
notification and consent of the Harbor Master/Township Administrator.
e. Tamper, vandalize, deface, obstruct or interfere with the boat ramp, or
any part of the boat ramp.
f. Any person abusing the boat ramp, annual boat ramp passes, or gate
will be barred from using the boat ramp for the remainder of the
calendar year. Anyone caught abusing the boat ramp on a second
occasion will be forever barred from using the boat ramp or from using
the services or facilities of the Neptune Marina. Unused annual boat
ramp passes or portions thereof will be forfeited and no refunds will be
issued. The term "abusing" shall have its ordinary and customary
meaning and shall include, by way of illustration and not limitation,
leaving the chain unlocked after use, using the key to allow more than
one (1) vessel, boat, sail boat or jet ski type craft to enter or exit at one
time, breaking the gate or otherwise impeding its normal operation or
otherwise using the boat ramp in a manner prohibited by law, ordinance
or resolution.
g. Any and all commercial uses as defined as any boat or vessel carrying
passengers for hire or for commercial purposes by prearranged
appointment or reservation for fishing or any other purpose.
a. All commercial leases may be renewed for one (1) year, provided that
the rent for the renewal term is paid in full and a written lease renewal
agreement or contract is executed on or before December 15th, of the
current lease year.
§ 18-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-3.4
1:566
§ 18-3.5. (Reserved)48
§ 18-3.6. Prohibited Activities Applicable to All Boats. [Ord. No.
06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1; Ord. No. 12-29 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-35
§§ 1, 7]
No person or corporation shall use or occupy any property owned by
the Township in the waters or in the waterways of the Township for the
purposes of docking, mooring or anchorage of boats or other related
purposes without first having entered into a lease for such privileges or
on a temporary basis having obtained permission from the Harbor Master/
Township Administrator or designee and paid the fees and charges for such
use. The following conditions shall apply to any such use:
b. Pleasure boat leases may be renewed for the following season, provided
the rent for the following term is paid in full and a written lease renewal
agreement or lease is executed on or before December 15th, of the
current lease year.
c. Failure to pay the rent for a lease renewal on or before the date set
forth in paragraph a and/or b above shall result in loss of priority in the
leased slip. The Township Committee shall maintain a waiting list of
pleasure vessels, with available slip being offered to the persons whose
names appear on the list. Any person to whom a slip is offered must
execute a lease and pay the rent within five (5) business days after the
offer is made or the offer will be withdrawn and that person's name
removed from the list and the slip offered to the person whose name
next appears in order on the list. Names will be added to the waiting list
in order, according to the date when a request to be added to the list is
made.
a. Slips shall be assigned to the holder of a lease for a particular boat. No
other boat may occupy the assigned slip except as provided in the lease
or by prior written consent of the Township.
b. No boat shall waste water. Freshwater hoses shall be equipped with self
closing nozzles or hand grip type nozzles.
c. All boats occupying berths or mooring spaces shall be equipped with
proper lines approved by the Harbor Master or his designee. No lines
shall be left on either the pilings or dock areas after the close of the
summer docking season.
d. No changes in slips will be permitted without prior written consent of
the Harbor Master/Township Administrator or designee.
e. Any condition on, about or around a boat declared to be a fire hazard in
the judgment of the Harbor Master/Township Administrator or
48.Editor's Note: Subsection 18-3.5, Restrictions on Commercial Uses, containing portions of
Ordinance Nos. 06-30 and 07-23 was deleted in entirety by Ord. No. 2016-35.
§ 18-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.6
1:567
§ 18-4. VIOLATIONS. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 1; Ord. No. 07-23 § 1]
Violation of any provision of section 18-3 after public hearing before the
Township Committee may result in revocation or suspension of the
Mercantile License of the owner of the vessel for the benefit or at whose
direction the violation occurred. This penalty shall be in addition to any
other penalty provided by law or ordinance.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, for each instance of violation, be fined an amount not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not more than one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety
designee or the Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector shall be
removed by the owner or person in charge of such boat immediately.
f. Walkways and facilities through or by which access is gained to boats
docked or moored shall be kept clear at all times. No supplies,
equipment, or material of any kind shall be piled or placed thereon. No
boat owner or their guests shall cause any security or access gate or
door anywhere in the Marina to be propped open, tied open or
otherwise prevented from closing, or tamper with or destroy the gate or
locking mechanism.
g. In an emergency or under unusual conditions when the Harbor Master/
Township Administrator or designee shall so determine, the Harbor
Master/Township Administrator or designee reserves the right to assign
a slip adequate for the boat other than the slip originally assigned to it.
h. All leases shall be in writing prepared by the Township Attorney and
must be signed, delivered to the Harbor Master/Township
Administrator or designee and complied with in all respects before
occupancy of any slip is permitted. Anyone in occupancy of any slip
after the expiration of any lease shall be subject to per diem charges of
one hundred ($100.00) dollars per day for commercial vessels and fifty
($50.00) dollars per day for pleasure boats as well as any other remedy
available to the Township by Statute or ordinance.
i. (Reserved)
j. No owner, captain, mate, employee, agent or other person on behalf of
the owner or captain of any boat may hawk or solicit business anywhere
in the Marine Basin.
k. Soliciting for the sale of products or services by anyone shall be
prohibited in the Marine Basin; however, this prohibition shall not apply
to veterans or exempt firemen possessing a valid license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
l. No one may be permitted on the lower docks except Township
personnel, boat owners, their employees, agents, invitees, or
passengers for hire.
§ 18-3.6 NEPTUNE CODE § 18-4
1:568
(90) days and/or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90)
days at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
Chapter 19
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 1203 and 1314.]
§ 19-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 19-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 09-38]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune, County of Monmouth, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 19-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 09-38]
§ 19-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 09-38]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Neptune are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.3
1:569
§ 19-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 09-38]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No. 13-12]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — Shall mean the elevation
shown on a community's Advisory Flood Hazard Map that indicates the
advisory stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect)
resulting from a flood that has a one (1%) percent or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (100-year flood event)
ADVISORY TWO TENTHS (0.2%) PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
ELEVATION (AACFE) — Shall mean the coastal water service elevation of a
flood having a two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual chance of being equaled or
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 19-1.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-2
1:570
exceeded in any given year. It is expressed in feet referenced to the North
American Verticle Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). (500-year flood event)
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — Shall mean the land in the
floodplain within a community subject to flooding from the one (1%) percent
annual chance event, or two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual chance event
depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD MAP — Shall mean the official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the
areas of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD ZONE A — Is comprised of the areas subject
to storm surge flooding from the one (1%) percent annual chance coastal
flood. These areas are not subject to high velocity wave action, but are still
considered high risk flooding areas.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD ZONE V — Is comprised of areas subject
to high velocity wave action (a 3-foot breaking wave) from the one (1%)
percent annual chance coastal flood. Zone V is subject to more stringent
building requirements than other zones because these areas are exposed to
a higher level of risk.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall means a designated AO, AH, or VO
Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a
one (1%) percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth
of one (1') to three (3') feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD — Shall mean
the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe
flood related erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation of the special flood
related erosion hazard area will be designated a Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a one (1%) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — Shall mean an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
§ 19-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:571
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built
in the case of a building in a Coastal High Hazard Area to have the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor,
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard
"elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — Shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood-plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 19-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-2
1:572
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
two-tenths (0.2') foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
(1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 19-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:573
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — Shall mean a continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the longest horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Shall mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in
ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348)
includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
§ 19-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-2
1:574
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — As amended, shall mean any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 19-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 09-38]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Neptune, County of Monmouth, New Jersey.
§ 19-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No. 13-12]
The area of special flood hazard for the Township of Neptune, Community
No. 340317, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," if designated as a key structure
and one that would be adversely affected in terms of historic character
as determined by the Municipal Construction Official/Floodplain
Administrator. Alteration of a "historic structure" shall not be
considered a relocation.
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated December 12, 2012.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on index and panels, Asbury Park NE, Asbury
Park OE E NW, Asbury Park SE, Asbury Park NW whose effective date is
December 12, 2012.
c. Advisory Base Flood Elevations and Advisory Flood Hazard Maps dated
December 12, 2012. These documents shall take precedence over
previous panels and FIS in construction and development regulations
only. Where the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) and the Advisory
Flood Hazard Area (AFHA) maps conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
§ 19-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3.2
1:575
§ 19-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 09-38]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars or
imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation,
and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Neptune from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 19-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 09-38]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 19-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 09-38]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 19-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 09-38]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Neptune, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents are on file
at 25 Neptune Boulevard, Neptune New Jersey.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 19-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-3.6
1:576
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 19-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 19-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 09-38]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
19-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited
to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 19-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 09-38]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 19-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. No.
09-38]
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 19-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
§ 19-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4.3
1:577
4. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
5. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with subsection 19-5.4b4.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer subsections 19-5.2a, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 19-5.2b, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 19-5.4.1c.
3. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
19-5.4b1 and 19-5.4.b2(a) and (b) are met.
4. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
§ 19-4.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-4.3
1:578
§ 19-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 09-38]
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
19-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by the Township of Neptune
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Monmouth County
Construction Board of Appeals, as provided in N.J.A.C. 5:27D-127.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 19-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4.4
1:579
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood-waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 19-4.4a4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing items (a)—(k) in subsection 19-4.4a4 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
§ 19-4.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-4.4
1:580
§ 19-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 19-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No. 13-12]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
19-4.4a4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
§ 19-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5.1
1:581
§ 19-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No. 13-12]
4. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least fifty (50%) percent lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one (1') foot above grade. Openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvements of any residential
structure within any Advisory Hazard Zones V and A shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the advisory
base flood elevation or advisory two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual
chance flood elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
§ 19-5.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-5.2
1:582
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities:
1. Elevated to or above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood
elevation, or above the advisory two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual
chance flood elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
bb. 1. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one (1') foot,
or advisory two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual chance flood
elevation, (whichever is more restrictive) the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 19-4.3c2(b).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 19-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base floor elevation or advisory two-tenths (0.2%)
percent annual chance flood elevation, (whichever is more
restrictive).
d. Historic District. Construction and reconstruction of buildings in the
Historic District shall be subject to the same standards as this section,
except for key structures, as set forth in the Land Development
Ordinance or other designated ordinances. Applicability to the
aforesaid ordinance or historic exclusion based on the key structure
nature of the building shall be determined after review by the Municipal
Construction Official/Floodplain Administrator. Should the Municipal
Construction Official/Floodplain Administrator deter-mine that the
building is subject to this section and the standards of this section, and
that substantial improvements are needed, the Municipal Construction
Official/ Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Notice of Determination
with regard to the need for substantial improvements. The
determination of the Municipal Construction Official/Floodplain
Administrator shall be appealable to the Historic Preservation
Commissions (HPC). An aggrieved party can appeal the determination
of the Municipal Construction Official/ Floodplain Administrator to the
HPC within forty-five (45) days of the determination. Any decision of the
§ 19-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5.2
1:583
§ 19-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 09-38]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
19-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
§ 19-5.4. Coastal High Hazard Area. [Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No.
13-12]
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in subsection 19-3.2. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges
and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
HPC may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in the manner
set forth in § 706 (Appeals and Application to ZBOA) of the Land
Development Ordinance.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 19-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 19-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Protection.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2') of
a foot at any point.
a. Location of Structures.
1. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
2. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
division.
b. Construction Methods.
1. Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest (excluding piling or columns) is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation, Advisory Base Flood Elevation or as
§ 19-5.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-5.4
1:584
required by the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23),
whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member so
as not to impede with the flow of water, except for breakaway
walls as provided for in subsection 19-5.4b4.
2. Structural Support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one (1%) percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean
recurrence interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
3. Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of subsection
19-5.4b1 and 5.4b2(a) and (b).
4. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this subsection shall
not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open lattice-work or insect screening shall
be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that they
are intended to collapse under wind and water loads without
causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a safe loading
resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty
(20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so
required by local or State codes) may be permitted only if a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the
designs proposed meet the following conditions.
(1) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
(2) The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
§ 19-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5.4
1:585
§ 19-6. APPLICATION FEE.
§ 19-6.1. Application Fee. [Ord. No. 09-38]
The Construction Official shall receive from the applicant, along with the
application, along with the application for a permit hereunder, a fee for the
review of the application and the determination thereof. The fee shall be one
hundred ($100.00) dollars for new construction and fifty ($50.00) dollars for
additions.
§ 19-6.2. Inspection. [Ord. No. 09-38]
If this special use permit shall be issued, the Construction Official or his
designee, Subcode Official, with the assistance of the Township Engineer,
shall make an on-site inspection, at least once during construction, to
determine whether the construction conforms to the approved plan,
materials and other specifications provided by the applicant.
§ 19-7. CONFLICTING CODES AND ORDINANCES. [Ord. No. 09-38]
In areas that the Federal Insurance Administrator has designated an area
within the floodplain as having special flood hazards, such designation
concerning land use control designed to reduce flood loss shall take
precedence over any conflicting ordinances or codes of the Township.
§ 19-8. LIABILITY. [Ord. No. 09-38]
The grant of the special use permit or approval of a subdivision plan
within the special flood hazard areas shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or
employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and
shall create no liability upon the Township, its officers or employees.
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural).
Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable State or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Building Subcode Official for approval.
c. Sand Dunes. Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones VE and V
on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential flood
damage is prohibited.
§ 19-5.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 19-9
1:586
§ 19-9. REPEALER. [Ord. No. 09-38]
All previous ordinances or resolutions or portions thereof of the Township
of Neptune inconsistent herewith be and they are hereby repealed.
§ 19-10. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 09-38]
If any clause, section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid by a
Court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision and shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion hereof.
§ 19-11. WHEN EFFECTIVE. [Ord. No. 09-38]
This chapter shall take effect upon adoption and publication in accordance
with law.
Chapter 20
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 20-1. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS.
§ 20-1.1. Enactment. [Ord. No. 1461 § I]
This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq., the Home Rule
Act which directs municipalities to act to provide for the health, welfare and
safety of its citizens.
§ 20-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1461 § II]
As used in this section:
COLLECTING AGENCY — Shall mean the Township of Neptune.
DISCHARGE — Shall mean any intentional or unintentional action or
omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of hazardous substances into any waters
which flow within the jurisdiction of the Township or any land within the
jurisdiction of the Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Shall mean any items used to extinguish or prevent
any hazardous material fire, or stop or contain any leak, release or spill
involving any hazardous material, which cannot be reused or cannot be
replenished without cost after that particular incident. These expendable
items include, but are not limited to, fire fighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums, and any
protective equipment and clothing to include, but not restricted to, chemical
protective suits, chemical protective gloves, goggles, and any other item
owned or controlled by the Township.
§ 19-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.2
1:587
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Shall mean any material, solid, liquid or gas,
listed as such under the N.F.P.A. Guide of Hazardous Materials, the
Department of Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances
adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant
to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of
1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.),
and the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA, pursuant
to Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, any hospital
or medical waste, including but not limited to, syringes, bandages and
discarded pharmaceutical products, and any material warranting removal
or cleanup in the opinion of the Neptune Township Office of Emergency
Management.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean and include the Township of Neptune's
employees, agents, officers, officials and supporting units as directed by the
Office of Emergency Management.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized equipment, registered or
unregistered, including, but not limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle,
truck, tractor trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft,
aircraft and trains.
VESSEL — Shall mean any container, drum, box cylinder or tank used
to hold or contain or carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or
not the container was manufactured for the containment of a hazardous
material.
§ 20-1.3. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1461 § III]
This section provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of, any
and all equipment utilized by the Township, for costs expended, without
regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating, controlling, or
containing any incident in which a hazardous material is involved in a
fire, leak, release or spill, or where the potential thereof exists, or for the
prevention of same.
This section also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses incurred
by the Township for the wages (regular or overtime) paid to its employees,
agents, or servants as a result of an incident involving a hazardous material,
fire, leak, release, or spill of a hazardous material and for the costs of
medical and hospital treatment for injuries incurred by agents, servants and
employees of the Township.
This section also provides for a penalty for the violation of the section for
either committing a spill or for failure to report the same.
§ 20-1.4. Hazardous Substances; Discharge; Prohibition. [Ord. No.
1461 § IV]
a. The discharge of hazardous substances is prohibited. This subsection
shall not apply to discharge of hazardous substances pursuant to and in
compliance with the conditions of a Federal or State permit.
§ 20-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 20-1.4
1:588
§ 20-1.5. Parties Responsible. [Ord. No. 1461 § V]
Reimbursement to the Town-ship for expendable items used shall be made
by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for the hazardous
material fire, leak or spill; the owner or person responsible for the vessel
containing the hazardous material involved in such fire, leak or spill on
public or private property, whether stationary or in transit and whether
accidental or through negligence; the owner or person responsible for any
property from which any leak or spill of hazardous material emanates,
whether accidental or through negligence and the person responsible for
the hazardous material fire, leak or spill whether accidental or through
negligence and the person responsible for the hazardous material fire,
leak or spill of hazardous material on public or private property, whether
accidental or through negligence.
§ 20-1.6. Reimbursement for Services of Recovery Company, Towing
Company or Technical Assistance. [Ord. No. 1461 § VI]
Any person causing any hazardous material fire, leak, spill or release
involving a hazardous material must provide reimbursement for services
rendered by any recovery company, towing company or any other technical
assistance called for by the Township to handle such incident. In the event
of a vehicle having been responsible for an incident, the vehicle shall be
impounded until such time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the
responsible official in conjunction and cooperation with the Township, and
until such time as arrangements have been made to reimburse the Township
and the towing company for their expenditures under the terms of this
section.
§ 20-1.7. Period for Payment. [Ord. No. 1461 § VII]
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the Township the full price of expendable items
b. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge, or becomes
aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the effective date
of this section shall immediately notify the Township Office of
Emergency Management at 988-5200, Ext. 241, or 988-8000.
c. Whenever any hazardous substance is discharged, the Township may in
their discretion act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
d. Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance, or who has
failed to report a discharge or who is in any way responsible for any
hazardous substance which has been or shall be removed by the
Township, shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all cleanup and removal costs and shall be liable for the wages
(regular and overtime) paid and the costs of medical and hospital
treatment for injuries incurred by the agents, servants and employees
of the Township.
§ 20-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.7
1:589
and costs used to extinguish such fire, or to stop or contain such leak, or to
control such spill, within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a bill therefor.
The collecting agency shall utilize its best efforts to collect costs hereunder
and shall reimburse its agents or the local units of amounts collected. In
the event that the collecting agency is not able to collect the costs or only a
portion thereof, the collecting agency shall not be responsible to its agents
or the local units for the full amount of same.
§ 20-1.8. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1461 § VIII; New]
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
material who fails to reimburse the Township within the time required, shall
be liable upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
The person or entity responsible for committing a spill, or who fails to report
same, will be liable for the same penalties as aforesaid stated.
§ 20-2. SALE AND USE OF CERTAIN FOOD SERVICE PLASTICS
CONTAINING CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS.
§ 20-2.1. Determination by Township Committee. [Ord. No. 1492
preamble]
The Township Committee has determined that certain food plastics
containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which constitute non-recyclable
waste, release dangerous toxic fumes when incinerated.
The plastic food service products are made up of a composition of chemical
products such as "CFCs" polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, and Styrofoam.
The Township Committee has determined that certain food service plastics
create a danger to the health and welfare of the citizens of Neptune and
create a danger to the environment.
These products have readily available substitutes.
§ 20-2.2. Finding and Purpose. [Ord. No. 1492 § 1]
The Township Committee finds and declares as follows:
a. Available scientific evidence indicates a strong probability that the
family of substances known as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), when
discharged into the atmosphere, degrades the earth's protective layer
of ozone, allowing increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation to
penetrate the atmosphere, posing an acute and immediate danger to
human health, life and the environment. Available scientific evidence
indicates that there is a strong possibility that the resulting increase in
ultraviolet radiation may already have caused an increase in the
incidence of skin cancers and other serious illnesses.
b. One (1) source of the CFCs currently being released into the
atmosphere is the use of these substances as blowing agents in the
manufacture of some of the polystyrene foam packaging products used
§ 20-1.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 20-2.2
1:590
§ 20-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1492 § 2]
As used in this section:
CFCS-PROCESSED FOOD PACKAGING — Shall mean any food packaging
which uses CFCs as blowing agents in its manufacture.
CHLOROFLUOROCARBON — Shall mean the family of substances
containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine having no hydrogen atoms and no
double bonds.
CUSTOMER — Shall mean anyone purchasing food or beverages from a
restaurant or retail food vendor.
FOOD PACKAGING — Shall mean all bags, sacks, wrapping, containers,
bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, straws and lids which are not intended
for reuse, on or in which any foods or beverages are placed or packaged on
a restaurant's or retail food vendor's premises.
FOOD VENDOR — Shall mean any restaurant or retail food vendor.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group, however organized.
PREPARED FOOD — Shall mean foods or beverages which are prepared
on the vendor's premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing or
squeezing, and which require no further preparation to be consumed. This
does not include any raw uncooked meat product or fruits or vegetables
which are not chopped, squeezed, or mixed.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean any establishment located within the Township
selling prepared food to be eaten on or about its premises by customers.
This includes a sidewalk food vendor.
RETAIL FOOD VENDOR — Shall mean any store, shop, sales, outlet, or
other establishment, including a grocery store, or delicatessen, other than
a restaurant, located within the Township, which sells takeout food.
TAKEOUT FOOD — Shall mean prepared foods or beverages requiring no
further preparation to be consumed and which are generally purchased in
order to be consumed off the retail food vendor's premises.
in the food services industry. There are substitutes for these products
currently available which do not use CFCs in their manufacture.
c. The people and the Township support international, Federal and State
bans on all uses of CFCs not deemed absolutely essential. Until such
bans are in effect, responsible action to reduce CFCs use and alert the
public to the danger posed by these substances must be undertaken at
the local level.
d. It is the intent of the Township Committee to reduce the amount of
CFCs-processed products purchased and used by the Township and
people of Neptune and thereby to reduce the health hazards created by
the manufacture of these products.
§ 20-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.4
1:591
§ 20-2.4. Prohibited Food Packaging. [Ord. No. 1492 § 3]
§ 20-2.5. Regulations Applicable to All Food Vendors. [Ord. No.
1492 § 4]
a. Restaurants.
1. Except as provided in subsections 20-2.7 and 20-2.8, no restaurant
shall provide prepared food to its customers in any CFCs-processed
food packaging, nor shall any restaurant purchase, obtain or keep
any CFCs food packaging for such purpose.
2. As to any food packaging obtained after the effective date of this
section, each restaurant shall obtain from each of its suppliers a
written statement signed by the supplier, or by a responsible agent
of the supplier, stating that the supplier will supply no CFCsprocessed
food packaging to that vendor. Additionally, that the
supplier will note on each invoice for food packaging supplied to
that vendor that the packaging covered by the invoice is not CFCsprocessed.
3. All contracts between a restaurant and a supplier entered into after
the effective date of this section shall include provisions that the
supplier will state on each invoice for food packaging supplied to
that vendor that the packaging covered by the invoice is not CFCsprocessed;
and that failure to comply with such provisions shall
constitute a material breach of the contract.
4. Restaurants shall retain each applicant's written statement for one
(1) year from the date of receipt of any food packaging from that
supplier.
b. Retail Food Vendors.
1. Except as provided in subsections 20-2.7 and 20-2.8, no retail food
vendor shall sell takeout food in any CFCs-processed takeout food
packaging, nor shall any retail food vendor purchase, obtain or
keep any CFCs-processed packaging for this purpose.
2. All retail food vendors shall segregate, in their warehouses or other
storage areas, food packaging used in their takeout food operations
from other food packaging; takeout food packaging containers or
boxes shall be labeled as such and shall indicate that they contain
food packaging which is not CFCs-processed.
3. As to any takeout food packaging purchased after the effective date
of this section, each retail food vendor shall comply with the
requirements of subsection 20-2.4a2 and a4 of this section.
All contracts for the purchase of takeout food packaging entered
into after the effective date of this section shall comply with the
provisions of subsection 20-2.4a3.
§ 20-2.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 20-2.5
1:592
§ 20-2.6. Inspection of Documents. [Ord. No. 1492 § 5]
All statements and documents required by this section shall be made
available for inspection by the Business Administrator or his designated
representative. It shall be unlawful for anyone having custody of such
documents to fail or refuse to produce such upon request by the Business
Administrator or his or her designated representative.
§ 20-2.7. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 1492 § 6]
The Business Administrator or his authorized representative may exempt
an item or type of packaging from the requirements of this section, upon
a showing that the item or type has no acceptable non-CFCs processed
equivalent and that imposing the requirements on that item or type would
cause indue hardship. The documentation shall include a list of suppliers
contacted to determine if non-CFC's processed substitutes are available.
§ 20-2.8. Existing Contracts Exempted. [Ord. No. 1492 § 7]
Food packaging required to be purchased under a contract entered into
prior to September 1, 1991, is exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 20-2.9. Township of Neptune; Purchase Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1492
§ 8]
The Township shall not purchase any CFCs-processed food packaging, nor
shall any Township sponsored event utilize such packaging.
§ 20-2.10. Business Administrator's Powers. [Ord. No. 1492 § 9]
The Business Administrator is authorized to promulgate regulations and to
take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this
section, including, but not limited to, inspecting any vendor's premises to
verify compliance.
§ 20-2.11. Liability and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1492 § 10]
a. It shall be unlawful for the supplier to make any misstatement or
material fact to any food vendor or to the Business Administrator or his
agent regarding the use or non-use of CFCs in the manufacture of any
food packaging supplied to any food vendor.
b. Food vendors shall state that they are in compliance with this section on
their annual business license renewal form.
a. Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of an infraction.
b. Anyone violating this section shall be fined twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
for the first violation; fifty ($50.00) dollars for each succeeding
violation.
§ 20-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.12
1:593
§ 20-2.12. Superseding Federal and/or State Law and Regulations.
[Ord. No. 1492 § 12]
This section shall be void upon the enactment or adoption of any Federal
and/or State law or regulation restricting the use of CFCs as blowing
agents in the manufacture of plastic foam which may pre-exempt or impose
requirements more restrictive than the provisions of this section.
§ 20-3. WATER AND MARINE REGULATIONS.
§ 20-3.1. Dumping and Littering. [Ord. No. 03-12 § 1; Ord. No.
2014-41]
§ 20-3.2. Sanitation. [Ord. No. 03-12 § 1]
a. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, throw or dump any debris
or material of any nature in any stream, watercourse, catch basin,
street storm water sewer inlet or drainage ditch, which could impede or
block the flow of water in any stream, watercourse, street storm water
sewer inlet or drainage ditch within the limits of the Township.
b. No person, firm or corporation shall throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, river or any other body of water in or adjacent to any park or
tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in
the pollution of such waters. This shall include but not be limited to fin
fish, shell fish, bait harvested in or transferred to the waters of the
Township of Neptune or property adjacent thereto, where the dumping
of said remains shall be caused to come to rest in or impact the waters
of said Township.
c. The remains of fin fish, shell fish or bait shall be permitted to be placed
in the Shark River if such remains are the result of recreational fishing
in the Shark River or from recreational fishing on a boat or vessel that
originates from the Shark River.
a. Persons in charge of or occupying, or being guest or passengers on
boats docked at or moored to land, docks, piers, wharves or areas
abutting the Shark River waterway, or sailing or operating on any
waters of the Shark River located in any portion of the Township, shall
observe all health and sanitary regulations of the Township and all
ordinances of the Township relating to the conduct of persons and
prohibiting acts contrary to public health, morals, safety or public
peace. All heads, toilets, toilet and washing facilities shall be locked,
closed and not used on any boat while within the confines of the
Township, whether docked or moored or traveling or standing still on
any portion of the Shark River within the boundary lines of the
Township.
§ 20-2.12 NEPTUNE CODE § 20-3.2
1:594
§ 20-3.3. Penalty. [Ord. No. 03-12 § 2; Ord. No. 2014-41]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, for each instance of violation, be fined an amount not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not more than two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days and/or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or any combination thereof, at the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
§ 20-4. HYDRAULIC FRACKING AND HYDRAULIC FRACKING BYPRODUCTS.
§ 20-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-54]
HYDRAULIC FRACKING — Shall mean the drilling technique of expanding
existing fractures or creating new fractures in rock by injecting water, often
under pressure, into or underneath the surface of the rock for purposes
including, but not limited to, well drilling and natural gas exploration and
production. The term "hydraulic fracking" shall include: "fracking",
"hydrofracking", "hydrofacturing", and other colloquial terms for this
drilling technique.
§ 20-4.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 2015-54]
§ 20-4.3. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-54]
Any person or persons, property owner or applicable lienholder who
violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days or imprisonment of a term not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or any combination of the aforesaid penalties for each offense.
Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. Fines assessed under this section shall be recoverable from the
b. No feces, excrement, tarnished, stained, sullied or putrescent material
or liquid shall be discharged or released or placed in the waterway or
on any land, docks, piers, wharves or areas abutting the waterway, or in
any portion of any pond, lake, stream, river or other body of water
located within the boundary lines of the Township.
a. Hydraulic fracking or similar well drilling and natural gas exploration
and production as defined in subsection 20-4.1 of this section; shall be
prohibited.
b. Wastewater, wastewater solids, sludge, drill cuttings, or other byproducts
resulting from hydraulic fracking for the purpose of natural
gas exploration or production may not be treated, discharged, disposed
of, applied to a roadway, or otherwise released into the environment, or
stored within or on any area within the municipal limits of the Township
of Neptune.
§ 20-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.3
1:595
owner and in some cases the lienholder and shall be a lien on the subject
property.
Chapter 21
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 21-1. WORD USAGE.
§ 21-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1441 § 2; Ord. No. 95-35 § I; Ord. No.
98-7 § 1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivation shall have the meanings given hereafter.
ASHES — Shall mean the residual from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible materials.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Shall mean any material, such as lumber, brick
(up to 2 x 2 x 2 in size), plaster, gutters (wood), roofing shingles (not
asbestos), and no more than one (1) door or window, or other substances
accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings,
construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures.
BUNDLES — Shall mean normally loose items such as newspaper,
cardboard and branches, shall be collected if organized into bundles of not
more than four (4) feet in length or fifty (50) pounds in weight. All bundles
shall be tied with heavy twine, rope, wire, etc. "Bundles" shall be organized
as to be conveniently handled by one (1) person.
CONTAINER — See Receptacle.
COORDINATOR — Shall mean the Solid Waste, Recycling and Clean
Community Coordinator for the Township of Neptune.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Township of Neptune, Road, Sanitation,
Recycling, Sewer, Building Maintenance, and/or Parks Departments.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — Shall mean the Director of Public Works
for the Township of Neptune.
GARBAGE — Shall mean all waste matters pertaining to the handling,
storing, preparing and disposal of meat, fish, fowl, birds and vegetables in
any form or forms, not described specifically. Fecal waste must be double
bagged.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean any waste or combination of wastes
which pose a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms
or the environment; any waste so designated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the New Jersey Commissioner of
Environmental Protection Department; any materials described in
Ordinance 1461 which is codified as Section 20-1 of these Revised General
Ordinances.
§ 20-4.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-1.1
1:596
HOSPITAL/RED BAG WASTE — Shall mean and include, but not be limited
to, all instruments, supplies, containers, bandages, tubing, gloves, etc. used
by health care practitioners and facilities as described in the New Jersey
Department of Health regulations and New Jersey Law, Section 306 of the
Manual of Standards for Hospital Facilities, and N.J.S.A. 2A:170-25.17.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean those materials and waste matters
connected with industrial establishments within the Township and
including, but not limited to, processed scrap metals, non-recyclable
packing materials, certain hazardous and dangerous materials such as
acids, paints, fluorescent tubes and more than two (2) forty-two (42) gallon
receptacles of non-recyclable glass and materials.
MULTIPLE DWELLING COMPLEX — Shall mean any building or structure
and land appurtenant thereto containing more than two (2) living units
(such as townhouses, condo-minimums and apartment houses).
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container constructed of such material and
in such a manner as to hold solid waste, recyclables, and garbage and
other such items without breaking or collapsing. "Receptacles" shall have
handles and covers so that contents therein are not exposed to the weather,
animals and vermin. A disposable plastic bag shall constitute a "receptacle"
except for the disposal of leaves if it is of sufficient strength to hold its
contents without breaking when collected. The "receptacle" shall be of such
a design and weight as to be able to be handled by one (1) person. No
"container" shall exceed forty-two (42) gallons in capacity nor weigh more
than fifty (50) pounds when loaded. Commercial garbage receptacles and
fifty-five (55) gallon drums are not acceptable as containers. Receptacles
which, in the opinion of the Department, are badly broken or fail to meet
the requirements of this chapter may be classified as "garbage" by the
Supervisor of the Department.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean all waste materials which have
the ability to be returned, through processing, to their former or alternate
use. Recyclable materials include, but are not limited to, the following:
ALUMINUM CANS — Shall mean and include such beverage or food
containers constructed or fabricated of aluminum or its alloys.
a.
BIMETAL CANS — Shall mean food and beverage containers which are
composed of an aluminum top and steel sides and bottom.
b.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLE — Shall mean and refer to the mixing
of glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, tin cans and pourable plastic
bottles in the same container.
c.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean and include Kraft
corrugated which has a brown liner made from Kraft paper and regular
corrugated which is gray or tan and is made from other types of paper
such as newspaper.
d.
§ 21-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1.1
1:597
SINGLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Shall mean any dwelling place occupied by
one (1) family.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean all garbage and waste normally generated by
the occupants of residential and other property, disposed of by private and/
or public collection and defined as "solid waste" by the New Jersey Solid
Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-3). Items classified as recyclable
shall be prohibited from being placed commingled with other materials. The
Township of Neptune is licensed by Solid Waste permit to collect three (3)
types of waste:
DEMOLITION MATERIAL — Shall mean and include asphalt, concrete,
wood waste, and another such waste material as associated with the
razing of any building, structure or any part thereof.
e.
GLASS — Shall mean and include all products made from silica or sand,
soda ash and lime, the product being transparent or translucent and
being used as packaging and commonly known as "glass".
f.
HI-GRADE PAPER — Shall mean and include white and off-white
stationery, photocopy and computer paper.
g.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean articles of paper such as, but not limited
to, magazines, catalogs, envelopes, mail, school papers, office papers,
real estate books, NCR paper, nonmetallic wrapping paper and
newspaper inserts.
h.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include papers of the type commonly
referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at periodic intervals, usually
daily or weekly. Expressly excluded, however, are all magazines or
other glossy surfaced periodicals and all other paper products, e.g.,
wrappings from food products.
i.
POURABLE PLASTICS — Shall mean and include all beverage
containers which are constructed of polyethylene teraphthalate or high
density polyethylene (food, drink and laundry containers).
j.
TIN CANS — Shall mean and include all food and beverage containers
which are constructed of steel sides, tops and bottoms.
k.
WASTE OIL — Shall mean and include used oil drained from
automobiles, motorcycles and lawnmowers, etc.
l.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean and include leaves, plant residue, and small
tree limbs.
m.
Type 10, Municipal Waste: Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
a.
Type 13, Bulky Waste: Large items of solid waste which because of
their size or weight require handling other than normally used for
municipal waste. Bulky waste includes, but is not limited to, such items
as demolition or construction material, appliances (excluding Freon),
and furniture.
b.
§ 21-1.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-1.1
1:598
STREET — Shall mean any right-of-way, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way which is:
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Neptune.
§ 21-2. LICENSING AND VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS; REPORTS.
§ 21-2.1. License Required for Collection. [Ord. No. 1441 § 3; Ord.
No. 95-35 § II]
No person or persons or corporation shall engage in the business of
collecting or transporting solid waste in the Township of Neptune without
first obtaining a license to do so from the Board of Health of said Township.
§ 21-2.2. License Expiration Date. [Ord. No. 1441 § 3; Ord. No.
95-35 § III]
The expiration date of licenses shall be September 30 next after the license
shall have been granted.
§ 21-2.3. Application for Licenses; Fees. [Ord. No. 1441 § 4; Ord. No.
95-35 § IV]
All applications for licenses to collect and/or transport garbage or refuse
shall be made in writing, addressed to the Board of Health of said Township.
The license fee shall be as promulgated by the Director of Public Works
and approved by the Township Committee under separate cover entitled
"Schedule of Fees" and paid per vehicle.
§ 21-2.4. Vehicle Requirements. [Ord. No. 1441 § 5; Ord. No. 95-35
§ V]
Every person or persons or corporation who shall transport any of the above
through or along any street in said Township, shall use a vehicle properly
constructed and furnished with a sufficient covering so as to prevent the
escape of the contents thereof.
Type 23, Vegetative Waste: Includes, but is not limited to, tree limbs,
branches, plants and flower residue, etc.
c.
a. An existing State, county or municipal roadway; or
Shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment and built in accordance with Township standards, and
which may be either public or private; or
b.
Shown on a plat filed with the office of the County Clerk of the County of
Monmouth prior to the creation of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment of the Township of Neptune;
c.
Not dedicated, in whole or in part, as a parking area or driveway which
provides access to any building or structures.
d.
§ 21-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2.5
1:599
§ 21-2.5. Collection Vehicles. [Ord. No. 1441 § 6; Ord. No. 95-35
§ VI]
No such vehicle shall stand in said streets or other public places at any time
except when being loaded.
§ 21-2.6. Solid Waste Hauler Reports. [Ord. No. 1441 § 7; Ord. No.
95-35 § VII]
All licensed solid waste haulers servicing residential, commercial and/or
institutional premises located within the boundaries of the Township of
Neptune shall be required to complete and submit tonnage reports of solid
waste types collected within said boundaries, excluding recyclables, on a
quarterly basis to the Board of Health of said Township.
§ 21-3. COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
§ 21-3.1. Scheduling of Collection. [Ord. No. 1441 § 8; Ord. No.
95-35 § VIII]
§ 21-3.2. Residential Garbage Collection. [Ord. No. 1441 § 9; Ord.
No. 95-35 § IX; Ord. No. 08-14 § 2]
Property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants
residing in residential dwellings who wish to have their solid waste disposed
of by the Township shall:
a. Collection sectors, together with the dates of collection, shall be
established by regulation of the Public Works Department. In the event
of emergent situations, and inclement weather such as ice and snow
storms, high winds, and/or heavy rains, the Department may suspend,
restrict or otherwise modify the provisions of this chapter. Should any
of the above situations occur, collection for the service which was
suspended will resume on the next regularly scheduled collection day.
b. The following shall constitute holidays on which collections will not be
made:
New Year's Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King's Birthday Columbus Day
Lincoln's Birthday Veterans' Day
Washington's Birthday Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Christmas Day
Independence Day
Please note that holidays falling on a Saturday shall be observed on
the preceding Friday and holidays falling on a Sunday shall be
observed on the following Monday.
§ 21-2.5 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-3.2
1:600
a. Place solid waste from their unit in appropriate containers, receptacles,
and/or bundles as specified at the street curb if one exists or adjacent to
but not on the street pavement if there is no curb. The number of
containers, on each collection day, shall not exceed six (6) per singleresidential
unit or six (6) per multiple-dwelling unit provided; however,
that there shall be allowed two (2) additional containers for each unit
over three (3) units. Businesses will be allowed no more than six (6)
receptacles on a single collection day. Each receptacle must not exceed
forty-two (42) gallons in size or fifty (50) pounds in weight. The number
of automated trash containers, on each collection day, shall not exceed
three (3) ninety-five (95) gallon automated containers per singleresidential
unit or multiple-dwelling unit.
b. Receptacles shall be placed as specified above beginning at dusk of the
night preceding the scheduled collection day. All containers with solid
waste and recyclables shall be placed at the curb by 6:00 a.m. of the
collection day. All solid waste or recycling placed at the curb after
collection has taken place will not be collected and must be removed
from the curb until the following collection day. Solid waste receptacles
shall be removed from the curb or pavement edge by 6:00 p.m. of the
evening of the collection day and secured within three (3) feet of a
permanent structure on the property. If the receptacle cannot be secure
in this manner, Public Works' written approval must be obtained.
c. Properties shall be permitted to place solid waste for collection
pursuant to this chapter, in accordance with a schedule approval by the
Township of Neptune and on file in the office of the Clerk.
d. The Department may permit additional receptacles to be placed,
provided that special prior arrangements have been made with the
Department.
e. No collection of solid waste shall be accomplished on property outside
of the dedicated public rights-of-way unless and until a release and a
hold harmless and indemnification agreement between the property
owner of record and the Township of Neptune shall be executed and in
force. The owner of record shall also execute a license to the Township
to permit access to the premises in question. Further, these premises
shall only be served after the Public Works Department has deemed the
roadway navigable and offers maneuverability to municipal equipment.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owners and their agents,
lessees, tenants or other occupants residing at said premises to
maintain the roadway and vegetative overgrowth. Failure to meet these
requirements will result in loss of services until such time that they are
met as determined by the Public Works Department.
f. The Public Works Department provides an eight (8) cubic yard
container for residents of the Township that desire to clean up their
properties. There is a fee associated with this service, and is
established with the Township Committee and charged as the per day
fee by the Department. The container is delivered to the resident
§ 21-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3.2
1:601
§ 21-3.3. Other Garbage Collection. [Ord. No. 1441 § 10; Ord. No.
1565 § 1; Ord. No. 95-35 § X); Ord. No. 07-59 §§ 1,2]
Solid waste disposal service shall be provided by the Township to other
property owners, their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants in
accordance with the following provisions:
requesting the same early in the morning and picked up the next
succeeding business day. A running list on a first come first served basis
is maintained and operated by the Department. The fee is raised from
time to time to keep up with escalating landfill tipping costs. Prohibited
materials, including but not limited to, tires, batteries, recycling
materials, asbestos shingles and all hazardous waste materials shall not
be placed in the canister.
a. Residential Charitable Institutions. Residential charitable institutions
will be served with vehicles to enter the institutional driveways to the
extent that they are navigable and offer maneuverability.
1. Containerized mechanically collected receptacles shall be required
at the sole discretion of the Public Works Department when the
volume or weight of the solid waste generated exceeds the limit of
containers or bundles imposed by the Township. In the event that
the number or the size of the containerized receptacles is found to
be insufficient, the Department in its sole discretion may require
additional containerized receptacles.
2. All containerized receptacles shall be provided by the institution at
their own cost. They also should meet and conform to specifications
determined by the Public Works Department to ensure that they
are compatible with Township's loading system.
3. All containerized receptacles shall be located on private property
within the dedicated area to be determined by the department in
order that the containerized receptacle can be promptly, efficiently
and safely emptied. The institutions shall not obstruct, block, or
impede, whether partially or totally, access to said containerized
receptacle. In the event that the containerized receptacle cannot
be emptied in the sole discretion of the Department, collection
service shall be refused, and any subsequent service shall be at the
expense of the institution.
4. No solid waste shall be removed unless the same is placed inside
the containerized receptacle.
5. In the event of a holiday where collection activities are suspended,
institutional collection activities shall return on the next regular
collection day without make-up collection.
b. Nonresidential Properties Including Commercial, Industrial,
Professional and Not-for-Profit Properties.
§ 21-3.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-3.3
1:602
1. Nonresidential property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants
or other occupants who wish to have their solid waste disposed by
the Township shall:
(a) Place all solid waste from their commercial or business
property in accordance with the provisions of subsection
21-3.2, Residential Garbage Collection, provided that the
maximum number of containers shall be three (3) ninety-five
(95) gallon automated containers.
(b) Provide containerized receptacles which shall be located on
private property in accordance with the regulation of the
Department.
2. Containerized receptacles shall be required at the sole discretion of
the Department when the volume or weight of the solid waste
generated from a nonresidential property exceeds the limit of
containers imposed by the Township. In the event that the number
or size of the containerized receptacles is found to be insufficient,
the Department in its sole discretion may require additional
containerized receptacles
3. All containerized receptacles shall be purchased, procedure or
provided by the property owner and his agents, lessees, tenants or
other occupants at their own cost. All containerized receptacles
shall meet and conform to specifications determined by the
Department of Public Works.
4. All containerized receptacles shall be located on private property
within a dedicated area determined by the Department in order
that the containerized receptacle can be promptly, efficiently, and
safely emptied. The property owner and his agents, lessees, tenants
or other occupants shall cause no obstruction to block, partially
block or impede the Department or its agent from access to the
containerized receptacle. In the event that the containerized
receptacle cannot be emptied in the sole discretion of the
Department, collection service shall be refused, and any
subsequent service shall be at the expense of the property owner
and his agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants.
5. The Township has the right to deny containerized trash collection
to any business in the event that the business has a private
contractor collecting their recyclable items.
c. Agreement for Nonresidential Containerized Refuse Collection. All
nonresidential property owners utilizing containerized receptacles shall
execute a Neptune Township Agreement for Commercial Refuse
Collection for a term of one (1) year and shall automatically renew
under the present terms subject to the Department providing a letter
addendum as to any future rate change.
§ 21-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3.3
1:603
§ 21-3.4. Prohibited Materials. [Ord. No. 1441 § 11; Ord. No. 95-35
§ XI; Ord. No. 98-7 § 2]
The following items are prohibited from being placed for collection:
d. Nonresidential Collection Fees. The Township Committee shall, by
Resolution, set fees collection of nonresidential containerized
receptacles by regulation. Fees not paid within thirty (30) days of
assessment by the Department shall constitute a lien against the
property which shall be collected via an action of law.
e. Governmental Properties (Federal, State, and/or County). No provisions
are to be made in this chapter for solid waste disposal services to these
agencies or facilities unless they are a subdivision of the Township of
Neptune.
a. Construction materials, including, but not limited to, dimensional
framing lumber, bulk or sheets of plywood, paneling, plasterboard,
sheetrock, etc. Over two (2) forty-two (42) gallon receptacles not over
fifty (50) pounds in weight.
b. Bulk roof shingles.
c. Hot ashes, stone macadam and blacktop. Concrete, concrete block over
the size of 2 x 2 x 2 may be brought to the Township yard. Earth and
dirt, not to exceed one (1) forty-two (42) gallon container, may be
brought to the Township yard.
d. Industrial waste, including, but not limited to, processed scrap
materials, packing materials and certain hazardous and dangerous
materials, such as acids, paints, fluorescent tubes, toxic materials and
highly volatile or explosive matter, either in liquid, gaseous or solid
form.
e. Bulk automotive parts, including, but not limited to, transmissions,
engines, rear ends, wheels, mufflers and other bulk items normally
produced in quantity by vehicular repair operations over twenty-five
(25) pounds and car parts with oil.
f. Animal waste, droppings and feces unless double bagged.
g. Surgical dressings, syringes and disposable hospital-type waste items,
also known as red bag waste.
h. New and used motor oils, petroleum based products, or antifreeze.
i. Hazardous waste classified pursuant to regulations issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), adopted
under authority of N.J.S.A. 13:1D-9 and 13:1E-6, as amended. Toxic
chemicals commonly known as "commercial hazardous waste" and
"household hazardous waste."
j. Dead animals.
§ 21-3.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-3.4
1:604
§ 21-3.5. Bulky Items from Residential Use. [Ord. No. 1441 § 12;
Ord. No. 95-35 § XII]
§ 21-3.6. Branches. [Ord. No. 1441 § 13; Ord. No. 95-35 § XIII; Ord.
No. 97-6 § 1]
A maximum of four (4) cubic yards of branches, bulky tree limbs and tree
trunks may be placed at the curb prior to the scheduled collection day as
specified in subsection 21-3.2b on the scheduled collection day in that zone.
§ 21-3.7. Leaves. [Ord. No. 1441 § 14; Ord. No. 95-35 § XIV; Ord. No.
97-6 § 2; Ord. No. 00-1 § 1; Ord. No. 13-34]
The Township will take leaves as follows:
k. Grass clippings.
a. Domestic or household bulky items, such as washing machines, dryers,
dishwashers, stoves, household appliances, and other household
furnishings, such as chairs, sofas, rugs, padding, etc., shall be placed at
the curb for collection as specified by subsection 21-3.2b and in
accordance with the published collection schedule of the Township of
Neptune. No bulky item shall be of weight or be of a size greater than
four (4) cubic yards such that it can not be handled by two (2) persons.
b. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to leave outside of any building or dwelling,
in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator, freezer or dishwasher or any other item
of any kind which has an airtight door, with or without lock, without
first removing said airtight door.
c. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to conduct a repair or salvage operation and
use the services of the Township for solid waste collection.
d. All Freon appliances, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, air
conditioners, freezers and dehumidifiers, will be collected provided that
twenty ($20.00) dollars is paid in advance and the pickup is scheduled
at the Public Works Department.
e. The Public Works Department may permit additional bulky items to be
placed, providing that special prior arrangements have been made with
the department.
a. Loose Leaf Pickup. Curbside leaf pickup season shall be from the third
Monday of October to December 31. During this time, leaves may be
placed in neat piles at the curb or pavement edge for collection,
provided that the piles do not constitute a traffic hazard. In the Ocean
Grove Historic District, residents are permitted and encouraged to
place leaves in large plastic or paper bags at the curb. Private
contractors hired by residents to collect leaves shall be permitted to
§ 21-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3.7
1:605
§ 21-3.8. Automated Trash/Recycling Containers.49 [Ord. No. 08-14
§ 1; Ord. No. 2014-33 § 1]
The Township of Neptune has provided each housing unit, located in the
portion of the Township that receives automated trash and recycling
collection, with an automated trash container and an automated recycling
container. These containers are the property of the Township of Neptune
and must remain with the issued address. Additional cans which are
purchased at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the housing unit
are the property of the purchaser. At the time of sale, at least one trash
container and one recycling container must remain with the housing unit.
This shall be verified by the Code Enforcement Department Certificate
of Inspection process. The Township of Neptune will replace a stolen or
damaged automated container provided that all provisions of this section
concerning the storage and placement of trash and recycling containers
have been followed.
§ 21-4. FEES AND COSTS.
§ 21-4.1. Fees for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 1441 § 16; Ord. No.
95-35 § XVI]
Property owners of record shall be responsible for the placement of
materials for collection as specified herein. The Township Committee shall
be empowered to fix fees by regulation for the removal of materials not
placed in accordance with the terms of this chapter which shall be the
responsibility of the property owner of record. As an alternative to removal,
the Township may, in its sole discretion, issue a warning. In the event the
violation still exists for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the warning
is issued, a final warning is issued. If after twenty-four (24) hours, the
violation is not abated, the parties will be issued a summons.
place said leaves at the curbside of the residence from where the
leaves are collected in conformance with any and all regulations of
this section. Residents placing leaves for collection after said special
leaf collection of the third Monday of October to December 31 shall
be required to contain the leaves in reusable receptacles for their
next regularly scheduled yard waste collection. During this period, it
is permissible to place leaves with other yard waste in a reusable
container.
b. Residential Leaf Drop-Off. Leaves may be brought to the Township yard
twelve (12) months a year. All bags or containers must be emptied in the
leaf pile and taken away by the resident.
49.Editor's Note: Former subsection 21-3.8, Grass Clippings, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1441, 95-35, and 97-6 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 98-7.
§ 21-3.7 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-4.2
1:606
§ 21-4.2. Township Held Harmless. [Ord. No. 1441 § 17; Ord. No.
95-35 § XVII]
Property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants who
place materials not in accordance with this chapter shall hold harmless and
indemnify for any or all losses the Township of Neptune, its employees and
agents for all costs, direct and indirect, which are attributable, in the sole
discretion of the Township, for materials which were placed for collection in
violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 21-4.3. Other Collection Fees. [Ord. No. 1441 § 18; Ord. No. 95-35
§ XVIII]
A schedule of fees shall be established by the Township Committee for
services provided under subsection 21-3.3, Other Garbage Collection. The
approved fees may be charged for household containers and/or
containerized receptacles, including but not limited to normal service, and
re-collection if collection activities are unable to be performed due to
violation of this chapter (see Fee schedule).
§ 21-4.4. Collection of Assessed Fees. [Ord. No. 1441 § 19; Ord. No.
95-35 § XIX]
Fees not paid within thirty (30) days of assessment by the Department shall
constitute a lien against the property which shall be collected via an action
of law, and services shall cease until full restitution has occurred.
§ 21-5. ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
§ 21-5.1. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1441 § 20; Ord. No. 95-35 § XX;
Ord. No. 09-41 § 1]
This chapter shall be enforced in Municipal Court upon a complaint signed
by a member of the Monmouth County Solid Waste Enforcement Team,
a designated representative of the Monmouth County Board of Health,
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Public Works Department, the
Code Enforcement Department, or the Police Department of the Township
of Neptune. Further, once a complaint has been signed and issued, the
responsibility for disposal of solid waste shall lie with the violator, and/or
shall be processed as a lien against the property in accordance with law.
§ 21-5.2. Exceptions for the Physically Handicapped. [Ord. No. 1441
§ 21; Ord. No. 95-35 § XXI]
The Public Works Department may issue regulations exempting from total
or partial compliance those residential properties whose sole occupant or
occupants are unable to meet the requirements of this chapter by reason of
a physical disability.
§ 21-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5.3
1:607
§ 21-5.3. Disposal of Solid Waste. [Ord. No. 1441 § 22; Ord. No.
95-35 § XXII]
The Public Works Department shall forthwith transmit all solid waste
collected pursuant to this chapter to lawfully licensed facilities designated
by the County of Monmouth in the Monmouth County Solid Waste Plan and/
or the State of New Jersey. If permitted by said Solid Waste Plan and if
said users and markets exist on a positive-cost-benefit-ratio basis to the
municipality, then the Township may elect to dispose of said solid waste or a
portion thereof in an alternative manner pursuant to statute and regulation.
§ 21-5.4. Ownership. [Ord. No. 1441 § 23; Ord. No. 95-35 § XXIII]
The Township of Neptune shall assume ownership of items or materials
classified as recyclable upon collection by the Township or upon delivery to
a municipal drop-off center specified herein.
§ 21-5.5. Appointment and Duties of Municipal Recycling
Coordinator. [Ord. No. 1441 § 24; Ord. No. 95-35 § XXIV; Ord. No.
09-41 § 1]
The Township Committee shall appoint a Municipal Recycling Coordinator
selected from Public Works personnel who shall be required to act as liaison
with Monmouth County and New Jersey Solid Waste Officials, keep records,
perform the annual Tonnage Grant application process, prepare reports as
required by State or County agencies or the Municipal Governing Body
regarding local solid waste and recycling programs, review performance
of local schools and municipal agencies in conducting recycling activities,
period review of local residential and business recycling practices and
compliance.
§ 21-6. RECYCLING PROGRAM.50
§ 21-6.1. Designation of Recyclable Materials and Services. [Ord.
No. 1441 § 25; Ord. No. 95-35 § XXV; Ord. No. 98-7 § 4; Ord. No.
09-41 § 2]
a. Upon classification of an item or material, presently or prospectively a
part of commingled solid waste flow, as recyclable, residential and
other property owners, except for the United States Government and
the State of New Jersey, shall cause themselves or their agents, lessees,
tenants or their occupants to separate said item or materials separately
for collection, whether said collection is performed by a municipal
agency or private contractor.
b. On and after the date fixed in the regulations and in accordance with
the terms thereof, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
lessors, renters or occupants of residential dwellings and commercial,
50.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning recycling, refer to Section 12-2
Community Clean-Up; Littering.
§ 21-5.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-6.1
1:608
industrial and institutional properties in the Township of Neptune to
separate recyclable materials from all other solid waste generated.
Commercial, industrial and institutional properties that are not
serviced by the Township shall be required to negotiate with their
private hauler/contractor in accordance with the provisions of the
Monmouth County District Recycling Plan.
c. All waste containers must be labeled as either "trash" or "recycling"
containers wherever appropriate. All apartment and other multi-family
complexes, schools, businesses and institutions shall provide separate
and clearly marked containers for use of residents, students,
employees, customers or other visitors, for trash and the types of
recyclables as indicated in subsection 21-6.1d1 through 7.
d. At the present time, the waste materials to be recycled by New Jersey
State mandate and designated as recyclable by the Township of
Neptune are:
1. Aluminum cans.
2. Tine and bimetal cans.
3. Glass bottles and jars.
4. Plastic pourable containers (#1 and #2).
5. Newspapers.
6. Corrugated cardboard.
7. Mixed paper (including chipboard, office paper, stationery
envelopes, magazines and colored sheets in newspapers).
8. Yard waste—branches, vegetative waste.
9. Leaves—(must be separate from yard waste).
10. Tree parts (stumps and limbs over 3" inches in diameter).
11. Concrete.
12. Asphalt.
13. Bulk ferrous and nonferrous scrap metal (any amount over 5
pounds in weight or bigger than one cubic foot).
14. Automotive batteries.
15. Used motor oil.
16. Computers, monitors and televisions (effective January 1, 2011).
NOTE: Additional recyclable materials shall be added in
accordance with the time line of the New Jersey Source Separation
and Recycling Act: S-1478/A-1781 and the Monmouth County
§ 21-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6.1
1:609
§ 21-6.2. Municipal Drop-Off Center. [Ord. No. 1441 § 26; Ord. No.
95-35 § XXVI; Ord. No. 98-7 § 5; Ord. No. 09-41 § 2]
The Township of Neptune will operate a Municipal Drop-Off Center and be
open to the public at hours prescribed in the Neptune Township Municipal
Calendar disseminated by the Department of Public Works. Only residents
with a valid Neptune Township Driver's License will be allowed to utilize the
Municipal Drop-Off Center.
Small businesses operating in Neptune Township and in possession of a
valid Neptune Township Mercantile License will be permitted to utilize the
Drop-Off Center for commingled paper, cardboard, junk mail, telephone
books, cans, bottles and electronics only.
District Recycling Plan, in order that the Township meet the volume
requirements of said laws. The Public Works Department shall
issue further regulations classifying recyclables and providing for
the method and manner of collection. Said classification shall be
dependent upon the existence of lawful disposal, users or markets
for said recyclables.
a. The following items are accepted at the Municipal Drop-Off Center:
Aluminum cans.
Glass bottles and jars.
Newspaper — paper of the type commonly known as newsprint.
Pourable plastics — plastic containers, such as food, drink, and laundry.
Telephone books.
Cardboard — type used to make cardboard boxes, cartons, and Kraft
paper.
Commingled — includes glass bottles, tin, and aluminum cans.
Mixed paper — magazines, junk mail, colored sections of the
newspaper, colored cardboard (almost all paper products except
newspaper and brown cardboard).
Yard waste — leaves and plant materials (must not be in plastic bags,
no grass clippings).
Metal — all metal products except for refrigerators, air conditioners,
dehumidifiers, products with Freon.
Brush and branches.
Bulk items — couches, chairs, furniture, rugs.
Demolition and construction material (maximum of two (2) forty-two
(42) gallon containers.
§ 21-6.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-6.2
1:610
§ 21-6.3. Disposal of Recyclable Items. [Ord. No. 09-41 § 2]
Materials classified as recyclable shall only be disposed of by:
Concrete — up to 2 x 2 x 2 piece (combined).
Electronics (computers, monitors and televisions).
Latex paint in non-leaking paint cans.
b. The following items will be accepted at the Drop-Off Center only if a
ticket is purchased at the Department of Public Works Office, 2201
Heck Avenue, Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., at an
amount established in the schedule of fees by the Township Committee:
Tires.
Freon products.
c. The following items are prohibited at the Drop-Off Center:
Demolition, construction materials and concrete in excess of amount
permitted in subsection 21-6.2a.
Roof shingles.
Oil.
Household garbage.
Car batteries and car parts with oil.
Asphalt.
Asbestos shingles.
Oil paint cans.
Hazardous waste as defined in Section 21-1.
Prohibited materials that are required to be recycled but are prohibited
at the Drop-Off Center can be disposed of at the Monmouth County
Reclamation center, Shafto Road, Tinton Falls 732-922-8686 or call the
Monmouth County Health Department at 732-922-4788.
a. Placing them for collection by the municipality pursuant to the terms of
this chapter and regulations issued by the Public Works Department in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the Neptune Township
Municipal Calendar.
b. Disposing of, giving, donating or selling them or permitting them to be
collected by any person, partner-ship or corporation, whether operating
for profit or not, provided that the material shall:
1. Be recycled.
§ 21-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6.3
1:611
§ 21-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 21-7.1. Separate Offenses. [Ord. No. 1441 § 28; Ord. No. 95-35
§ XXVIII]
Each such collection in violation of this chapter and each day a violation or
neglect is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and be punishable as such.
§ 21-7.2. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1441 § 28; Ord. No. 95-35 § XXVIIIb]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or directive promulgated
pursuant thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not
to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or by up to ninety (90) days in
jail, or both. If permitted by general law, a convicted person may be ordered
to perform community service.
§ 21-8. RENTAL OF DUMPSTER CONTAINERS.
§ 21-8.1. Application for Use; Monthly Charge; Failure to Pay. [Ord.
No. 608 §§ 1-4; New]
2. Be collected from a point other than the curbside in districts with
municipal collection of recyclable items or materials or at a
municipal drop-off center, except with the permission of the
Township of Neptune.
3. Be reported to the municipality by both the generator and the
receiver of the recyclable items or materials in accordance with
regulations of the Public Works Department.
c. Recycling documentation in the form of weight slips or a signed
business form letter shall be required from all those who market,
collect, haul and/or generate recyclable materials, whether they be
residential, commercial and/or institutional premises located within the
boundaries of the Township of Neptune, as required by the Monmouth
County District Recycling Plan. These records and reports shall be
submitted to the Neptune Township Recycling Coordinator on a
quarterly basis, specifically, not later than close of business January 1,
April 1, July 1 and October 1 of a given year.
d. Used Tires. Depending upon the availability of markets or other
disposal means for used tires, the Department may, at its discretion,
provide for the disposal of used tires by the residents. The Township
Committee shall be empowered to fix fees by regulation for the disposal
of used tires; and the disposal method shall be established by regulation
of the Department.
a. Every person, firm or corporation desiring to use a dumpster container
for garbage purposes may make application to the Township Clerk.
§ 21-6.3 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-8.1
1:612
§ 21-9. PUBLIC WASTE RECEPTACLES.
§ 21-9.1. Placement of Receptacles. [Ord. No. 96-5 § 2]
The Township reserves the right to place waste receptacles in commercial
and recreational areas in which Type 10 waste is generated by the purchase
of merchandise or the consumption of food.
§ 21-9.2. Household; Business Trash Prohibited. [Ord. No. 96-5 § 2]
It shall be prohibited for any person to use a Public Waste Receptacle for
the disposal of any amount or type of trash more than what can be carried
on one's person without the aid of a container, box or bag. It shall be
prohibited for any individual or business to transport any amount or type of
waste or recyclable material to any other location or public trash receptacle
which would otherwise be collected during scheduled collection days for
residential and/or other garbage collection. It is the intent of this section to
prohibit the placement of household and/or business trash into public trash
receptacles.
§ 21-9.3. Violations. [Ord. No. 96-5 § 2]
Any violation of this section shall be subject to the provisions of Section
21-7, Violations and Penalties.
§ 21-10. REFUSE CONTAINERS AND DUMPSTERS—COVERED AND
FREE FROM LEAKAGE.
§ 21-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 11-10]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Neptune and/or the
waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
There shall be paid to the Township a charge as established by
resolution for each container owned and provided by the Township.
b. Payments shall be made in advance to the Public Works Department.
c. In the event of failure to pay such charge the Township, without notice,
will discontinue the use of the containers.
d. The Township may maintain an action at law to recover any monies due
for the use of such containers and the failure to pay such charges.
§ 21-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-10.2
1:613
§ 21-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-10]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Neptune or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 21-10.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 11-10]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Neptune.
§ 21-10.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 11-10]
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
§ 21-10.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 21-10.4
1:614
§ 21-10.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 11-10]
This section shall be enforced by the Township Police Department or Code
Enforcement of the Township of Neptune.
§ 21-10.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 11-10]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed in accordance with Chapter
1, Section 1-5 General Penalty of the General Code of the Township of
Neptune.
Chapter 22
CABLE TELEVISION
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 1005 and 1627]
§ 22-1. PREAMBLE. [Ord. No. 04-47 Preamble]
The governing body of the Township of Neptune (hereinafter referred to
as the "Township") determined that Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc.,
(hereinafter referred to as "the Company" or "Cablevision") had the
technical competence and general fitness to operate a cable television
system in the Township, and by prior ordinance granted its municipal
consent for Cablevision to obtain a non-exclusive franchise for the
placement of facilities and the establishment of a cable television system in
the Township.
By application for renewal consent filed with the Township and the Office
of Cable Television on or about July 26, 2002, Cablevision has sought a
renewal of the franchise.
The Township having held public hearings has made due inquiry to review
Cablevision's performance under the franchise, and to identify the
Township's future cable-related needs and interests and has concluded
that Cablevision has substantially complied with its obligations under the
franchise and has committed to certain undertakings responsive to the
Township's future cable-related needs and interests.
The governing body of the Township has accordingly concluded that the
consent should be renewed subject to the requirements set forth below;
and that, provided Cablevision's proposal for renewal embodies the
commitments set forth below, the Township's municipal consent to the
renewal of the franchise should be given.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 21-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:615
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 1]
For the purpose of this chapter the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean that statute of the State of
New Jersey relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Shall mean Cablevision's application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's
office and is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof,
except as modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter.
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New
Jersey or its successor agency.
COMPANY — Shall mean Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. ("Cablevision") the
grantee of rights under this chapter.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — Shall mean that Federal statute relating to cable
communications commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, or as those statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Shall mean those Federal regulations relating
to cable television services, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the
extent applicable, any other Federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including, but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. Section
76.3), or as such regulations may be amended.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Shall mean those regulations of the State of
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television. N.J.A.C.
14:17-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be
amended.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the governing body of the Township of Neptune
in the County of Monmouth, and the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 2]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 22-2 NEPTUNE CODE § 22-4
1:616
§ 22-4. GRANT OF AUTHORITY. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 3]
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its non-exclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Township of a cable television system, and for the provision of any
communication service over the such system as may be authorized by
Federal or State regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant
to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ 22-5. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 4]
The consent granted herein shall be non-exclusive and shall be for a term of
fifteen (15) years from the date of issuance of a Certificate of Approval by
the Board.
§ 22-6. EXPIRATION AND SUBSEQUENT RENEWAL. [Ord. No.
04-47 § 5]
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a Municipal consent and Certificate of Approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable State and Federal rules
and regulations. The Company shall also petition the Board for approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by
the Township and the Board relative to the renewal of the consent.
§ 22-7. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 6]
The consent granted under this chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 22-8. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 7]
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of
the franchise territory at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard
installation.
§ 22-9. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 8]
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
primary service area to those residences within the franchise territory.
Cablevision shall extend service to all others pursuant to its Line Extension
Policy set forth as Appendix G to the application for municipal consent.
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-10
1:617
§ 22-10. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 9]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to two (2%) percent of the actual gross revenues received from all
recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers
for its cable television reception services in the Township. In the event
applicable law hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected,
but does not fix the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall
negotiate in good faith with respect to the amount thereof.
§ 22-11. FREE SERVICE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 10]
§ 22-12. CONSTRUCTION/SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No.
04-47 § 11]
a. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one (1)
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all State or locally accredited elementary and secondary public schools
and all municipal public libraries, as well as all municipally owned
buildings located within the Township that are used for municipal
governmental purposes.
b. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one (1)
high-speed cable modem and monthly Internet access service,
including a standard installation service to one (1) municipally owned
building, all State or locally accredited public schools, elementary and
secondary private schools and all municipal public libraries, subject to
the terms, conditions and use policies of the Company.
a. Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable State and Federal law. The
Company shall be subject to the following additional construction
requirements with respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in
the Township:
1. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any
pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces,
the Company shall at its sole expense restore and replace such
disturbances in as good a condition as existed prior to the
commencement of said work.
2. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality
shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or
place, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Township shall
remove or relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
3. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit
issued by the Township, the Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving
or erection of buildings or for the performance of other work. The
§ 22-10 NEPTUNE CODE § 22-12
1:618
§ 22-13. TECHNICAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS. [Ord.
No. 04-47 § 12]
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable Federal and State laws,
rules and regulations.
§ 22-14. LOCAL OFFICE OR AGENT. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 13]
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays. Said office
shall also be open one (1) week day evening or one (1) weekend day for not
less than three (3) hours.
§ 22-15. DESIGNATION OF COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 04-47
§ 14; Ord. No. 07-31 § 1]
The Board of Public Utilities, Office of Cable Television, is hereby
designated as the complaint officer for the Township pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All complaints shall be reviewed and
processed substantially similar to the process set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26.
§ 22-16. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 15]
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars for bodily injury or
death to one (1) person, and one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for bodily
injury or death resulting from any one (1) accident or occurrence stemming
from or arising out of the Company's exercise of its rights hereunder.
expense of any such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid
in advance to the Company by the person requesting the same.
In such cases, the Company shall be given not less than fourteen
(14) days prior written notice in order to arrange for the changes
required.
4. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent,
the Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the
Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with the wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the
Company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 22-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-17
1:619
§ 22-17. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 16]
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this Agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars. Such bond shall be to insure
the faithful performance of its obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ 22-18. RATES. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 17]
§ 22-19. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 18]
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages pursuant to State and Federal requirements. The Company shall
in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Township or any other
person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality is unable
to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated herein. The
Township shall utilize the State-approved procedures for such emergency
uses.
§ 22-20. TECHNOLOGICALLY CURRENT. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 19]
Cablevision agrees that the capabilities of the cable system shall be
maintained technologically current throughout the duration of the
franchise, as compared with other communities, of similar size, served
a. The rates of the Company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by Federal and State law.
b. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
ten (10%) percent off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of
cable television reception service to any person sixty-two (62) years of
age or older who subscribes to the Company's cable television service,
subject to the following:
1. Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one (1) person in the
same household who is less than sixty-two (62) years of age; and,
2. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and,
3. The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service, and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offered by the Company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services, and
4. Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
§ 22-17 NEPTUNE CODE § 22-20
1:620
by the Company, to the extent economically reasonable and commercially
practicable.
§ 22-21. EQUITABLE TERMS. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 20]
In the event that another multi-channel video program provider's service
within the Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to
Cablevision, the Company shall have the right to request from the Township
lawful amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create
the unfair competitive situation. Should the Company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good-faith
appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the Company of
such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an agreement on
such terms, the Township agrees to support the Company's petition to the
Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47
and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate amendments
to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the Company shall have
the right to petition the Board directly for such amendments in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.AC. 14:17-6.7; provided, however, the
Township shall be under no obligation to support Cablevision's request for
such relief from the Board.
Cablevision represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the Township has
not yet risen to the level of creating a significant competitive disadvantage
sufficient to enable the Company to seek relief under this section.
§ 22-22. REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 21]
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this chapter, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six (6) months after such expiration, termination
or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other Federal or State certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ 22-23. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. No. 04-47 § 22]
a. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
b. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
§ 22-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-23
1:621
§ 22-24. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 23]
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the Company except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this chapter, or to the extent that
they conflict with State or Federal law.
§ 22-25. CONSISTENCY WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. [Ord. No. 04-47
§ 24]
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal, State and local laws.
§ 22-26. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 25]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ 22-27. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 04-47 § 26]
This chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a Certificate of Approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
event that the Company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the Company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
c. In consideration for the rights granted in this chapter, the Company
shall provide the Township with a one-time grant of one hundred
thousand ($100,000.00) dollars, which may be used by the Township for
any cable and/or other telecommunications related purpose as the
Township, in its discretion, may deem appropriate.
d. Cablevision shall provide one (1) access return line at a building to be
determined by the Township and located within the municipality,
including the modulator and associated signal transmission equipment
(but excluding cameras, play back devices and other production related
equipment) necessary to allow for upstream programming from this
location by the Township for the production of noncommercial public,
educational and governmental access programming on the cable
system.
§ 22-23 NEPTUNE CODE § 22-27
1:622
Chapter 23
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 23-1. REGULATIONS FOR PARKS AND PLAYFIELDS.
§ 23-1.1. Locations Designated. [Ord. No. 1096 § 1; Ord. No. 1355
§ 2; Ord. No. 1511 § 1; Ord. No. 07-29 § 1; Ord. No. 11-41; Ord. No.
13-06 § 2]
The following locations within the Township are designated as playfields
and parks for recreational activities as hereinafter set forth:
§ 23-1.2. Permitting and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1096 § 2; Ord. No.
1355 § 3; Ord. No. 06-20 § 1; Ord. No. 12-03]
The playfields and appropriate field permitting shall be under the
supervision of the Recreation Director for the Township, hereinafter
referred to as Director.
a. Shark River Hills Field, Beverly Way.
b. Jumping Brook Field, Jumping Brook Road.
c. Anthony C. Loffredo Fields, West Bangs Avenue.
d. Bert Willis Fields, Old Corlies Avenue.
e. Sunshine Village Park, Monmouth Avenue.
f. Liberty Park Mini Park, Monroe Avenue.
g. Midtown Commons Park, West Lake Avenue.
h. West Grove Mini Park, Division Street.
i. Shark River Hills Memorial Park & Playground.
j. Pittenger Place Mini Park, Pittenger Place.
k. Mini Park at Trident, Hillview, Bangs Avenue.
l. Mini Park in Rear at Hillview Drive and Hill Drive.
m. Central Avenue Mini Playground, Ocean Grove.
n. (Reserved)
o. Riverside Park, South Riverside Drive.
p. Bradley Park, Ridge Avenue.
In addition to the locations set forth herein, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to any and all open space owned by the Township including all areas
identified in the Township's Roster of Open Space Inventory.
§ 22-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-1.2
1:623
§ 23-1.3. Posting of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1096 § 3; Ord.
No. 1355 § 4]
The rules and regulations set forth in subsection 23-1.2 shall be posted at
each field.
§ 23-1.4. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 1096 § 4; New]
Any person, firm or corporation charged with violating any provision of
this chapter, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, shall be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each violation of any provision of
this chapter and each day that this chapter is violated, shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 23-1.5. Use of Sunshine Village Park, Jumping Brook Fields and
Anthony C. Loffredo Fields. [Ord. No. 06-20 § 1; Ord. No. 12-03]
The scheduling and field use permitting of Sunshine Village Park, Jumping
Brook Fields and Anthony C. Loffredo Fields shall be through the Recreation
Department and shall be coordinated with the schedules of the appropriate
youth sports organization under contract with the Township. These
organizations include the Neptune Soccer Association, Neptune Little
League and Neptune Fliers Youth Football & Cheer.
§ 23-2. USE OF PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
a. Organized play is approved by permit only through the Recreation
Office. Pick-up play is allowed, preferably on the designated Open Play
Field. Open/Closed signs indicating field conditions/maintenance must
also be observed. Mini parks will be open for all from sunrise to sunset.
b. No motorized or non-motorized vehicle of any description shall be
permitted upon any portion of the playfields unless authorized in
writing by the Director.
c. No motor vehicle shall be parked in the area of the playfields except at
those places designated for parking.
d. No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted at any time within the
perimeter of the Shark River Hills Field and Jumping Brook Field.
e. No food or beverage shall be sold at the playfields without first
obtaining a mercantile license from the Township.
f. No recreational activity shall be permitted on Sundays on fields 1, 2,
and 3 located at the Jumping Brook Fields. No persons shall be allowed
at playfields and parks after sunset until the sunrise following.
§ 23-1.2 NEPTUNE CODE § 23-2.1
1:624
§ 23-2.1. Conduct. [Ord. No. 1688 § 1; Ord. No. 98-12 § 1; Ord. No.
13-06 § 1]
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person
shall:
a. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving materials, public utilities or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards (whether temporary or permanent), monuments,
stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever,
either real or personal.
b. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition.
c. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs, plants or other
wood or, materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, or other
means.
d. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind (whether
permanent or temporary) or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued
hereunder.
e. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure
the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise
disturb grassed areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
f. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
g. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
h. Hurt, molest, kill, wound, trap, abuse, shoot, pursue or throw objects at,
or have in his/her possession any animal, reptile or bird found within
any park, nor shall their habitats be disturbed, except where
specifically designated and permitted. No person shall purchase, sell,
accept or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or eggs except as
may be specifically provided for and permitted.
i. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in any
park or any tributary stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result
in the pollution of said waters.
§ 23-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2.1
1:625
j. Have brought in, dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, garbage, refuse, or organic or inorganic
solid liquid waste.
k. Drive or park any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by Township of Neptune.
l. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking areas
or elsewhere in the park areas. No motor vehicle shall be parked in said
park areas from one half hour after sunset until sunrise, except as
otherwise permitted.
m. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
n. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees, or in
any place or position where a person may trip over or be injured by it.
o. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in any park, except in
such waters and at such places as may be specifically designated for
such activities.
p. Bring into or operate any boat, raft, or other watercraft, whether motor
powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for
boating by Township of Neptune. Such activity shall be in accordance
with applicable regulations as are now or will hereafter be adopted.
q. Fish in any area were bathing is permitted.
r. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. No
person shall carry or possess firearms of any description, spring-guns,
bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons or devices
potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human safety, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any
kind of trapping device, except as may be specifically permitted.
s. Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces together with
tables and benches follows the generally accepted rule of "first come,
first served."
t. Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or structures
therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other
persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
u. Set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing
hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, campwagon,
or the like except in those areas designated by Township of
Neptune for those purposes.
§ 23-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 23-2.1
1:626
v. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails, where permitted.
Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden
with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor
shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
w. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink same at any time except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated and permitted
by Township of Neptune.
x. Have in his/her possession, set or otherwise cause to explode,
discharge, or burn, any fireworks, firecrackers, or explosives or
flammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such
areas from lands or highways adjacent thereto.
y. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by Township of Neptune signs bearing the words
"Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area". All domestic animals in
those areas where such animals are permitted shall be adequately
restrained at all times.
z. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private
except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated
and permitted by Township of Neptune.
aa. Build, or attempt to build, a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by Township of Neptune. No person
shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, paper or other flammable material within
any park or on any highways, roads, or streets abutting or contiguous
thereto.
bb. Gamble, participate in, or abet any game of chance except in such areas
and under such regulations as may be designated by Township of
Neptune.
cc. Go onto the ice on any waters except such areas as are designated as
skating fields, and provided a safety signal is displayed.
dd. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
ee. Expose, or offer for sale, any article or thing, nor place any stand, cart,
or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or
thing. Exception is made for any permitted or licensed concessionaire
acting by and under the authority and regulation of Township of
Neptune.
ff. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or
inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect, or cause to be erected,
any sign on any park lands or roads in any park.
gg. Golf or engage in any activity that creates divots or damage to the
surface of any ball field, park or recreational area.
§ 23-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2.1
1:627
§ 23-2.2. Public Use and Availability of Park and Recreation Areas.
[Ord. No. 1688 § 2]
§ 23-2.3. Permits. [Ord. No. 1688 § 3]
Permits for special events/activities in parks must be obtained by
application to Township of Neptune in accordance with the following
procedures:
hh. Smoke, chew, or possess lighted cigarettes, pipes, cigars, electronic
cigarettes, or any other type of tobacco product.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information and shall be determined from time to time by
resolution of Township of Neptune.
b. No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex, or handicap be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination in, any park
facility, program, or activity.
c. Discrimination on the basis of residence, including preferential
reservation, membership, or annual permit systems is prohibited except
to the extent that reasonable differences in admission and other fees
may be maintained on the basis of residence in any park.
a. Standards for issuance of a use permit by Township of Neptune shall
include the following findings:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with, or detract from, the general public enjoyment of the
park.
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with, or detract from, the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and reaction.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
b. Within ten (10) days after the receipt of an application for permit,
Township of Neptune shall apprise an applicant in writing of its reasons
for refusing a permit, and provide for an appeal process.
c. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
§ 23-2.1 NEPTUNE CODE § 23-2.3
1:628
§ 23-2.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1688 § 4]
Chapter 24
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
§ 24-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 271 §§ 1, 5]
As used in this chapter:
TRAILERS, CAMP CARS OR TRAILER COACHES OR RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES — Shall mean any vehicle, whether self-propelled or otherwise,
used or intended for use as a conveyance upon streets, and so designed,
constructed or reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such
manner as to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place
d. The person(s) to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss,
damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person(s) to whom such permit shall have been
issued. The Township of Neptune shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising as a result of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
Township of Neptune prior to the commencement of any activity or
issuance of any permit.
e. Revocation. The Township of Neptune shall have the authority to revoke
a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon
good cause shown.
a. The Township of Neptune or its designated agents shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this section.
b. The Township of Neptune or its designated agents shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person(s) acting in violation of
this section.
c. The Township of Neptune or the designated agents shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, or device in the
park, or used, in violation of this section.
d. This section shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the
municipality.
e. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park
property and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars and in default of payment thereof may be sentenced
to imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding thirty (30)
days.
§ 23-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1
1:629
for one (1) or more persons, or as living and business quarters combined,
and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so as to be
integral with or portable by such trailer, camp car or trailer coach.
TRAILER CAMP — Shall mean any land and premises where the owner,
lessee, or person, firm or corporation having control thereof, shall offer
parking sites by lease, contract, agreement, or otherwise, for trailers, camp
cars or trailer coaches.
§ 24-2. REGULATIONS.
§ 24-2.1. Use or Occupancy Prohibited. [Ord. No. 271 § 3; Ord. No.
362 § 1]
No person shall use or occupy any trailer, camp car or trailer coach on the
premises of any occupied building, on any lot which is not a part of the
premises of any occupied building.
§ 24-3. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 271 § 10]
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulations.
§ 24-4. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 271 § 11; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. Each day this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 25
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 25-1. FEES FOR BOARD OF HEALTH CERTIFICATIONS AND
INSPECTIONS.
§ 25-1.1. Fees Established. [Ord. No. 1190 A. I]
The fees for the following are fixed for the purpose of regulating and
controlling applications and certifications to be made and/or issued by the
Township Board of Health.
§ 24-1 NEPTUNE CODE § 25-1.2
1:630
§ 25-1.2. Vital Statistics. [Ord. No. 1190 § 1; Ord. No. 1473 § 1; Ord.
No. 00-10 § 1; Ord. No. 04-08 § 1; Ord. No. 04-28; Ord. No. 06-28
§ 1; Ord. No. 10-22]
a. The fee for a certified copy of a birth, death,
marriage, remarriage, domestic partnership or
civil union, or reaffirmation of civil union
certificate.
$15.00
b. Preparing and/or processing each birth
correction form REG. 34, REG. 35, REG. 56 and
REG. 60 (this fee does not include a new birth
certificate).
$10.00
c. Preparing and/or processing corrective form
REG. 34 in the following instances:
1. Adding a father's name as a result of a
paternity suit.
$10.00
2. Correcting false information given on any
record by the informant or on a marriage
certificate by the bride and groom.
$10.00
3. Correcting false information given on any
death certificate by the informant, funeral
director or any individual having personal
knowledge.
$10.00
d. The fee for a burial permit (set by State of New
Jersey).
$5.00
§ 25-1.3. Septic System. [Ord. No. 1190 § 2; Ord. No. 1473 § 2]
a. The fee for the review and inspection of
applications and plans for a permit to locate
and construct an individual sewage disposal
system.
$100.00
b. The fee for the review and inspection of an
application of plans for a permit to alter an
existing individual sewage disposal system.
$50.00
c. The fee for reinspection of an individual sewage
disposal system, or part thereof, caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct
or alter the same in accordance with the terms
of the permit.
$25.00
§ 25-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.4
1:631
§ 25-1.4. Wells. [Ord. No. 1190 § 3; Ord. No. 1473 § 3; Ord. No.
00-10 § 2]
a. The fee for review and inspection of
applications and plans for a permit to locate
and construct a water supply.
$100.00
b. The fee for the review and inspection of
applications and plans for a permit to alter an
existing water supply.
$50.00
c. The fee for each reinspection of a water supply,
or part thereof, caused by the failure to locate
and construct or alter the same in accordance
with the terms of the applicable rules,
regulations and ordinances of the Township.
$25.00
d. The fee for review and inspection of
applications and plans for a permit to locate an
irrigation water supply.
$50.00
e. For review and inspection of applications and
plans for a permit to locate and construct a
monitoring well, there shall be no fee charged.
§ 25-1.5. Mortgage Certification. [Ord. No. 1190 § 4]
a. The fee for a requested certification from the
Board of Health as to the existence of a septic
system serving a structure.
$20.00
b. The fee for a certification from the Board of
Health that a public sewer system services a
structure.
$10.00
Chapter 26
YOUTH SPORTS CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 26-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 05-12 § I]
CODE OF CONDUCT — Shall mean a written specification of the behavior
of parents, guardians, coaches, and officials adopted and implemented
by each youth sports organization which must at a minimum incorporate
this chapter, which must be agreed to in writing by the parents or legal
guardians of the minor participants of each youth sports team and/or
organization, prior to such minor participants' participation in the youth
sports activity.
PARTICIPATING LEAGUE — Shall mean any sports organization having
games organized between one (1) or more youth sports teams, whether
affiliated within or without the Township of Neptune, which has its own
rules, regulations and/or Code of Conduct pursuant to its organizing
§ 25-1.4 NEPTUNE CODE § 26-1
1:632
charter. Examples of participating leagues are Pop Warner Football, Little
League, AAU Basketball, and Monmouth Ocean Soccer Association.
YOUTH SPORTS EVENT — Shall mean any competition, practice, clinic,
or instructional event involving one (1) or more youth sports teams or
organization.
YOUTH SPORTS ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any sports association or
club which is affiliated with, or received monetary or other support from,
Neptune Township or the Neptune Township Recreation Department, or
regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated, or maintained by Neptune
Township, and which has minors participating in the sporting activities
conducted by such association or club. Sometimes "youth sports
organization" may also be referred to as "sports organization" or "sports
team."
§ 26-2. REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 05-12 § II]
Every youth sports organization shall be required to adopt and implement
a Code of Conduct incorporating, at a minimum, the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 26-3. REQUIREMENTS FOR PARENTS AND/OR GUARDIANS OF
PARTICIPANTS. [Ord. No. 05-12 § III]
The parents or guardians of each child participating in a youth sports
organization shall be required by such organization to sign an agreement
acknowledging that they have received and read the youth sports
organization's Code of Conduct and that they agree to be bound thereby.
The form of acknowledgment shall be as indicated on the attached form
designated as Schedule A.51 The Township Committee encourages each
parent or guardian to review the Code of Conduct with the child participant,
as it is expected that the child participant shall also abide by the Code of
Conduct.
§ 26-4. REQUIREMENTS FOR COACHES. [Ord. No. 05-12 § IV]
Any parent, guardian or other citizen who desires to coach or instruct any
youth sport governed by this chapter shall be required by the youth sports
organization to execute an agreement acknowledging receipt of the sports
organization's Code of Conduct and agreeing to be bound thereby. The form
of acknowledgment shall be as indicated on the attached form as Schedule
B.52
§ 26-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 05-12 § V]
Any parent, guest, spectator, coach, participant or official at any youth
sports event shall violate the provisions of this chapter if such person:
51.Editor's Note: Schedule A and Schedule B may be found at the end of this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Schedule A and Schedule B may be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5
1:633
§ 26-6. AUTHORITY OF FIELD OFFICIALS. [Ord. No. 05-12 § VI]
Any parent, official, coach or spectator at any youth sporting event shall
be subject to the authority of all field officials including umpires, referees,
and elected league officials of the youth sports organization, or the teams
sponsoring the youth sporting event, or in the absence of such persons at a
practice or instructional event, to the authority of the coach or coaches on
the premises. Such authority shall include the authorization to direct any
person or persons involved in any incident in violation of this chapter or
the applicable sports organization's Code of Conduct to immediately remove
themselves from the premises.
a. Verbally abuses officials, players, coaches or spectators, including, but
not limited to, the use of obscene or profane language or gestures, or
racial, ethnic, or sexual slurs;
b. Enters the field of play, court, rink, or other playing surface during any
youth sporting event for the purpose of physically or verbally abusing or
confronting coaches, players or officials;
c. Initiates a fight, scuffle, or any type of physical abuse or threat of
physical abuse toward any player, coach, official, parent, guest or
spectator; or
d. Throws or causes to be deposited any object on the field of play, court,
rink or other playing surface during any youth sports event.
Any person violating this chapter may be banned from attendance at all youth
sports events for a period to be determined by the youth sports organization,
but for a first violation not more than twelve (12) months from the date of
the incident. If it is determined that such person has a subsequent offense
for violating this chapter, such person shall be banned from attendance at all
youth sports events within Neptune Township for at least twelve (12) months,
up to and including permanent banishment from all youth sports events, from
the date of each subsequent incident. Such time period may be determined
by the youth sports organization. Any individual violating this chapter may
also be subject to any other discipline as provided for by the applicable youth
sports organization's bylaws, organizing documents, rules, regulations or Code
of Conduct, or by any participating leagues' Code of Conduct or rules and
regulations.
In addition, for any violation of this chapter, the youth sports organization may
also require that such person attend anger management counseling before the
violator is permitted to attend any youth sports events, but penalties of twelve
(12) months or more shall require that such person attend at least twelve (12)
hours of anger management counseling. The youth sports organization may
require additional hours of anger management counseling, in its discretion. The
chapter violator shall pay for the cost of anger management counseling.
§ 26-5 NEPTUNE CODE § 26-7
1:634
§ 26-7. CODE OF CONDUCT COMMITTEE. [Ord. No. 05-12 § VII]
The Township of Neptune hereby establishes a Code of Conduct Committee,
which shall be authorized to review any appeals for penalties imposed by
any youth sports organization for violations of this chapter. The Code of
Conduct Committee shall be made up of at least three (3) but not more
than seven (7) persons, who shall be appointed by the Neptune Township
Recreation Committee. Members of the Committee must be Neptune
Township residents or employed by the Township of Neptune. A Committee
quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Committee, and
decisions by the Committee must be supported by greater than a majority
of the quorum present to hear appeals. The Committee may also consist of
up to two (2) alternate members in the event of any conflict of interest or
unavailability of a Committee member.
§ 26-8. VIOLATION PROCEDURES AND HEARINGS. [Ord. No. 05-12
§ VIII]
a. When it is determined that a person has violated this chapter after a
hearing before the youth sports organization's officers, or the
organization's Committee to hear Code of Conduct violations, the
organization shall forward a letter to such violator notifying him or her
of the date, location, and nature of the violation, as well as the period of
banning and/or other action taken in response to such violation. The
letter shall be delivered via regular and certified mail, or by personal
delivery, and if mailed, the effective date shall be the date of mailing.
Personal delivery shall be effective on delivery.
b. Any person receiving such a violation notice who wishes to contest a
penalty shall appeal to the Neptune Township Code of Conduct
Committee within seven (7) calendar days of the mailing or personal
delivery date of the violation notice from the youth sports organization.
The appeal shall consist of a written request for appeal specifically
setting forth the basis of such person's contest of the notice of violation.
The request for appeal shall be delivered personally or by regular and
certified mail to the Chairperson of the Township Code of Conduct
Committee at 25 Neptune Boulevard, Neptune, New Jersey 07753. If
mailed, the effective date of such notice shall be the date of mailing.
c. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Code of Conduct Committee shall
convene within seven (7) days and provide an opportunity for said
person and any interested persons to appear and be heard with respect
to the occurrence of any violation and the action taken by the youth
sports organization. The youth sports organization issuing any violation
must be notified of the date and time of the hearing.
d. The Code of Conduct Committee shall be authorized to hear testimony
under oath, review affidavits and such other information or
documentation relevant to the violation. The Code of Conduct
Committee, by a greater than majority vote, may sustain, overturn, or
modify the penalties imposed by the youth sports organization. The
§ 26-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-8
1:635
§ 26-9. ADDITIONAL PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 05-12 § IX]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person from filing any municipal,
criminal or civil action against any individual for a violation of this chapter,
nor shall it impair the ability of any participating league from imposing
any penalties it shall deem appropriate. Such penalties imposed by the
participating league may be considered by the sports organization's Code of
Conduct Committee or the Neptune Township Code of Conduct Committee
when imposing any penalty under this chapter.
decision made by the Township Code of Conduct Committee shall be
final.
e. All notices of violation and banning by any youth sports organization
shall remain in effect until overturned or modified by the Code of
Conduct Committee.
f. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within seven (7) days
of the effective date of such notice, the penalties imposed by the youth
sports organization shall become final.
§ 26-8 NEPTUNE CODE § 26-9
1:636


TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE
MONMOUTH COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
VOLUME II
ADOPTED BY THE NEPTUNE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE
PURSUANT TO N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
ON JULY 24, 2000
WITH AMENDMENTS:
• AUGUST 27, 2001
• FEBRUARY 11, 2002
• JUNE 10, 2002 (ORDINANCE #02-14)
• DECEMBER 9, 2002 (ORDINANCE #02-41 AND #02-42)
• NOVEMBER 10, 2003 (ORDINANCE #03-035)
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
INTRODUCED: July 10, 2000
ADOPTED: July 24, 2000
LAST AMENDED: November 10, 2003
NEPTUNE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE:
James W. Manning, Mayor
Joseph E. Krimko, Deputy Mayor
Thomas J. Catley, Committeeman
Kevin B. McMillan, Committeeman
Patricia A. Monroe, Committeewoman
Philip D. Huhn, Business Administrator
Richard J. Cuttrell, Township Clerk
Daniel P. Jacobsen, Township Attorney
Neptune Township, New Jersey
N:\project\2003\0304261\01\Zoning_Ordinance\LDO-Amended(11-10-2003)_FINAL.doc

TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS.......................................................................................................1
§ 100 TITLE .................................................................................................................................................... 1
§ 101 SHORT TITLE ........................................................................................................................................ 1
§ 102 PURPOSE AND INTENT........................................................................................................................... 1
§ 103 APPLICABILITY TO TOWNSHIP............................................................................................................... 3
§ 104 SCOPE/INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.............................................................................................. 3
§ 105 TIME OF COMPLIANCE .......................................................................................................................... 3
§ 106 PROPOSED PUBLIC DEDICATIONS.......................................................................................................... 3
§ 107 DATE OF APPROVAL ............................................................................................................................. 3
§ 108 DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY. ......................................................................................................... 3
§ 109 REQUIRED CONFORMANCE ................................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................5
§ 200 WORD USAGE ....................................................................................................................................... 5
§ 201 DEFINITIONS ......................................................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE III - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP....................................................................28
§ 300 DISTRICTS........................................................................................................................................... 28
§ 301 ZONING MAP ...................................................................................................................................... 28
§ 302 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES...................................................................................................... 29
§ 303 APPLICABILITY WITHIN EACH DISTRICT ............................................................................................ 29
ARTICLE IV - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS ............................................................................30
§ 400 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES................................................................................................... 30
§ 401 PROHIBITED USES ............................................................................................................................... 30
§ 402 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL USES........................................................................................ 30
§ 403 RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS ........................................................................................................... 31
§ 403.01 R-1 – Very Low Density Residential ........................................................................................31
§ 403.02 R-2 – Low Density Residential.................................................................................................32
§ 403.03 R-3 – Moderate Density Residential ........................................................................................32
§ 403.04 R-4 – Medium Density Residential...........................................................................................33
§ 403.05 R-5 – Multi-family Residential .................................................................................................34
§ 404 COMMERCIAL/MIXED USE/INDUSTRIAL ZONE DISTRICTS .................................................................. 35
§ 404.01 B-1 – Town Commercial ..........................................................................................................35
§ 404.02 B-2 – Professional Office.........................................................................................................42
§ 404.03 B-3 – Marina Mixed Use..........................................................................................................46
§ 404.04 C-1 – Planned Commercial Development................................................................................49
§ 404.05 C-2 – Corridor Commercial.....................................................................................................57
§ 404.06 C-3 – Route 66 West Commercial............................................................................................60
§ 404.07 C-4 – Route 66 East Commercial.............................................................................................66
§ 404.08 C-5 – Route 33 West Commercial............................................................................................68
§ 404.09 C-6 – Route 33 East Commercial.............................................................................................72
§ 404.10 C-7 – Route 35 Commercial.....................................................................................................78
§ 404.11 LI - Light Industrial..................................................................................................................83
§ 405 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT ................................................................................. 92
§ 406 PUBLIC USE ZONE DISTRICT............................................................................................................. 107
§ 406.01 C - Civic .................................................................................................................................107
§ 407 HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS ............................................................................................................... 112
§ 407.01 HD-R-1 – Historic District Single Family Residential...........................................................112
§ 407.02 HD-O – Historic District Oceanfront ....................................................................................112
§ 407.03 HD-R-2 – Historic District Multi-family Residential.............................................................113
§ 407.04 HD-B-1 – Historic District Mixed-use ...................................................................................114
§ 407.05 HD-R – Historic District Recreation .....................................................................................120
§ 408 SCHEDULE A-1 – USE REGULATIONS - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.......................................... 121
§ 409 SCHEDULE A-2 – USE REGULATIONS – MIXED USE AND NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS........... 121
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
ii
§ 410 SCHEDULE B – ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS.................................................................... 121
§ 411 SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES ................................................ 121
§ 411.01 Adult Retirement Communities ..............................................................................................121
§ 411.02 Community Shelters ...............................................................................................................121
§ 411.03 Home Occupations and Home Professional Offices ..............................................................122
§ 411.04 Motor Vehicle Parking in Residential Areas..........................................................................123
§ 411.05 Number of Principal Buildings and Principal Uses in a Residential Zone District...............124
§ 411.06 Parking of Trucks and Buses..................................................................................................124
§ 411.07 Porches and Decks.................................................................................................................124
§ 411.08 Private Garages .....................................................................................................................125
§ 411.09 Recreational Vehicle Storage.................................................................................................125
§ 411.10 Satellite Dish and Ham Radio Antennas ................................................................................126
§ 411.11 Storage Sheds.........................................................................................................................127
§ 411.12 Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts.......................................................................................127
§ 411.13 Yard and Garage Sales ..........................................................................................................128
§ 412 SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS.......................................... 128
§ 412.01 Accessory Buildings and Structures.......................................................................................128
§ 412.02 Boatyards ...............................................................................................................................128
§ 412.03 Cemeteries..............................................................................................................................129
§ 412.04 Child Care Centers ................................................................................................................130
§ 412.05 Corner and Through Lots ......................................................................................................130
§ 412.06 Driveways ..............................................................................................................................130
§ 412.07 Fences and Walls ...................................................................................................................131
§ 412.08 Frontage on Public Street ......................................................................................................134
§ 412.09 Helistops ................................................................................................................................134
§ 412.10 Holiday Sales .........................................................................................................................134
§ 412.11 Light Fixture Mounting Height ..............................................................................................134
§ 412.12 Loading Requirements ...........................................................................................................135
§ 412.13 Marinas..................................................................................................................................135
§ 412.14 Marine Related Sales and Services ........................................................................................136
§ 412.15 Multifamily Development in B-3 Zone ...................................................................................138
§ 412.16 Minimum Improvable Lot Area..............................................................................................138
§ 412.17 Parking Requirements............................................................................................................138
§ 412.18 Parking in Front Setback .......................................................................................................141
§ 412.19 Places of Worship ..................................................................................................................141
§ 412.20 Setbacks for Buildings in the B-1 Zone ..................................................................................142
§ 412.21 Temporary Trailers ................................................................................................................143
§ 412.22 Yards ......................................................................................................................................145
§ 412.23 Senior Citizen Apartment Buildings in the B-1 Zone .............................................................145
§ 413 SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS .............................................................. 146
§ 413.01 Alcoholic Beverages...............................................................................................................146
§ 413.02 Flared Avenue Open Space Areas..........................................................................................146
§ 413.03 Outdoor Commercial Displays and Sales ..............................................................................146
§ 413.04 Outdoor Dining Facilities ......................................................................................................147
§ 413.05 Prior Non-conforming Hotels ................................................................................................147
§ 413.06 Yard Requirements.................................................................................................................148
§ 414 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS..................................................................... 148
§ 415 CONDITIONAL USE CRITERIA............................................................................................................ 156
§ 415.01 Adult Entertainment Uses ......................................................................................................156
§ 415.02 Assisted Living Facilities .......................................................................................................156
§ 415.03 Automotive Body Repair and Painting...................................................................................157
§ 415.04 Automotive Service Station and Gasoline Fueling Station.....................................................157
§ 415.05 Bed & Breakfast Guesthouses and Homestays.......................................................................159
§ 415.06 Billboards...............................................................................................................................160
§ 415.07 Community Centers................................................................................................................161
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
iii
§ 415.08 Drive-through Restaurants.....................................................................................................162
§ 415.09 Historic Hotels .......................................................................................................................163
§ 415.10 Light Food Concessions.........................................................................................................164
§ 415.11 Mobile Home Parks ...............................................................................................................164
§ 415.12 Accessory Apartments in B-1 and HD-B-1 Districts..............................................................165
§ 415.13 Professional Offices in Historic District................................................................................165
§ 415.14 Parking...................................................................................................................................165
§ 415.15 Public Utility Facility.............................................................................................................166
§ 415.16 Restaurants And Retail Establishments in Historic Hotels ....................................................167
§ 415.17 Retail Sales and Services .......................................................................................................167
§ 415.18 Self Storage Facility...............................................................................................................168
§ 415.19 Wireless Telecommunication Facility ....................................................................................168
§ 416 SIGNS................................................................................................................................................ 171
§ 416.01 Purpose ..................................................................................................................................171
§ 416.02 General Provisions ................................................................................................................172
§ 416.03 Design Requirements .............................................................................................................173
§ 416.04 Exempt Signs..........................................................................................................................174
§ 416.05 Permitted Temporary Signs....................................................................................................176
§ 416.06 Prohibited Signs.....................................................................................................................177
§ 416.07 Permitted Signs ......................................................................................................................178
§ 416.08 Signs in Historic Districts ......................................................................................................182
§ 416.09 Enforcement ...........................................................................................................................185
§ 417 SCHEDULE C: TABLE OF PERMITTED SIGNS....................................................................................... 185
§ 418 HEIGHT EXEMPTIONS AND PERMITTED PROJECTIONS....................................................................... 185
§ 419 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS ........................................................................................................ 186
§ 420 SOIL CONSERVATION........................................................................................................................ 190
§ 421 SLOPE REGULATIONS AND RETAINING WALLS .................................................................................. 193
§ 422 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS ............................................................................ 196
ARTICLE V - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................198
§ 500 PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................................... 198
§ 501 EXCEPTIONS...................................................................................................................................... 198
§ 502 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................................................. 199
§ 503 BUFFERING AND SCREENING............................................................................................................. 202
§ 504 CURB DESIGN STANDARDS............................................................................................................... 204
§ 505 DRIVEWAY DESIGN STANDARDS ...................................................................................................... 204
§ 506 ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS .................................................................................................. 206
§ 507 HISTORIC DISTRICT STREETSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS................................................................... 206
§ 508 HISTORIC PRESERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES................................................................................ 207
§ 509 LANDSCAPING................................................................................................................................... 209
§ 510 LAND USE RESTRICTIONS AND EASEMENTS ..................................................................................... 213
§ 511 LIGHTING.......................................................................................................................................... 214
§ 512 MONUMENTATION ............................................................................................................................ 217
§ 513 OPEN SPACE ..................................................................................................................................... 217
§ 514 PARKING LOT AND LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS................................................................. 218
§ 515 REFUSE AND RECYCLING AREAS....................................................................................................... 220
§ 516 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................................................... 221
§ 517 RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS................................................................................ 225
§ 518 SECURITY GRILLES AND ROLL-UP DOORS ........................................................................................ 226
§ 519 SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES .............................................................. 226
§ 520 SIGHT TRIANGLE .............................................................................................................................. 229
§ 521 SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS............................................................................................ 229
§ 522 STREETS............................................................................................................................................ 231
§ 523 STREET TREES .................................................................................................................................. 232
§ 524 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS........................................................................................ 233
§ 525 TREE REMOVAL AND TREE CUTTING................................................................................................ 234
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
iv
§ 526 UNDERGROUND WIRING.................................................................................................................... 238
§ 527 RETAINING WALLS ........................................................................................................................... 239
ARTICLE VI - AGENCY ESTABLISHMENT AND RULES.................................................................240
§ 600 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLANNING BOARD ..................................................................................... 240
§ 601 POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE PLANNING BOARD .................................................................... 242
§ 602 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT .............................................................. 242
§ 603 POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. .......................................................................... 244
§ 604 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION .................................................... 245
§ 605 POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ........................... 247
ARTICLE VII - DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES..................................250
§ 700 DIVISION OF JURISDICTION IN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS .......................................................... 250
§ 701 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT . 250
§ 702 PUBLIC HEARINGS. ........................................................................................................................... 251
§ 703 DECISIONS ........................................................................................................................................ 252
§ 704 PUBLIC NOTICE OF A HEARING ......................................................................................................... 253
§ 705 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS .................................................................................... 255
§ 706 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT........................................... 258
§ 707 TIME LIMITS FOR DECISIONS ............................................................................................................ 259
§ 708 NOTICE OF DECISIONS ...................................................................................................................... 260
§ 709 EFFECT OF APPROVAL ............................................................................................................... 260
ARTICLE VIII - APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS...................................................262
§ 800 CONFORMITY REQUIRED................................................................................................................... 262
§ 801 SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION REQUIRED ......................................................................................... 262
§ 802 SUBMISSIONS REQUIRED FOR ALL APPLICATIONS ............................................................................ 263
§ 803 PERMISSIBLE DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLAN PREPARATION .............................................. 265
§ 804 COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATIONS.................................................................................................... 266
§ 805 APPLICATION FOR INFORMAL (CONCEPT) REVIEW ........................................................................... 267
§ 806 APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION AND MINOR SITE PLAN ...................................................... 267
§ 807 APPLICATION FOR GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL. ....................................................... 269
§ 808 APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION AND PRELIMINARY MAJOR SITE PLAN........ 274
§ 809 APPLICATION FOR FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION AND FINAL MAJOR SITE PLAN................................. 277
§ 810 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT AFTER APPROVAL ................................................................................ 282
§ 811 CIRCULATION IMPACT STUDY........................................................................................................... 283
§ 812 SUBMISSION CHECKLISTS ................................................................................................................. 286
§ 812.01 Zoning Data Table .................................................................................................................286
§ 812.02 Site Plan Checklist .................................................................................................................287
§ 812.03 Minor Site Plan Checklist ......................................................................................................291
§ 812.04 Preliminary Major Subdivision Checklist ..............................................................................294
§ 812.05 Final Major Subdivision Checklist.........................................................................................296
§ 812.06 Minor Subdivision Checklist ..................................................................................................298
ARTICLE IX - HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES.........................301
§ 900 APPLICATION PROCEDURE IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND FOR DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES.. 301
§ 901 ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS REQUIRED FOR APPLICATIONS IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS OR
OTHER DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES ............................................................................................... 301
§ 902 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ................................................................... 303
§ 903 REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS APPLICATIONS.............................. 303
§ 904 TIME FOR DECISIONS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ............................................................. 304
§ 905 EFFECT OF DECISIONS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ........................................................... 304
§ 906 APPEALS OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION DECISION ....................................................... 304
§ 907 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES ON PROPERTIES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS OR ON DESIGNATED
HISTORIC SITES; NON-PUBLIC USES ................................................................................................. 304
§ 908 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES ON PROPERTIES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND ON DESIGNATED
HISTORIC SITES; PUBLIC USES.......................................................................................................... 307
§ 909 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN ANY HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICT AND OTHER STRUCTURES OF
ARCHITECTURAL AND HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE ............................................................................ 307
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
v
§ 910 EMERGENCY REPAIRS IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND ON DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES.......... 308
§ 911 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS ............................. 308
§ 912 PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND FOR DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES310
§ 913 PENALTIES; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ............................................................................. 311
§ 914 EXPIRATION OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ....................................................................... 312
ARTICLE X - FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS & OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS............313
§ 1000 APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES ................................................................................................... 313
§ 1001 AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTRIBUTION ......................................................................................... 315
§ 1002 GUARANTEES REQUIRED FOR ON-AND-OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.............................................. 317
§ 1003 CERTIFICATION OR GUARANTEE REQUIRED; ESTIMATE OF GUARANTEE ........................................ 318
§ 1004 APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY............................................................................................. 318
§ 1005 BONDING AND CASH REQUIREMENTS............................................................................................. 318
§ 1006 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS................................................................................................................. 319
§ 1007 REDUCTION OF GUARANTEE. .......................................................................................................... 321
§ 1008 CONDITIONS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE......................... 323
§ 1009 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY ................................................................................... 324
§ 1010 AS-BUILT PLAN REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................... 324
§ 1011 OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS........................................................................................................... 324
ARTICLE XI - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS & PENALTIES ................327
§ 1100 ADMINISTRATION ........................................................................................................................... 327
§ 1101 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................................................... 327
§ 1102 ZONING PERMITS ............................................................................................................................ 327
§ 1103 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY......................................................................................................... 328
§ 1104 VIOLATIONS.................................................................................................................................... 330
§ 1105 PENALTIES ...................................................................................................................................... 330
ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENT, SEVERABILITY, INTERPRETATION, REPEALER &
ENACTMENT..............................................................................................................................................332
§ 1200 AMENDMENTS ................................................................................................................................ 332
§ 1201 SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE ....................................................................................................... 332
§ 1202 INTERPRETATION ............................................................................................................................ 332
§ 1203 REPEALER....................................................................................................................................... 332
§ 1204 COPY TO BE FILED WITH COUNTY PLANNING BOARD..................................................................... 332
§ 1205 ENACTMENT ................................................................................................................................... 332
ZONING SCHEDULES
A-1: USE REGULATIONS – RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
A-2: USE REGULATIONS – BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
B: ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
C: SIGNS (EXCEPT HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS)
APPENDICES & GRAPHICS
A: CORNER LOTS
B: FENCES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
C: TYPES OF FREESTANDING SIGNS
D: TYPES OF BUILDING MOUNTED SIGNS
E: PARKING LOT ISLANDS AND TREE PLANTINGS
F: LIGHTING
G: SECURITY GRILLES
H: STREET TREE/SIDEWALK/UTILITY EASEMENT LOCATIONS
I: HISTORIC FLARED AVENUE OPEN SPACE
J: SHADE TREE COMMISSION TREE PLANTING GUIDE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
vi
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY
LEFT BLANK
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
1
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 100 TITLE
A comprehensive ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and the uses and locations of
buildings and structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk of buildings and structures and
determining the area of yards and other open spaces; regulating and limiting the density of population;
dividing the Township of Neptune into zone districts for such purposes; adopting a map of said Township
showing boundaries and the classification of such zone districts; establishing rules, regulations and
standards governing the subdivision of land within the Township; establishing a Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment, and Historic Preservation Commission; and prescribing penalties for the violation of
its provisions.
§ 101 SHORT TITLE
The short form by which this Ordinance may be known shall be “THE LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE.”
§ 102 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to exercise the authority delegated to municipalities under
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A 40:55D-1 et seq.) to regulate development.
The implementation of the Township of Neptune Master Plan through the provisions of this Ordinance is
intended:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in a manner that will promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. To ensure that the development of the Township of Neptune does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and state as a
whole;
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations that
will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
preservation of the environment;
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the
coordination of public development with land use policies;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of residential,
recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and private,
according to their respective environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all
New Jersey citizens;
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes that will promote the free
flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes which will result in
congestion or blight;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
2
I. To provide a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space, energy resources
and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land;
K. To encourage planned unit development which incorporates the best features of design
and relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational development of the particular site;
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
M. To encourage the coordination of various public and private procedures and activities
shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such development and to
the more efficient use of land;
N. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources;
O. To promote the maximum practical recovery and recycling of recyclable materials from
municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices designed to incorporate the
state recycling plan goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs.
P. To promote a balanced variety of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, public,
open space and conservation land uses
Q. To preserve and enhance the existing character of the residential neighborhoods in the
Township while providing a mix of housing types and uses.
R. To promote aesthetic and site improvements in the Township’s major commercial and
industrial areas in a manner that maintains an appropriate transition between residential
and commercial uses and districts.
S. To guide the redevelopment and development of the remaining large parcels and
scattered vacant sites within neighborhoods to ensure proposed uses support existing
uses without adverse impacts in terms of land use compatibility, traffic, economic, and
aesthetic impacts.
T. To maintain a balance between residential and nonresidential uses to ensure a stable
and sound community tax base and local employment opportunities.
U. To provide for the utilization of the Township waterfront for appropriate uses.
V. To reclaim underutilized and/or constrained parcels for productive use.
W. To provide a circulation network for vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians that permits safe
and efficient travel.
X. To provide for adequate parking facilities in accordance with the needs of the respective
land uses and the character of the individual zone districts.
Y. To provide adequate community facilities and services in order to enhance the quality of
life for existing and future Township residents and respond to changing demographics.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
3
Z. To promote the preservation of natural systems and environmentally sensitive areas,
particularly wetland, woodland, coastal, flood hazard and aquifer recharge areas, in a
manner that provides open space and enhances existing parklands and facilities.
§ 103 APPLICABILITY TO TOWNSHIP
Whenever the Township or any duly constituted board, agency or department thereof is acting in or
pursuant to the performance of a governmental function, carrying out a legislative mandate or in the
exercise of its private right as a corporate body, any Township owned, operated or controlled building,
structure, facility or use either existing or proposed shall not be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
It is the intention of this Section that whatever the Township may be authorized to do shall constitute a
function of government and that whenever the Township shall act pursuant to granted authority, it acts as
government and not as private entrepreneur and, therefore, is exempt from any Zoning Ordinance and
any land use act zoning provisions.
§ 104 SCOPE/INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to the minimum requirements for the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the Township of Neptune.
The provisions and requirements of this Ordinance shall be held paramount to any corresponding or
similar, but less restrictive, provisions and requirements of any existing law, ordinance, rule, regulation,
deed restriction or private covenant affecting lands and premises in the Township of Neptune.
§ 105 TIME OF COMPLIANCE
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or
change in use of the principal use and shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not the
entire structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in
use.
§ 106 PROPOSED PUBLIC DEDICATIONS
Approval of final plans by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall
constitute an acceptance of proposed dedications for streets, parks, and other public uses or purposes.
Nonetheless, such approval shall not constitute an acceptance of physical improvements on such
dedicated land and shall not impose on the Township any obligation of jurisdiction or maintenance of
such improvements. The acceptance of such physical improvements shall be by action of the Township
Committee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 107 DATE OF APPROVAL
The time period for the effect of approval shall begin with the date of the adoption of the resolution
memorializing such approval of the subject application by the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ 108 DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
No subdivision or site plan involving any street(s) requiring additional right-of-way width as specified in
the Master Plan or Official Map and the street requirements of this Ordinance shall be approved unless
such additional right-of-way, either along one or both sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be
deeded to the municipality or other appropriate governmental agency.
§ 109 REQUIRED CONFORMANCE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
4
No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor
shall any land be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose other than as permitted within
the zoning districts so described by this Ordinance, nor shall any open space or yard area be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner except in strict conformity with the regulations contained herein.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
5
ARTICLE II- DEFINITIONS
§ 200 WORD USAGE
Any word or term not defined herein shall be as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A., 40:55D-
1 et seq., or shall be utilized in standard usage for the context in which the word is used. In interpreting
this Article words in one tense shall include other tenses or derivative forms; words in the singular shall
include the plural and in the plural, the singular; either gender shall include the other; the word "shall" is
mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word 'fused" shall include "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used"; the word "lot" includes
the words "plot," and "premises".
§ 201 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall have the meanings indicated:
abandonment - The relinquishment of property, or cessation of the use of the property, by the owner or
lessee without any intention of transferring property rights to another owner or of resuming the use of the
property.
accessory apartment - A self-contained residential dwelling unit with a kitchen, sanitary facilities,
sleeping quarters, and a private entrance, which is created within an existing residence or by an addition
to an existing residence or accessory building.
accessory structure – A structure or building detached from a principal building located on the same lot
and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. Where a structure is attached
to a principal building by a breezeway, roof, common wall, or the like, such a structure shall be
considered part of the principal building.
accessory use – A use of land or of a structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
acre – A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet.
adaptive re-use – The development of a new use for a building or site. Adaptive re-use is not to be
construed to permit the commencement of a use that is not allowed in a particular zone district.
addition - any extension or increase in the size, floor area or height of a building or structure.
administrative officer – The Neptune Township Zoning Officer, or the Zoning Officer’s designee.
adult entertainment use - An establishment consisting of, including, or having the characteristics of any
or all of the following:
1. adult bookstore – An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its
stock-in-trade books, magazines, publications, tapes, or films that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual
activities or anatomical genital areas.
2. adult cabaret – (1) An establishment devoted to adult entertainment, either with or without
a liquor license, presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
6
(2) a cabaret that features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, or similar
entertainers for observation by patrons.
3. adult mini motion picture theater – An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty
persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas.
4. adult motion picture theater – An enclosed building with a capacity for fifty or more
persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas.
adult retirement community – A planned development or portion of a planned unit development that
emphasizes social and recreational activities, personal services, limited health facilities, and
transportation. An adult retirement community shall be designed for adults aged at least fifty-five (55)
years for one resident of each eighty percent (80%) of the total units, provided that significant facilities
and services for the elderly are provided.
alley – A thoroughfare less than thirty (30) feet in width dedicated for the public use of vehicles and/or
pedestrians, which may afford access to property, but is not intended for general traffic circulation.
alteration of building– Any change in the supporting members of a building, bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders, or interior partitions, or any addition to or diminution of a building, including the addition,
modification, removal or replacement of exterior elements, including but not limited to siding, roofing,
windows, doors, trim, cornices, eaves, gutters, finials, moldings, railings, arches, cupolas, or other
decorative ornamentation. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-41]
antenna – Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through
the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or other communication signals. Parabolic
dish antennas used for satellite communications shall not be included within this definition.
applicant - person, partnership, corporation or public agency requesting permission to engage in land
development/soil removal/tree removal activity.
approving authority – The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission of the Township of Neptune.
area of special flood hazard - The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1%)
percent or greater chance of flooding in a given year.
as-built survey – A property survey prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor to reflect the
actual location of structures and other improvements constructed on a property.
assisted living facility - A facility that is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
automatic car wash – A structure containing facilities for washing automobiles and automatic or semiautomatic
application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and heat for drying.
automobile dealership – A facility that displays and/or sells new and/or used motor vehicles of any type.
automotive body repair and painting facility – Any building, land area or premises, or portion thereof,
used primarily for auto body work, welding and painting.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
7
automotive detailing shop – Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used by a
business establishment primarily engaged in manually cleaning, washing, detailing and/or waxing motor
vehicles. [NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
automotive fueling station – Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the
retail sale and direct delivery of fuel and lubricating oil to motor vehicles. The term “automotive fueling
station” shall be synonymous with “gasoline fueling station”, “gasoline station” and “gas station”. [NOTE:
The previous definition has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
automotive service station - Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used by a
business establishment engaged in (a) general mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance
services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers or (b) engine
repair and replacement; but specifically excluding automotive body repair and painting facilities, and
automatic car washes. Automotive service stations include all those establishments engaged in any
specialized category (or combination of categories) of general automotive repair and maintenance
services, such as but not limited to: oil change and lubrication shops (a.k.a. quick lube shops),
transmission repair shops, exhaust system repair shops, automotive audio equipment and accessory
installation shops, automotive detailing shops, automotive glass replacement shops, tire installation and
re-treading services etc. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
awning - Any structure made of cloth, canvas or vinyl, with a frame attached to a building or other
structure which may be raised to a position against the building or structure when not in use.
bank – A financial organization that provides direct banking services including but not limited to walk-up
tellers, accessory drive-through areas and automatic teller machines.
banners, pennants or bunting – Temporary announcement device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric
or other light material.
bar – Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink for on-site consumption and
where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to the principal use.
basement - Any area of a building having its floor located at or below a grade level on all sides.
bed and breakfast – an owner-occupied facility providing sleeping or dwelling accommodations and a
morning meal to transient guests for compensation.
bed and breakfast guesthouse - a bed and breakfast designed to accommodate at least six (6) guests
and not more than fifteen (15) guests.
bed and breakfast homestay - a bed and breakfast designed to accommodate five (5) or fewer guests.
billboard - A sign which advertises goods, products, services or facilities not conducted upon the
premises where the sign is located
board of jurisdiction – The Planning Board of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
boatyard – A designated area for the temporary storage of watercraft.
breakaway wall - A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
building – Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
8
building coverage – The percentage of the lot area that is covered by building area, which includes the
total horizontal area when viewed in plan.
building envelope – An area, generally described by building setback lines, depicting the area within
which the building(s) can be constructed.
building footprint – The horizontal area contained within the outer dimensions of the foundation walls of
a building.
building height – The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat
or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average height between the eaves and the ridge
level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
building line – A line formed by the intersection of an exterior wall of a building with the ground.
building line, front – A line parallel to the front yard line touching that part of a principal building closest
to the front yard line, not including the dimensions of a porch structure.
canopy - Any structure, other than an awning or marquee, made of cloth, plastic, metal or other
substance and providing a roof-like shelter.
canopy, automobile service station – A roofed, accessory structure with open sides located on the
same lot as an automobile service station.
cellar – See “basement.”
cemetery – Property used for interring of the dead.
certificate of appropriateness – a document issued by the Historic Preservation Commission approving
any preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or alteration of property dealing with construction, demolition,
additions, removals, repairs or any feature for any existing or new construction.
certificate of completeness – A document issued by the administrative officer specifying that an
development application has met the submission requirements set forth in this Chapter.
change of use - Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
channel – The area between the top of the banks of any watercourse, with or without continuous flow,
wherein surface waters are contained under conditions less than flood stage. This area shall also consist
of lands lying between two (2) or more branches of the same watercourse.
child care center – An establishment licensed by the Department of Human Services pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1, et seq., providing for the care, supervision and protection of children.
clear cutting -The removal of all standing trees on a lot or portion of a lot.
COAH – the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
co-location – When two (2) or more receiving and/or transmitting facilities are placed together in the
same location or on the same antenna support structure.
commercial recreation facility – A facility designed and equipped for the conduct of leisure, sport or
other recreational activities operated as a business, for-profit, and open to the public for a fee.
commercial vehicles – Any commercially registered vehicle except a passenger car. Vehicles normally
associated with a commercial use, but not registered for commercial use, shall be deemed commercial
vehicles.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
9
common open space – A parcel of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within
that part of a townhouse development site that has been designated for the use or enjoyment of residents
and owners of the townhouse development. Common open space may contain such non-residential
recreational structures, improvements and landscaping as are necessary or appropriate for use by the
residents.
common ownership – Ownership of two (2) or more contiguous lots of real property by one (1) person or
persons.
community center – A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities, open to
the public or a designated part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or non-profit group
or agency.
community residence for persons with head injuries - A community residential facility licensed
pursuant to P.L. 1977, c.448(C. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than fifteen (15) persons with head injuries, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not limited
to: group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a
residence shall not be considered a health care facility with the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c.136(C. 26:2H-1 et seq.).
community residence for the developmentally disabled – Any community residential facility licensed
pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448 (C. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than fifteen (15) developmentally disabled or mentally ill
persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall
include, but not be limited to: group homes, half-way houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised
apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health care
facility within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c.136 (C. 26:2H1 et seq.).
In the case of such a community residence housing mentally ill persons, such residence shall have been
approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as
shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the Department of
Human Services. As used in this chapter, developmentally disabled person means a person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c.448 (C. 30:11B-2), and mentally ill
person means a person who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in R.S. 30:4-23, but shall not
include a person who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense by
reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
community residence for the terminally ill – Any community residential facility operated as a hospice
program providing food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such supervision as
required, to not more than fifteen (15) terminally ill persons.
community shelter for victims of domestic violence – Any shelter approved for a purchase of service
contract and certified pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c.337(C.30:14-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter, medical care,
legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services to not more than fifteen (15) persons who have
been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter
and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
conditional use – a use permitted in a particular zone district only upon a showing that such use in a
specified location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in this Chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefore by the Planning Board.
conservation easement – The grant of a property right stipulating that the described land will remain in
its natural state and precluding future or additional development.
construction official - the chief administrative Construction Official for the Township.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
10
conversion – Alteration in an existing residential structure resulting in an increase in the number of
dwelling units.
curbline – A stone, concrete or other improved boundary marking the edge of a roadway or paved area.
deck – An above grade, unroofed structure without walls that is attached to a residential dwelling unit,
twelve (12”) inches or more above grade.
demolition - the partial or total razing, dismantling or destruction of any building or of any improvement
within the Township and/or the Historic Districts.
density, gross – The permitted number of dwelling units per total area of land to be developed.
design criteria and guidelines - the Historic Preservation Guidelines of the Township.
developer - the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed for development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
development – The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels, the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land.
development fees – money paid by an individual, person, partnership, association, company or
corporation for the improvement of property as permitted in COAH’s rules.
diameter at point of measurement - The diameter of a tree measured four and one-half (4-1/2') feet
(forestry method) above the ground level on the downhill side for existing trees. Trees utilized in the
replacement of existing trees or proposed as part of a landscape plan, shall be measured twelve (12")
inches above ground level for trees over a four (4”) inch caliper. The measurement shall be six (6")
inches above grade for trees up to four inch (4”) caliper (nursery method). Diameter at point of
measurement may appear as the abbreviation "DPM".
distribution facility – An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage and distribution of goods,
products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by rail or motor vehicle.
disturb - to dig, dredge, excavate, remove, deposit, grade, clear, level, fill or otherwise alter or change
the location or contour of land or otherwise cause land to be exposed to the dangers of erosion.
dripline - A limiting line established by a series of perpendicular drop points marking the maximum radius
of the crown of an existing tree,, but not less than six (6') feet from the trunk, whichever is greater.
drive through facility – An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service or by packaging
procedures encourages or permits customers to receive service or obtain goods while remaining in their
motor vehicles.
driveway – A private right-of-way providing access for motor vehicles to a garage, dwelling or other
building from a street or other right-of-way.
duplex – A two-unit dwelling sharing a common vertical separation with independent means of ingress
and egress for each unit.
dwelling unit – A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof intended or designed for non-transient
residential use of a single housekeeping unit, (A) separated from all other spaces by lockable doors, (B)
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
11
having access to the outside without crossing another dwelling, (C) having any cooking facilities, fixed or
portable, or food refrigeration facilities, and (D) having any sanitary facilities. A house trailer, a boarding
or rooming house, convalescent home, fraternity or sorority house, hotel, inn, lodging, nursing, or other
similar home, or other similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling unit.
dwelling unit, apartment – Either, (a) a dwelling unit within a multi-family dwelling (see definition for
dwelling, multi-family); or (b) a dwelling unit fully contained within the same building that is also designed,
arranged, occupied, maintained and/or devoted to a nonresidential use(s). The term “apartment” shall be
synonymous with “apartment dwelling unit”. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per
Ordinance No. 03-035]
dwelling unit, rehabilitated - A previously substandard dwelling unit, as further defined herein, which
has undergone significant renovation to meet municipal or other applicable housing code standards.
Upon rehabilitation of a substandard dwelling unit, housing deficiencies shall be corrected and the house
shall be brought up to code standard. The standard for evaluating rehabilitation activity of a substandard
dwelling unit shall be the local property maintenance code, or, if none is available, the BOCA Property
Maintenance Code, in effect at the time of evaluation. The rehabilitation activity shall not include luxury
improvements, the purchase of appliances (with the exception of stoves) or improvements that are strictly
cosmetic. A rehabilitated unit is considered complete at the date of final inspection.
dwelling unit, single-family detached - A structure containing a single housekeeping unit that is not
attached to any other dwelling unit by any means.
dwelling unit, substandard - A dwelling unit with health and safety code violations that require the repair
or replacement of a major system. A major system shall include weatherization, a roof, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems) and/or a load bearing
structural system.
dwelling unit, townhouse – A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each
unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
dwelling unit, two-family – A building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which is
totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced
ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to
both dwelling units.
dwelling, multi-family – A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including units that are
located one over the other.
early childhood education center – A public education facility as defined by the New Jersey
Department of Education. [NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordinance No. 02-14]
easement – A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to another person or
entity, and/or for the use by the public or a corporation.
elevated building - A non-basement building: (A) built in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the
top of the elevated floor or when in a Coastal High Hazard Area to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by the means of piling,
columns (posts or piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and (B) adequately anchored so
as to not impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard elevated buildings shall also include a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of Coastal High Hazard elevated building shall also include a building
otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
12
equalized assessed value – The value of a property determined by the municipal tax assessor through a
process designed to ensure that all property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio
or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a construction permit may be obtained
utilizing estimates for construction costs. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at project
completion by the municipal tax assessor.
erosion - detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
excavation or cut - any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced or relocated.
extended stay lodging facility – A lodging establishment designed and intended for the temporary
lodging of business travelers which includes a cooking area and related appurtenances in every room,
which has limited maid service, front desk and reception services but which does not include restaurants,
conference facilities or retail/convenience stores.
exterior alteration - Any change in the exterior architectural features of a building or any other structure
including repainting, additions or the demolition of part of a building excepting repainting the structure the
same color for maintenance purposes.
exterior architectural feature - Any element of the architectural style, design or general arrangement of
a structure that is visible from the outside including, but not limited to, the style and placement of all
windows, doors, gutters, driveways, porches, railings, steps, lighting, the roof, type, color and texture of
the building material, signs and decorative elements including landscaping, fences, curbs and sidewalks.
FAA – Federal Aviation Administration.
family – A single, non-profit housekeeping unit, which bears the generic character of a relatively stable
and permanent functioning unit.
family day care home – Any private residence approved by the Division of Youth and Family Services or
an organization with which the division contracts for family day care and which is operated in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.4 et seq.
FCC – Federal Communications Commission.
fence – A barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate
areas.
final approval – The official action of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment taken on a
preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering plans and other
requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guarantees properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guarantees.
flood fringe area – That portion of the flood hazard area outside of the floodway which is subject to less
severe flooding.
flood hazard area – The flood hazard area shall consist of the floodway and flood fringe area, being the
areas that are subject to flooding.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
Township.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
13
flood insurance study - The official report provided in which the Federal Insurance Administration has
provided flood profiles, as well as Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
flood of record – The greatest flood in a given area for which accurate records are available and/or as
determined by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection.
flood or flooding - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from (A) the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or, (B) the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface waters from any source.
flood plain – Same as the flood hazard area.
flood, design – Design flood (floodway or flood hazard area) is the relative size or magnitude of a flood,
expressed as a design discharge in cubic feet per second, which is developed from hydrologic criteria,
represents a major flood of reasonable expectancy, reflects both flood experience and flood potential, and
is the basis of the delineation of the floodway and the flood hazard area and of the water surface
elevations thereof.
floodway - The channel of a river or other water-course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
floor area – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all the floors of the building or buildings on a lot
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls equal to or in excess of 7’-6” or from the center line of
party walls separating two (2) buildings, excluding cellar and basement areas used only for storage or the
operation and maintenance of the building.
floor area ratio (F.A.R) – The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot divided by the area of such
lot in square feet.
floor area, livable – All finished spaces within the exterior walls of a dwelling exclusive of garages,
breezeways, unheated porches, cellars and basements having a window area of less than ten percent
(10%) of the square foot area of the room. Usable floor area shall include all finished spaces not
otherwise excluded above such as: principal rooms, utility rooms, bathrooms, all closets and hallways
opening directly into any rooms within the dwelling unit and all attic spaces having a clear height of six (6)
feet from finished floor level to pitch of roof rafter with a clear height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches from
finished floor level to ceiling level over fifty percent (50%) of the area of such attic space.
front porch line – A line formed by the intersection of a porch foundation wall with the ground, or when
viewed in plan, the outermost extremity of the roof, whichever is closer to the front lot line.
funeral home – A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and/or the display of the
deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation.
garage, private – A fully enclosed detached accessory building, or a portion of a principal building, used
primarily for the storage of vehicles owned or used by the occupant of the principal building, or used for
the storage of incidental items to which the garage is an accessory.
garden center– Land, greenhouses or structures used to raise and/or sell flowers, shrubs, plants and
other garden related items.
gasoline fueling station – see “automotive fueling station”. [NOTE: The previous definition has been
added per Ordinance 03-035]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
14
golf course – A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with
trees, greens, fairways, and hazards and that may include a clubhouse and shelter.
greenhouse – A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or
translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of
plants.
HAM radio antenna - A device mounted on a freestanding support structure or secured to a roof or wall
of a building and used to receive and transmit radio communications between other terrestrially based
sites.
health & fitness club – An establishment that provides facilities for physical exercises and/or saunas,
showers and lockers.
heliport - An identifiable area on land, water or structure, including any building or facilities thereon, used
or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters. The term “heliport” as used herein
applies to all sites, including helistops, used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of
helicopters.
helistop - An area used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters engaged in
dropping-off or picking-up passengers.
historic flared avenue open space – An unobstructed area located between the curbline and the front
leasehold line at particular properties within historic zone district. This area is also known as the “flared
setback area.”
historic integrity - the authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical
characteristics that existed during the property's historic or prehistoric period.
historic landmark - may substitute in this Chapter and in any other official document or action of the
Township for “historic” and “historic site”.
historic site - any real property, man-made structure, natural object or configuration or any portion or
group of the foregoing which have been formally designated as being of historic, archaeological, cultural,
scenic or architectural significance.
historic sites inventory - A list of historic properties determined to meet criteria of formal designation
specified herein.
home occupation - An activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary,
incidental and accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit.
home professional office – A home occupation consisting of the office of a practitioner of a recognized
profession.
homeowner’s association – An association of owners of the various properties of a common ownership
community, formed under the provisions of a Master Deed, Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions
and a Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws.
hospital/medical center – An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to
persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical
or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, training facilities,
medical offices and emergency care facilities.
hotel – A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional
services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities, and so
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
15
constructed that access and egress from rooms to the outside passes a control desk.
hotel, historic - A facility offering sleeping and transient lodging accommodations to the general public
for a specified period of time in a structure originally constructed as a hotel or other transient residential
use.
impervious cover – Any structure, surface or improvement that reduces and/or prevents absorption of
stormwater into land. Porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, crushed shell, elevated
structures (including boardwalks), and other similar structures, surfaces or improvements are considered
impervious cover. Grass, lawns or any other vegetation are not considered impervious cover.
improvable area - the area of a lot for the placement of principal buildings, off-street parking lots, and offstreet
loading areas which is located within the envelope delineated by the required yards, or buffers of
the zone district and which is not encroached upon by, (A) an existing or proposed public right-of-way, (B)
an area classified as a floodway by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
or as an area of special flood hazard or floodway, (C) wetlands or any required wetlands transition area
pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act (N.J.S.A.13:9B-1, et seq. ), except
where construction, fill, or disturbance has been authorized pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands Act, (D)
slope areas where the inclination of the land's surface from the horizontal is fifteen (15) percent or greater
for a ten (10) foot interval, (E) stream corridors and, (F) an easement for utility installation, drainage or
other purpose granted to another person, entity or governmental unit.
improvement - any structure or any part thereof installed upon real property by human endeavor and
intended to be kept at the location of such construction or installation.
incombustible material - any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two
hundred (1,200F.) degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to glow or burn at that temperature.
industry, light – Those fields of economic activity including construction, light manufacturing,
warehousing and wholesale trade.
junk – Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process
of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition.
This definition also includes, but is not limited to, unregistered, inoperable vehicles, tires, vehicle parts,
equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, brush, wood
and lumber.
junkyard – Any space, whether inside or outside a building, used for the storage, keeping, or
abandonment of junk.
kennel – Any building, structure, or premises in which cats, dogs or other domesticated animals are kept,
boarded, bred or trained for a fee or compensation.
land - any ground, soil, or earth including marshes, swamps, drainageways and areas not permanently
covered by water within the municipality.
leasehold area – A designated area bound by leasehold lines.
leasehold line – A line of record bounding a leasehold area that divides a leasehold area from another
leasehold area, lot, or from a public or private street or any other public space.
loading space, off-street – Any off-street space on the same lot available for the loading or unloading of
goods.
long-term care facility – An institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to
provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
16
more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or
adoption. “Long-term care facility” shall include the terms “skilled nursing facility” and “intermediate care
facility.”
lot – A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and
to be used, developed, or build upon as a unit.
lot coverage - The percentage of lot area that is covered by impervious cover.
lot depth – The mean distance between the front and rear property lines of any lot, measured along a
line either parallel to or making equal angles with the side lines.
lot frontage – The length of the street line of a lot.
lot line – A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private
street or any other public space.
lot line, front - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. In the Historic District-Oceanfront
District the lot line, front shall be the lot line between the leasehold lot in question and the Historic Flared
Avenue Open Space. This line is also considered the inner sidewalk line.
lot line, rear - The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot,
the lot line opposite the shorter front street line shall be considered the rear lot line.
lot line, side - Any lot line other than a front lot line or rear lot line.
lot width – A distance measured at the front yard setback line along a line perpendicular to parallel side
lines or making equal angles with both converging side lines. Where a front yard is not required, the lot
width shall be measured along the street line.
lot, corner - A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets where the interior
angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting a curved
street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot
lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
lot, flag – a large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to a public road is
via a narrow, private right-of-way or driveway.
lot, reverse frontage – A through lot that is not accessible from one from one of the parallel or
nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
lot, through – A lot other than a corner lot which adjoins two (2) street lines which are at opposite ends of
the lot. A through lot shall be considered to have two front yard lines.
lowest floor - The lowest level of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as
to render the structure in violation of other non-elevation design requirements.
maintenance guarantee – Any security, which may be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of
any required improvements.
manufactured home - A structure transportable in one or more sections which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers,
travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
17
insurance purposes the term manufactured home does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles.
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
manufacturing – Any process whereby the nature, size, or shape of articles or raw materials are
changed, or where articles are assembled or packaged.
marina, recreational – Any pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or similar structure or facility which is operated
to provide dockage for recreational watercraft.
marine related sales and services - Establishments engaged in selling watercraft related goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal use and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.
marquee - A permanent, roof- like structure extending from part or all of a building or other structure over
a public or quasi-public right-of-way and constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass or
plastic.
membership club – A building, lot, or land area, used as a private club or social organization not
conducted for profit or gain, and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with or as a
public tavern, café, restaurant or other like public space.
mezzanine – An intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of any story and covering not more than
33% percent of the floor area of the room in which it is located.
minor site plan – A development plan of one or more lots which proposes new development requiring
site plan review and approval as specified by this Ordinance which:
a. Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to section 30 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-42);
and,
b. Contains the information reasonably required, as set forth in Article VIII of this chapter, in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements established by this chapter
for approval of a minor site plan have been met; and,
c. Meets all of the following criteria:
1. Consists of new building construction and/or building additions that contain less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area; and
2. Contains less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of impervious surface; and
3. Is located on a tract that was not the subject of a minor subdivision or minor site plan
approval within two (2) years of the date of the resolution of memorialization.
[NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
mixed use residential building - A building that contains residential and non-residential uses.
mobile home – See “manufactured housing.”
mobile home park – A site containing spaces with required improvements and utilities that are leased for
the long term placement of manufactured houses and that may include services and facilities for the
residents.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
18
monopole – The type of tower that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete and a
platform (or racks) for panel antennas arrayed at the top.
mortuary – See “funeral home.”
motel – An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a majority of all rooms having direct
access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
motor vehicle – A self-propelled device used for transportation of people or goods over land surfaces.
multi-level parking structure – A building or structure consisting of more than one (1) level and used for
the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
national register criteria - the established criteria for evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion
in the National Register of Historic Places.
new construction - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of this Ordinance.
nightclub – An establishment dispensing liquor and meals and in which music, dancing or entertainment
is conducted. For the purposes of this Chapter, an “adult entertainment use” shall not be considered a
“nightclub.”
non-conforming lot - A lot, the area, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
non-conforming structure - A structure the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
non-conforming use - A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
nuisance – An interference with the enjoyment and use of property.
nursery – Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and plants for sale.
nursing home/convalescent home – See “long term care facility.”
office – A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service,
industry, or government and generally furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment.
offsite – Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property, of which the lot is a
part, which is the subject of a development plan or the closest half of the street or right-of-way abutting
the property of which the lot is a part. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per Ordinance
No. 03-035]
off-tract – Not located on the property that is the subject of a development plan nor on the closest half of
the abutting street or right-of-way. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per Ordinance No.
03-035]
onsite – Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street or right of way. [NOTE: The
previous definition has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
19
on-tract – Located on the property that is the subject of a development plan or on the closest half of an
abutting street or right-of-way. [NOTE: The previous definition has been amended per Ordinance No.
03-035]
open space – Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved, except for buildings,
structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
open space, common – An open space area within or related to a development, and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open space
may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
ordinary maintenance and repair - A repair or exact replacement of any part of a structure for which a
construction permit is not required by the Township and where the purpose and effect of such work or
replacement is to correct deterioration, restore a damaged part and prevent the spread of deterioration
and is without change in the exterior of the structure or in the color of the paint. The following are some
of the activities which are permitted as ordinary maintenance and repairs: (A) identical replacement of
existing windows and doors; (B) repairs of existing windows and doors and the installation of storm doors
and windows that do not change their design, scale or appearance; (C) maintenance and repair of
existing roofing materials involving no change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure; (D)
replacement of existing clapboards, shingles or other siding with identical materials and in an identical
configuration. Maintenance and repair of existing clapboards, shingles, or other siding including masonry
involving no change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure.
outdoor storage – The keeping other than in a building of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or
vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
park – A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation.
parking lot – An improved, off-street, ground-level open area used for the parking of motor vehicles. A
parking lot may include access drives or aisles for ingress and egress.
parking space, off-street – A paved or surfaced area for off-street motor vehicle parking.
patio or terrace – A level, landscaped, and/or surfaced area on a lot with a principal building and not
covered by a permanent roof, less than twelve (12’’) inches above grade.
performance guarantee – Any security which may be accepted by the Township to assure required
improvements associated with an application for development will be satisfactorily completed.
permit - Any required Township approval for exterior work to any structure or property in a historic district
or on a historic site, which exterior work is subject to public view. Permit shall include, but is not limited to
a zoning permit, construction permit, a demolition permit, a permit to move, convert, relocate or remodel
or to change the use or type of occupancy of any structure or property in a historic district which involves
exterior changes to the structure or the property on which it is located.
person with head injury – A person who has sustained an injury, illness or traumatic changes to the
skull, the brain contents or its coverings which results in a temporary or permanent physiobiological
decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functions which causes partial or total
disability.
personal boatslip or dock – A structure intended for non-commercial purposes built along or at an angle
from a shoreline so that a boat may discharge or receive passengers.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
20
personal service- A service provided to an individual or group of individuals that does not produce
tangible goods for retail sale or consumption.
personal service establishment – Any business use that provides services to an individual or group of
individuals, such as barbershops, dry cleaning establishments, beauty salons, travel agencies and
substantially similar type uses, and does not provide goods for retail sale or consumption.
place of worship – A church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is used for prayer, or
formal religious services by a religious congregation.
planned commercial development – A contiguous or noncontiguous land area with a minimum
specified land area as specified herein developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or
more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial and/or office uses.
planned development – any planned unit development and any planned commercial development.
planned unit development – An area with a minimum contiguous or non-contiguous acreage of ten (10)
acres or more to be developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential
clusters or planned unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public or commercial
area in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as is specified in this Chapter.
porch - A roofed, open area attached to and with direct access to or from a building.
preliminary approval – The conferral of certain rights pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, prior to
final approval of a major site plan or major subdivision, after specific elements of a development have
been approved by the delegated approving authority and agreed to by the applicant.
preservation - the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity and material
of a building or structure, and the landscape features and vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial
stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials.
principal structure – A building in which the principal use of the lot on is conducted.
principal use – The primary or predominant use of any lot.
professional office – An office used or occupied by a licensed professional in the fields of accounting,
architecture, dentistry, engineering, finance, insurance, law, medicine, planning and similar occupations
and professions.
prohibited use – Any use that is not specifically permitted by this Ordinance.
protection - the act or process of applying measures designed to affect the physical condition of a
property by defending or guarding it from deterioration, loss or attack, or to cover or shield the property
from danger or injury.
public purpose use – The use of land or buildings by the Township of Neptune or by any other federal,
state, county or municipal governmental body including the Township of Neptune Board of Education.
public utility - A facility with the primary function of generating, creating or harnessing natural or manmade
energy for essential services use or distribution off-site, including electrical sub-and switching
stations, or the disposal or treatment of water or wastes, not including service yards or storage and
treatment yards and facilities or wireless telecommunications facilities.
reception and banquet hall – A facility specifically geared to providing interior areas for groups of
individuals to congregate, socialize or celebrate particular events.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
21
reconstruction - the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a
vanished building, structure or object, or any part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.
recreational facility – A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time
activities, excluding billiard parlors, video arcades, adult book and video stores and massage parlors.
refuse and recycling area – A designated area either within a building, or a screened space on the
exterior of a building, specifically designed to hold waste or recyclable materials.
rehabilitation - The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration
which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the
property which are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values.
replacement plan - A specific plan for replacement of removed trees in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
replacement tree - A nursery grown certified tree, properly balled, and marked with a durable label
indicating genus, species and variety, and satisfying the standards for nursery stock and installation
thereof, set forth by American Association of Nurserymen.
research laboratory – An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural,
physical or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development.
restaurant – Any establishment at which food or drink is prepared, served and consumed primarily within
the principal building or at a permitted accessory outside dining facility.
restaurant, drive-through – An establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption, where the consumption may take place or is designated to take place outside the confines
of a restaurant, and where ordering or pick-up of food may take place from an automobile.
restaurant, take-out – An establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption, where the consumption may take place or is designated to take place outside the confines
of a restaurant, and where ordering or pick-up of food may not take place from an automobile.
restoration - The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting
as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement
of missing earlier work.
retail sales - and services – Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general
public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
retail services – Establishments providing services to the general public for personal or household use.
retaining wall – shall mean a structure that is designed and constructed to stabilize two generally
horizontal surfaces which are vertically displaced, and which shall be either a landscape retaining wall or
structural retaining wall:
1. a landscape retaining wall shall mean a retaining wall greater than eighteen (18) inches but less
than four (4) feet in height, which does not support any site improvement within four (4) feet of the
top of the wall.
2. a structural retaining wall shall mean a retaining wall greater than four (4) feet in height, or a
retaining wall with any site improvement located within a distance from the top of the wall equal to
the height of the retaining wall.
[NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordnance No. 03-035]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
22
steep slope – areas on a lot where the inclination of the land's surface from the horizontal is fifteen
percent (15%) or greater as measured over a ten (10) foot interval. Steep slopes which are twenty-five
percent (25%) or greater as measured over a five (5) foot interval shall be considered critical slopes.
[NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordnance No. 03-035]
row house – See “townhouse.”
satellite dish antenna - A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh or bar
configured and in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia, for use to receive and/or
transmit radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses.
school, private elementary, middle or high – Any building or a group of buildings the use of which
meets state requirements for elementary, secondary or higher education and which use does not secure
the major part of its funding from any governmental agency.
school, public elementary, middle or high – Any school licensed by the state and that meets the state
requirements for elementary, secondary or higher education.
school, vocational – A secondary or higher educational facility primarily teaching useable skills that
prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the state requirements as a vocational facility.
selective cutting - The removal of larger trees on an individual basis while leaving trees of lesser size.
self-storage facility – A structure or facility containing separate, individual and private storage spaces of
varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time.
senior citizen apartment building – A development consisting of multifamily dwelling units wherein
permanent residents will be restricted by covenant to persons with a minimum age of at least fifty-five (55)
years for one resident of each eighty percent (80%) of the total units [in accordance with the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended in 1988]. [NOTE: The previous definition has been added per Ordinance No.
02-14]
setback – The distance between a building and any lot line.
setback line – That line that is established at the required minimum distance from any lot line and that
establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed.
setting - the relationship that a site and its buildings have to its surroundings.
shopping center - a group of retail stores and service establishments with parking facilities and designed
to serve a community or neighborhood which is planned, developed, owned and managed as a total
entity.
sidewalk sale – A periodic event that is accessory to a principal permitted retail use and occurs before
and after designated holidays during which merchants are allowed to display merchandise for sale on the
sidewalk.
sign - Any name, identification, description, display or illumination which is affixed to or painted on or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land, and which directs attention to
a person, organization, institution, activity, event, place, object, product, commodity, business,
entertainment, service or profession or which conveys any message, notice or greeting.
sign alteration – The enlargement, extension or relocation of an existing sign or support structure.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
23
sign area - The entire area within a contiguous perimeter enclosing the limits of a sign and including the
frame of the sign, but not including structural elements outside the limits of such sign and not forming an
integral part thereof.
sign face – The area or display surface used for the message.
sign restoration – The routine maintenance and painting of existing, approved signs, that does not
change the approved design or increase the total sign area.
sign supporting structure - All frames, glass or other coverings, gooseneck arms, light bulbs, lights,
shields, shades, reflectors, supports, brackets, braces, screws, bolts, fastenings or other items or devices
which constitute a part of the support system for any sign, awning, canopy or marquee.
sign, awning – A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning.
sign, contractor – A temporary sign that identifies the tradesperson or architect of a specific
improvement on the property for which the improvement is being made.
sign, directional – A sign intended to facilitate efficient traffic circulation movement within a particular
tract.
sign, directory – A ground or wall sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building or group of buildings
and that may indicate their respective professions or business activities.
sign, flashing - A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use.
sign, freestanding – A single or multi-faced sign not attached to a building, and with an upright base
extending from the ground.
sign, illuminated - A sign having characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric
light or luminous tubes as a part of the sign.
sign, indirectly illuminated - An illuminated, non-flashing sign whose illumination is derived from an
external artificial source and is so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from the artificial
source into an area where anyone resides or into any public street or public way.
sign, political – A temporary sign denoting a political campaign headquarters, party affiliation, cause or
candidate.
sign, portable - A sign that is not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise affixed in a permanent
manner to a building or other structure.
sign, project – A temporary sign intended to identify a project under construction, including the project
name, general contractor, architect and prime real estate agent.
sign, projecting – A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects
more than nine (9) inches from such building.
sign, public purpose – A sign designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare, including
official government notices, government signs, signs to control and direct traffic on public streets, street
identification signs, signs erected by public utility companies to warn of dangerous or hazardous
conditions and political signs.
sign, reader board – A temporary, portable sign that incorporates changeable lettering and is intended
primarily for advertising or announcement purposes.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
24
sign, real estate – A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion thereof, on which
the sign is located.
sign, residential development – A sign identifying a residential major subdivision, condominium,
apartment or townhouse complex, and is located entirely on the property which it is identifying.
sign, residential nameplate – A wall sign permitted for the sole purpose of identifying the inhabitant
residing therein, the house name and/or identifying the address of the house.
sign, roof – A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or is wholly dependent upon a building for
support, and that projects above the top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a
building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
sign, sidewalk – A temporary, moveable, non-illuminated sign located within the public right-of-way that
is not permanently affixed to a wall, structure or to the ground.
sign, traffic-control – A permitted sign for the purpose of identifying private parking areas and directing
the flow of traffic on private property.
sign, wall-mounted – A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the wall of a building or
structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall.
sign, window - A sign which is part of or affixed or attached to the interior or exterior of a window or
otherwise part of a window and located within eighteen (18”) inches of the interior of the window and
which can be seen from a public street or public parking facility.
silviculture - The management of any wooded tract-of land to insure the continued survival and welfare
whether for commercial or noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Bureau of Forestry.
site plan - A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed
conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood
plains, marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; and any other information that may be reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to this Ordinance.
slash - The forest debris remaining after a tree removal operation.
soil conservation district - The Freehold Soil Conservation District as established in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, N.J.S.A.
solid waste enclosure – A designated, unroofed, enclosed area for the temporary storage of waste and
recyclable materials.
specimen tree - Any tree with a DPM of eighteen (18") inches or greater.
start of construction - The date the construction permit is issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement is commenced within 180 days of
that date.
state soil conservation committee - An agency of the State established in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, N.J.S.A.
storage shed, private – An accessory building that is exclusively used by the occupant of the principal
building to which it is incidental, and contains items customarily associated with residential use such as
personal items, lawnmowers, tools and hardware.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
25
story – That portion of a building consisting of at least seven (7) feet of vertical height, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. If the ceiling or underside of supporting members
is less than four (4) feet above average grade of any space, then that space shall not be considered a
story nor counted as floor area.
story, one-half – A space under a pitched roof at the top of a building, the floor of which is not more than
two (2) feet below any plane, which will not qualify for living space under BOCA (Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.).
stream corridor – Any river, stream, pond, lake or wetland, together with adjacent upland areas, that
supports protective bands of vegetation that line the water’s edge.
street line – The dividing line between a lot and a street.
stripping - Any activity which disturbs vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surfaces including clearing
and grubbing operations.
structure – A combination of materials constructed for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether
installed on, above, or below the surface of land.
subdivision – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this act, if no new streets are created: (A) divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be
for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size, (B) divisions of
property by testamentary or intestate provisions, (C) divisions of property upon court order, including but
not limited to judgments of foreclosure, (D) consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument and (E) the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the
same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated as separate
lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality. The term “subdivision” shall also include
the term “resubdivision.”
subdivision, major – Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
subdivision, minor – A subdivision of land for the creation of not more than three (3) lots, provided such
subdivision does not involve (A) a planned development, (B) any new street or (C) the extension of any
off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
substantial improvement - Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, where the cost
exceeds or equals fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure either: (A) before the
improvements or repair is started, or (B) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition substantial improvement is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
substantive certification – a determination by COAH approving a municipality’s housing element and
fair share plan in accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and criteria set
forth herein. A grant of substantive certification shall be valid for a period of six years in accordance with
the terms and conditions therein.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
26
swimming pool – An accessory structure whether located above or below the ground, designed and
maintained for swimming and bathing purposes by a private residence for use by household members
and guests, having a depth of more than 18 inches and/or a water surface in excess of 100 square feet.
swimming pool, portable – A swimming pool which is located above ground level, otherwise not
permanently installed, does not require water filtration, circulation and purification, does not exceed a
water surface of 100 square feet, and does not require braces or supports.
tavern – An establishment used for the serving and consumption of liquor by the drink to the general
public on-site as a principal use.
theater, motion-picture – A place where motion pictures are shown to the public for a fee. For the
purposes of this Chapter, an “adult entertainment venue” shall not be considered a “motion picture
theater.”
theater, performing arts – A building designed for the presentation and viewing of live performances.
For the purposes of this Chapter, an “adult entertainment venue” shall not be considered a “performing
arts theater.”
thinning - The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or damaged trees so as to cultivate and
improve the development of the remaining trees on the lot.
topsoil - The top six (6) inch layer of arable soil.
tower, telecommunications or transmission – The structure designed to support transmitting or
receiving antennas. For the purposes of this Chapter, amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities
used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals are not “transmission towers.”
townhouse - A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own
front and secondary access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated
from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
trailer – A wheel-based non-commercial structure that is used for the transportation or storage of goods
or materials, as a construction office, for temporary short-term habitation in case of calamity, or other
occupancy subject to the provisions of this Chapter. A box container which has been temporarily or
permanently removed from a chassis or truck bed shall be considered a “trailer.”
tree - Any deciduous or coniferous species which reaches a typical mature height of twelve (12') feet or
more at maturity, and has a typical DPM of four (4") inches or greater.
use – The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which
land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
wall, decorative - A wall constructed of stone or other material erected for the sole purpose of providing
a decorative and/or landscaped feature, and not to include structural support walls, retaining walls or any
other walls constructed for a purpose other than aesthetics.
warehouse – A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
wireless telecommunication facility – A structure that facilitates personal wireless services as defined
in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services such as cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that
currently exist or may be developed in the future.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
27
wooded acres permitted for development - Those wooded lands within a lot or tract which are not
specifically excluded by any general, state, county or municipal law or ordinance, deed restriction or
covenant running with the land. For purposes of this chapter, those lands specifically eliminated from
considerations as wooded acres permitted for development include, but are not limited to, wetlands as
defined by N. J. S. A.13-9B-1 et seq.
yard – An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The
minimum required yard as set forth herein is to be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as may be provided in this Chapter.
yard, front – An open, unoccupied space (unless occupied by a structure hereinafter specifically
permitted) extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the street line and the building line.
All yards abutting a street shall be considered a front yard. In the Historic District-Oceanfront District the
yard, front shall be the yard between the building line and leasehold line abutting the Historic Flared
Avenue Open Space.
yard, rear - An open, unoccupied space (unless occupied by an accessory structure) extending across
the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the building line.
yard, side - An open, unoccupied space (unless occupied by an accessory structure) extending along the
side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the building line.
zoning officer – An agent appointed by the Township Committee who shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions, requirements, regulations and standards contained in
this Ordinance and who shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may herein specified or
assigned by an appropriate body.
zoning permit – A document signed by the administrative officer (1) which is required by ordinance as a
condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or building and (2) which acknowledges such use,
structure or building complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
28
ARTICLE III- ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
§ 300 DISTRICTS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Township of Neptune is hereby divided into the following districts:
ZONING DISTRICT ZONING SYMBOL
Low Density Residential R-1
Moderate Density Residential R-2
Medium Density Residential R-3
High Density Residential R-4
Multifamily Residential R-5
Town Commercial B-1
Professional Office B-2
Marina Mixed Use B-3
Planned Commercial Development C-1
Corridor Commercial C-2
Route 66 West Commercial C-3
Route 66 East Commercial C-4
Route 33 West Commercial C-5
Route 33 East Commercial C-6
Route 35 Commercial C-7
Light Industrial LI
Planned Unit Development PUD
Civic C
Historic - Single Family Residential HD-R-1
Historic – Oceanfront HD-O
Historic – Multifamily Residential HD-R-2
Historic – Mixed Use HD-B-1
Historic – Recreation HD-R
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 301 ZONING MAP
The zoning map entitled "Zoning Map, Neptune Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey," dated July
24, 2000, with revisions to November 10, 2003 is hereby adopted as the Official Map and is made a part
of this Ordinance. [NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-14 and
Ordinance No. 03-035]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
29
§ 302 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street centerlines, railroad rights-ofway,
streams and lot or property lines as they exist on lots of record at the time of
enactment of this Ordinance unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on the zoning
map. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet and measured horizontally and, when
measured from a street, shall be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the
centerline of that street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact location
of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
B. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they approximately follow lot
lines and where they do not scale more than 20 feet distant therefrom, the street
centerlines, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
C. Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundary, unless
indicated by dimensions on the zoning map, shall be determined by use of the stated
scale on the map.
§ 303 APPLICABILITY WITHIN EACH DISTRICT
The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each district
and the district line extends vertically in both directions from ground level.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
30
ARTICLE IV- ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 400 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Relationship to Other Articles. This Article establishes the use, bulk requirements and other regulations
governing the zones created in Article III. Article II is the compendium of definitions for terms of art in this
Article and throughout the Land Development Ordinance. Performance regulations and design standards
are contained in Article V that provide the basis for the physical development and redevelopment of land
within the zoning classifications. Article VII contains the standards of review upon which all applications
for subdivision or site plan are measured.
§ 401 PROHIBITED USES
All uses not expressly permitted in this Ordinance are hereby prohibited.
§ 402 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL USES
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended use will comply with the
performance standards enumerated below. In the case of a structure being built where the future use is
not known, a zoning permit may be issued with the condition that no certificate of occupancy will be
issued until such time as this documentation is submitted with respect to the particular occupant. A new
application and a new certificate of occupancy shall be required in the event of a change of any user of
any structure.
A. Electrical and/or Electronic Devices. All electrical or electronic devices shall be subject to
the provisions of Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress, HR 10790, dated October, 1968,
entitled "An Act for the Protection of Electronic Product Radiation." Radiation products,
as defined in DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 76-8003, shall be so limited and controlled so
that no measurable energy can be recorded at any point beyond the property boundaries.
The applicant, upon request, shall certified data wherein measurements made in
accordance with the procedure and standards set forth in the DHEW Publication No.
(FDA) 75-8003 adequately demonstrate compliance with the minimum standards
established by the Act. All other forms of electromagnetic radiation lying between one
hundred (100) KHz and ten (10) GHz shall be restricted to the technical limits established
in the Federal Communication Commission's Rules and Regulations. Additionally,
electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is no interference with any
radio or television reception at the lot line (or beyond the operator's dwelling unit in the
case of multi-family dwellings) as the result of the operation of such equipment.
B. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong, dazzling
light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered, and
directed so that glare, direct light or reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining
properties, adjoining dwelling units, adjoining properties, adjoining dwelling units,
adjoining districts or streets.
C. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines. Further, no use shall be
permitted which would cause the temperature to rise or fall in any body of water.
D. Noise. Noise levels shall be designed and operated in accordance with local regulations
and those rules established by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection as they are adopted and amended.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
31
E. Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond.
F. Storage and Waste Disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in
such form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces,
nor shall any substance be deposited which can contaminate an underground aquifer or
otherwise render such underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes which might cause
fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate
containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
G. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent uses nor
contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air conditioners or exhaust
fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted air unless set back from all property lines
10 feet or equipped with baffles to deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use.
H. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling
beyond the immediate lot.
§ 403 RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
§ 403.01 R-1 – Very Low Density Residential
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Zone District is to provide for single-family residential
development at a density less than 3.5 units per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Community center
2. Community shelter
3. Detached single-family residence
4. Parks
5. Place of worship
6. Recreation facilities
C. Conditional uses.
1. Public or private elementary, middle or high school
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
32
5. Surface level parking for a principal permitted use
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 403.02 R-2 – Low Density Residential
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 Zone District is to provide for single-family residential
development at a density ranging between four (4) and five (5) dwelling units per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Cemetery
2. Community center
3. Community shelter
4. Detached single family residence
5. Marina
6. Park
7. Place of worship
8. Recreational facilities
9. Public or private elementary, middle or high school
C. Conditional uses.
1. Public utility facility
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
5. Surface level parking for a principal permitted use.
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 403.03 R-3 – Moderate Density Residential
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-3 Zone District is to provide for single-family residential
development at a density not to exceed 5.8 dwelling units per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
33
1. Cemetery
2. Community center
3. Community shelter
4. Detached single family residence
5. Park
6. Place of worship
7. Recreational facility
8. Public or private elementary, middle or high school
C. Conditional uses.
1. Public utility facility
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
5. Personal boatslip or dock
6. Surface level parking areas for a principal permitted use
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 403.04 R-4 – Medium Density Residential
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-4 Zone District is to provide for single-family residential
development at a density not to exceed 8.7 dwelling units per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Community shelter
2. Detached single family residence
3. Park
4. Place of worship
5. Recreational facility
6. Private or public elementary, middle or high school
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
34
C. Conditional uses.
1. Assisted living facility
2. Community center
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
5. Surface level parking areas for a principal permitted use
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 403.05 R-5 – Multi-family Residential
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-5 Zone District is to provide for multi-family residential
development at a density not to exceed 12 dwelling units per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Age restricted residences
2. Cemetery
3. Community shelter
4. Detached single family residence
5. Multi-family dwellings
6. Park
7. Place of worship
8. Recreational facilities
9. Townhouses
C. Conditional uses
1. Community centers
2. Parking [NOTE: Added per Ordinance No. 02-14]
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
35
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
5. Surface level parking areas for a permitted use
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 404 COMMERCIAL/MIXED USE/INDUSTRIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
§ 404.01 B-1 – Town Commercial
A. Purpose. The B-1 Zone District intends to serve the needs of specific surrounding
residential neighborhoods by providing for retail sale and service uses. The need to
complement and preserve the character of the surrounding residential neighborhoods is
paramount.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Senior Citizen Apartment Building
2. Furniture stores
3. Floor covering stores
4. Home furnishings stores
5. Radio, television & other electronics stores
6. Computer & software stores
7. Musical instrument Stores
8. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
9. Hardware stores
10. Grocery (except convenience) stores
11. Convenience stores
12. General stores
13. Retail bakeries
14. Delicatessens
15. Butcher shops
16. Fish & seafood markets
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
36
17. Fruit & vegetable markets
18. Beer, wine & liquor stores
19. Pharmacies & drug stores
20. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
21. Food (health) supplement stores
22. Health & personal care stores
23. Family clothing & apparel stores
24. Lingerie and corset stores
25. Swimwear stores
26. Jewelry stores
27. Shoe stores
28. Hobby, toy & game stores
29. Bicycle stores
30. Sporting goods stores (excluding firearms)
31. Firearms and ammunition dealers
32. Arts & craft shops
33. Family bookstores
34. Magazine/newspaper stands
35. Department stores
36. General merchandise stores
37. Florists / flower shops
38. Gift shops
39. Greeting card stores
40. Seasonal holiday stores
41. Christmas tree sales (outdoor)
42. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
43. Pet food & pet supplies stores
44. Tobacco shops
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
37
45. Art dealers
46. Antique shops
47. Garden Centers / Nurseries
48. Commercial banking
49. Savings institutions
50. Bank
51. Credit unions
52. Consumer lending
53. Real estate credit
54. All other nondepository credit intermediation
55. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
56. Investment banking & securities dealing
57. Securities brokerage
58. Direct life Insurance carriers
59. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
60. Insurance agencies & brokerages
61. Claims adjusting
62. All other insurance related activities
63. Offices of real estate agents
64. Offices of real estate appraisers
65. Other activities related to real estate
66. Consumer electronics & appliances rental
67. Video tape & disc rental
68. Home health equipment rental
69. Consumer goods rental
70. Musical instrument rental
71. General rental centers
72. Private or Public Elementary, Middle or High School
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
38
73. Early childhood education center
74. Vocational School
75. Sports & recreation instruction
76. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
77. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
78. Offices of physicians (excluding mental health)
79. Offices of physicians, mental health
80. Offices of dentists
81. Offices of chiropractors
82. Offices of optometrists
83. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
84. Offices of podiatrists
85. All other outpatient care centers
86. Diagnostic Imaging centers
87. Home health care services
88. Ambulance and first aid services
89. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
90. Child Care Center
91. Family Day Care
92. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
93. Independent artists, writers & performers
94. Amusement arcades
95. Billiards / pool halls
96. Public Community Centers
97. Public Parks and recreational facilities
98. Community swimming pool, indoor
99. Theater, Performing Arts
100. Places of Worship
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
39
101. Grantmaking foundations
102. Civic & social organizations
103. Professional organizations
104. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
105. Food service contractors / catering
106. Banquet facilities
107. Full-service restaurants
108. Restaurant
109. Restaurant, take-out
110. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
111. Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
112. Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
113. Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
114. Manicure salon or nail services
115. Wig grooming service
116. Diet & weight reducing centers
117. Depilatory salons (hair removal)
118. Ear piercing services
119. Electrologist's studio
120. Electrolysis studio
121. Scalp treatment
122. Hair replacement
123. Tanning salons
124. Funeral homes
125. Consumer electronics repair & maintenance
126. Household item repair and maintenance
127. Computer & office machine repair & maintenance
128. Communication equipment repair & maintenance
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
40
129. Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical) repair & maintenance
130. Appliance repair & maintenance
131. Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops
132. Musical instrument repair shop
133. Leather goods repair services
134. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
135. Bicycle repair shops
136. Locksmiths
137. Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance services
138. Coin-operated laundries & drycleaners
139. Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
140. Linen supply
141. Tailor and mending of garments
142. Film developing services, retail
143. Pet grooming services
144. Offices of lawyers
145. Offices of certified public accountants
146. Other accounting services
147. Architectural services
148. Landscape architectural services
149. Professional planning services
150. Engineering services
151. Building inspection services
152. Custom computer programming services
153. Computer systems design services
154. Computer facilities management services
155. Other computer related services
156. Administration & general management consulting services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
41
157. Other scientific & technical consulting services
158. Advertising agencies
159. Other services related to advertising
160. Photography studios & videography services
161. All other professional, scientific & technical services
162. Office administrative services
163. Facilities support services
164. Employment placement agencies
165. Private mail centers
166. Quick printing
167. All other business support services
168. Travel agencies
169. Investigation and security services
170. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
171. Municipal facilities
172. Fire department facilities
173. Public safety facilities
174. First aid facilities
175. Board of Education facilities
176. Greenhouses
177. Taxi service
178. Couriers
179. Local messengers & local delivery
180. Film & sound recording studios
[NOTE: Section 404.01.B has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-14 and 03-035]
C. Conditional uses.
1. Accessory Apartments
2. Restaurant, drive-through
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
42
3. Centralized telephone utility installations
4. Centralized coaxial cable utility installations
5. Public Utility Facility
6. Electricity regulating substations
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Educational support services
3. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
4. Outdoor Dining Facility
5. Parking for principal use
6. Telephone communication distribution
7. Coaxial cable communication distribution
8. Emergency services radio communication facilities
9. Natural gas distribution
10. Electric power transmission & distribution
11. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
12. Sanitary sewer lines
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 404.02 B-2 – Professional Office
A. Purpose. The B-2 Zone District seeks to provide for professional office development in
designated areas.
B. Permitted uses
1. Christmas tree sales (outdoor)
2. Commercial banking
3. Savings institutions
4. Bank
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
43
5. Credit unions
6. Consumer lending
7. Real estate credit
8. All other nondepository credit intermediation
9. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
10. Investment banking & securities dealing
11. Securities brokerage
12. Direct life Insurance carriers
13. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
14. Insurance agencies & brokerages
15. Claims adjusting
16. All other insurance related activities
17. Offices of real estate agents
18. Offices of real estate appraisers
19. Other activities related to real estate
20. Private or Public Elementary, Middle or High School
21. Early childhood education center
22. Computer training facility
23. Apprenticeship training
24. Other technical & trade schools
25. Offices of physicians (excluding mental health)
26. Offices of physicians, mental health
27. Offices of dentists
28. Offices of chiropractors
29. Offices of optometrists
30. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
31. Offices of podiatrists
32. All other outpatient care centers
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
44
33. Diagnostic Imaging centers
34. Home health care services
35. Ambulance and first aid services
36. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
37. Child Care Center
38. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
39. Independent artists, writers & performers
40. Health and Fitness Club
41. Public Community Centers
42. Public Parks and recreational facilities
43. Grantmaking foundations
44. Civic & social organizations
45. Professional organizations
46. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
47. Funeral homes
48. Offices of lawyers
49. Offices of certified public accountants
50. Other accounting services
51. Architectural services
52. Landscape architectural services
53. Professional planning services
54. Engineering services
55. Building inspection services
56. Testing laboratories
57. Custom computer programming services
58. Computer systems design services
59. Computer facilities management services
60. Other computer related services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
45
61. Administration & general management consulting services
62. Other scientific & technical consulting services
63. Advertising agencies
64. Other services related to advertising
65. Photography studios & videography services
66. All other professional, scientific & technical services
67. Office administrative services
68. Facilities support services
69. Employment placement agencies
70. Municipal facilities
71. Fire department facilities
72. Public safety facilities
73. First aid facilities
74. Board of Education facilities
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
C. Accessory Uses
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
3. Parking for principal use
4. Telephone communication distribution
5. Coaxial cable communication distribution
6. Emergency services radio communication facilities
7. Natural gas distribution
8. Electric power transmission & distribution
9. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
10. Sanitary sewer lines
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Conditional uses.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
46
1. Electricity regulating substations
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 404.03 B-3 – Marina Mixed Use
A. Purpose. The B-3 Zone District seeks to provide for a well balanced mix of residential
and marine oriented retail uses that enhance the Shark River Waterfront area while
respecting important coastal environments.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Detached Single Family Residence
2. Multi-family Dwellings [editorial note: see supplementary regulations]
3. Townhouses [editorial note: see supplementary regulations]
4. Boat and marine equipment dealers [editorial note: see supplementary
regulations]
5. Commercial banking
6. Savings institutions
7. Bank
8. Credit unions
9. Offices of real estate agents
10. Offices of real estate appraisers
11. Other activities related to real estate
12. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
13. Child Care Center
14. Family Day Care
15. Nightclub
16. Marinas [editorial note: see supplementary regulations at §412]
17. Personal Boatslip or Dock
18. Health and Fitness Club
19. Indoor recreational facility
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
47
20. Public Community Centers
21. Public Parks and recreational facilities
22. Grantmaking foundations
23. Civic & social organizations
24. Professional organizations
25. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
26. Bed & Breakfast Guesthouse
27. Bed & Breakfast Homestay
28. Hotels (excluding casino hotels)
29. Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)
30. Food service contractors / catering
31. Banquet facilities
32. Full-service restaurants
33. Restaurant
34. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
35. Offices of lawyers
36. Offices of certified public accountants
37. Other accounting services
38. Architectural services
39. Landscape architectural services
40. Professional planning services
41. Engineering services
42. Building inspection services
43. Custom computer programming services
44. Computer systems design services
45. Computer facilities management services
46. Other computer related services
47. Administration & general management consulting services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
48
48. Other scientific & technical consulting services
49. Advertising agencies
50. Other services related to advertising
51. Photography studios & videography services
52. All other professional, scientific & technical services
53. Municipal facilities
54. Fire department facilities
55. Public safety facilities
56. First aid facilities
57. Board of Education facilities
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
C. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Home Occupation
3. Home Professional Office
4. Swimming pools, private
5. Tennis courts, private
6. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
7. Outdoor Dining Facility
8. Boatyards [editorial note: see supplementary regulations]
9. Parking for principal use
10. Telephone communication distribution
11. Coaxial cable communication distribution
12. Emergency services radio communication facilities
13. Natural gas distribution
14. Electric power transmission & distribution
15. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
16. Sanitary sewer lines
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
49
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 404.04 C-1 – Planned Commercial Development
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-1 Zone District is to serve the regional need for retail,
professional office and research facilities by encouraging planned commercial
development.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Planned Commercial Development [editorial note: see §404.04.F]
2. Furniture stores
3. Floor covering stores
4. Home furnishings stores
5. Household appliance stores
6. Radio, television & other electronics stores
7. Computer & software stores
8. Musical instrument Stores
9. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
10. Home centers
11. Hardware stores
12. Grocery (except convenience) stores
13. Convenience stores
14. General stores
15. Retail bakeries
16. Delicatessens
17. Butcher shops
18. Fish & seafood markets
19. Fruit & vegetable markets
20. Beer, wine & liquor stores
21. Pharmacies & drug stores
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
50
22. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
23. Food (health) supplement stores
24. Health & personal care stores
25. Family clothing & apparel stores
26. Lingerie and corset stores
27. Swimwear stores
28. Jewelry stores
29. Shoe stores
30. Hobby, toy & game stores
31. Bicycle stores
32. Sporting goods stores (exluding firearms)
33. Arts & craft shops
34. Family book stores
35. Magazine/newspaper stands
36. Department stores
37. General merchandise stores
38. Florists / flower shops
39. Gift shops
40. Greeting card stores
41. Seasonal holiday stores
42. Christmas tree sales (outdoor)
43. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
44. Pet food & pet supplies stores
45. Pet stores
46. Membership warehouse club (retail)
47. Tobacco shops
48. Art dealers
49. Antique shops
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
51
50. Commercial banking
51. Savings institutions
52. Bank
53. Credit unions
54. Consumer lending
55. Real estate credit
56. All other nondepository credit intermediation
57. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
58. Investment banking & securities dealing
59. Securities brokerage
60. Direct life Insurance carriers
61. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
62. Insurance agencies & brokerages
63. Claims adjusting
64. All other insurance related activities
65. Offices of real estate agents
66. Offices of real estate appraisers
67. Other activities related to real estate
68. Consumer electronics & appliances rental
69. Videotape & disc rental
70. Home health equipment rental
71. Consumer goods rental
72. Musical instrument rental
73. General rental centers
74. Computer training facility
75. Apprenticeship training
76. Other technical & trade schools
77. Sports & recreation instruction
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
52
78. Art, music, dance & martial arts instruction
79. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
80. Offices of physicians (excluding mental health)
81. Offices of physicians, mental health
82. Offices of dentists
83. Offices of chiropractors
84. Offices of optometrists
85. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
86. Offices of podiatrists
87. All other outpatient care centers
88. Diagnostic Imaging centers
89. Home health care services
90. Ambulance and first aid services
91. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
92. Child Care Center
93. Amusement arcades
94. Bowling centers
95. Golf course, miniature
96. Public Parks and recreational facilities
97. Theater, Motion Picture (indoor)
98. Grantmaking foundations
99. Civic & social organizations
100. Professional organizations
101. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
102. Hotels (excluding casino hotels)
103. Hotels, Extended Stay Lodging Facilities
104. Food service contractors / catering
105. Banquet facilities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
53
106. Full-service restaurants
107. Restaurant
108. Restaurant, take-out
109. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
110. Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
111. Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
112. Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
113. Manicure salon or nail services
114. Wig grooming service
115. Diet & weight reducing centers
116. Depilatory salons (hair removal)
117. Ear piercing services
118. Electrologist's studio
119. Electrolysis studio
120. Scalp treatment
121. Hair replacement
122. Tanning salons
123. Funeral homes
124. Consumer electronics repair & maintenance
125. Household item repair and maintenance
126. Computer & office machine repair & maintenance
127. Communication equipment repair & maintenance
128. Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical) repair & maintenance
129. Appliance repair & maintenance
130. Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops
131. Musical instrument repair shop
132. Leather goods repair services
133. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
54
134. Bicycle repair shops
135. Locksmiths
136. Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance services
137. Coin-operated laundries & drycleaners
138. Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
139. Linen supply
140. Tailor and mending of garments
141. Film developing services, retail
142. Pet grooming services
143. Offices of lawyers
144. Offices of certified public accountants
145. Other accounting services
146. Architectural services
147. Landscape architectural services
148. Professional planning services
149. Engineering services
150. Building inspection services
151. Testing laboratories
152. Custom computer programming services
153. Computer systems design services
154. Computer facilities management services
155. Other computer related services
156. Administration & general management consulting services
157. Other scientific & technical consulting services
158. Advertising agencies
159. Other services related to advertising
160. Veterinary services / animal hospital
161. Photography studios & videography services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
55
162. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
163. Office administrative services
164. Facilities support services
165. Employment placement agencies
166. Private mail centers
167. Quick printing
168. All other business support services
169. Travel agencies
170. Investigation and security services
171. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
172. Janitorial services
173. Landscaping maintenance services
174. Carpet & upholstery cleaning services
175. Other services to buildings & dwellings
176. Municipal facilities
177. Fire department facilities
178. Public safety facilities
179. First aid facilities
180. Board of Education facilities
181. Medicinal & botanical manufacturing
182. Research Laboratory
183. Pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing
184. Dental laboratories
185. Taxi service
186. Couriers
187. Local messengers & local delivery
188. Newspaper publishers
189. Book publishers
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
56
190. Software publishers
191. Film & sound recording studios
192. Data Center
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
C. Conditional uses.
1. Restaurant, drive-through
2. Centralized telephone utility installations
3. Centralized coaxial cable utility installations
4. Wireless telecommunications facility
5. Electricity regulating substations
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Educational support services
3. Health and Fitness Club
4. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
5. Helistops
6. Parking for principal use
7. Telephone communication distribution
8. Coaxial cable communication distribution
9. Emergency services radio communication facilities
10. Natural gas distribution
11. Electric power transmission & distribution
12. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
13. Sanitary sewer lines
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
57
F. Planned commercial development. Planned Commercial Development in the C-1 Zone
shall conform to the requirements set forth at Section 414 and the design standards set
forth in §414.D.
§ 404.05 C-2 – Corridor Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-2 Zone District provides for roadway oriented, non-retail business uses.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Garden Centers / Nurseries
2. Sports & recreation instruction
3. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
4. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
5. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
6. Offices of physicians, mental health
7. Offices of dentists
8. Offices of chiropractors
9. Offices of optometrists
10. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
11. Offices of podiatrists
12. All other outpatient care centers
13. Diagnostic Imaging centers
14. Home health care services
15. Ambulance and first aid services
16. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
17. Child Care Center
18. Nightclub
19. Bowling centers
20. Golf course, miniature
21. Health and Fitness Club
22. Public Parks and recreational facilities
23. Places of Worship
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
58
24. Grantmaking foundations
25. Civic & social organizations
26. Professional organizations
27. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
28. Hotels (excluding casino hotels)
29. Hotels, Extended Stay Lodging Facilities
30. Food service contractors / catering
31. Banquet facilities
32. Full-service restaurants
33. Restaurant
34. Restaurant, take-out
35. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
36. Automatic car washes
37. Welding shops and blacksmiths
38. Machine shops
39. Offices of lawyers
40. Offices of certified public accountants
41. Other accounting services
42. Architectural services
43. Landscape architectural services
44. Professional planning services
45. Engineering services
46. Building inspection services
47. Custom computer programming services
48. Computer systems design services
49. Computer facilities management services
50. Other computer related services
51. Administration & general management consulting services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
59
52. Other scientific & technical consulting services
53. Advertising agencies
54. Other services related to advertising
55. Photography studios & videography services
56. Facilities support services
57. Municipal facilities
58. Fire department facilities
59. Public safety facilities
60. First aid facilities
61. Board of Education facilities
62. Taxi service
63. School & employee bus transportation operations
64. Motor vehicle towing operations
65. Couriers
66. Local messengers & local delivery
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
C. Conditional uses.
1. Adult Entertainment Use
2. Restaurant, drive-through
3. Electricity regulating substations
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Educational support services
3. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
4. Parking for principal use
5. Telephone communication distribution
6. Coaxial cable communication distribution
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
60
7. Emergency services radio communication facilities
8. Natural gas distribution
9. Electric power transmission & distribution
10. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
11. Sanitary sewer lines
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended as per Ordinance No. 03-035]
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 404.06 C-3 – Route 66 West Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-3 Zone District provides for business uses appropriate to the Route 66
highway corridor situated west of Route 18.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Automobile Dealerships
2. Furniture stores
3. Floor covering stores
4. Home furnishings stores
5. Household appliance stores
6. Radio, television & other electronics stores
7. Computer & software stores
8. Musical instrument Stores
9. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
10. Home centers
11. Hardware stores
12. Grocery (except convenience) stores
13. Convenience stores
14. Retail bakeries
15. Delicatessens
16. Family clothing & apparel stores
17. Lingerie and corset stores
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
61
18. Swimwear stores
19. Jewelry stores
20. Shoe stores
21. Hobby, toy & game stores
22. Bicycle stores
23. Sporting goods stores (excluding firearms)
24. Arts & craft shops
25. Family bookstores
26. Magazine/newspaper stands
27. Department stores
28. Florists / flower shops
29. Gift shops
30. Greeting card stores
31. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
32. Pet food & pet supplies stores
33. Pet stores
34. Membership warehouse club (retail)
35. Tobacco shops
36. Art dealers
37. Antique shops
38. Commercial banking
39. Savings institutions
40. Bank
41. Credit unions
42. Consumer lending
43. Real estate credit
44. All other nondepository credit intermediation
45. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
62
46. Investment banking & securities dealing
47. Securities brokerage
48. Direct life Insurance carriers
49. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
50. Insurance agencies & brokerages
51. Claims adjusting
52. All other insurance related activities
53. Offices of real estate agents
54. Offices of real estate appraisers
55. Other activities related to real estate
56. Videotape & disc rental
57. Home health equipment rental
58. Musical instrument rental
59. Early childhood education center
60. Vocational School
61. Computer training facility
62. Apprenticeship training
63. Other technical & trade schools
64. Sports & recreation instruction
65. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
66. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
67. Educational support services
68. Offices of physicians (excluding mental health)
69. Offices of physicians, mental health
70. Offices of dentists
71. Offices of chiropractors
72. Offices of optometrists
73. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
63
74. Offices of podiatrists
75. All other outpatient care centers
76. Diagnostic Imaging centers
77. Home health care services
78. Child Care Center
79. Community Shelter
80. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
81. Independent artists, writers & performers
82. Health and Fitness Club
83. Public Parks and recreational facilities
84. Theater, Motion Picture (indoor)
85. Theater, Performing Arts
86. Civic & social organizations
87. Professional organizations
88. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
89. Hotels (excluding casino hotels)
90. Hotels, Extended Stay Lodging Facilities
91. Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)
92. Food service contractors / catering
93. Banquet facilities
94. Full-service restaurants
95. Restaurant
96. Restaurant, drive-through
97. Restaurant, take-out
98. Funeral homes
99. Cemeteries
100. Communication equipment repair & maintenance
101. Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical) repair & maintenance
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
64
102. Appliance repair & maintenance
103. Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops
104. Musical instrument repair shop
105. Leather goods repair services
106. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
107. Bicycle repair shops
108. Locksmiths
109. Tailor and mending of garments
110. Film developing services, retail
111. Pet grooming services
112. Offices of lawyers
113. Offices of certified public accountants
114. Other accounting services
115. Architectural services
116. Landscape architectural services
117. Professional planning services
118. Engineering services
119. Building inspection services
120. Testing laboratories
121. Custom computer programming services
122. Computer systems design services
123. Computer facilities management services
124. Other computer related services
125. Administration & general management consulting services
126. Other scientific & technical consulting services
127. Advertising agencies
128. Other services related to advertising
129. Veterinary services / animal hospital
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
65
130. Photography studios & videography services
131. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
132. Office administrative services
133. Private mail centers
134. Quick printing
135. All other business support services
136. Travel agencies
137. Investigation and security services
138. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
139. Municipal facilities
140. Fire department facilities
141. Public safety facilities
142. First aid facilities
143. Board of Education facilities
144. Sign manufacturing
145. Newspaper publishers
146. Book publishers
147. Software publishers
148. Film & sound recording studios
149. Data Center
C. Conditional uses.
1. Gasoline fueling stations
2. Gasoline fueling stations with convenience stores
3. Assisted Living Facility
4. Homes for the elderly
5. Public Community Centers
6. General automotive repair & maintenance (mechanical & electrical systems)
7. Automotive body repair, painting & interior repair & maintenance
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
66
8. Automotive oil change & lubrication shops
9. Installation of auto phones
10. Automotive Body Repair and Painting
11. Automotive Service Station
12. Marine related sales and services
13. Automatic car washes
14. Consumer electronics repair & maintenance
15. Household item repair and maintenance
16. Computer & office machine repair & maintenance
17. Electricity regulating substations
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Garden Centers / Nurseries
3. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
4. Parking for principal use
5. Telephone communication distribution
6. Coaxial cable communication distribution
7. Emergency services radio communication facilities
8. Natural gas distribution
9. Electric power transmission & distribution
10. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
11. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. Regulations set forth in Schedule B-1 for the Corridor Commercial (C-
2) Zone shall govern.
[NOTE: The previous section has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 404.07 C-4 – Route 66 East Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-4 Zone District provides for business uses appropriate to the Route 66
highway corridor situated east of Route 18.
B. Permitted uses.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
67
1. Offices of physicians (excluding mental health)
2. Offices of physicians, mental health
3. Offices of dentists
4. Offices of chiropractors
5. Offices of optometrists
6. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
7. Offices of podiatrists
8. All other outpatient care centers
9. Diagnostic Imaging centers
10. Home health care services
11. Child Care Center
12. Community Shelter
13. Bowling centers
14. Public Parks and recreational facilities
15. Places of Worship
16. Full-service restaurants
17. Cemeteries
18. Municipal facilities
19. Fire department facilities
20. Public safety facilities
21. First aid facilities
22. Board of Education facilities
C. Conditional uses.
1. Electricity regulating substations
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
68
3. Parking for principal use
4. Telephone communication distribution
5. Coaxial cable communication distribution
6. Emergency services radio communication facilities
7. Natural gas distribution
8. Electric power transmission & distribution
9. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
10. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. Regulations set forth in Schedule B-1 for the Town Commercial (B-1)
Zone shall govern.
[NOTE: The previous section has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 404.08 C-5 – Route 33 West Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-5 Zone District provides for business uses appropriate to the Route 33
highway corridor situated west of Route 18.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Furniture stores
2. Floor covering stores
3. Home furnishings stores
4. Radio, television & other electronics stores
5. Computer & software stores
6. Musical instrument Stores
7. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
8. Hardware stores
9. Retail bakeries
10. Garden Centers / Nurseries
11. Commercial banking
12. Savings institutions
13. Bank
14. Credit unions
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
69
15. Consumer lending
16. Real estate credit
17. All other nondepository credit intermediation
18. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
19. Investment banking & securities dealing
20. Securities brokerage
21. Direct life Insurance carriers
22. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
23. Insurance agencies & brokerages
24. Claims adjusting
25. All other insurance related activities
26. Offices of real estate agents
27. Offices of real estate appraisers
28. Other activities related to real estate
29. Computer training facility
30. Apprenticeship training
31. Other technical & trade schools
32. Sports & recreation instruction
33. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
34. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
35. Offices of physicians, mental health
36. Offices of dentists
37. Offices of chiropractors
38. Offices of optometrists
39. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
40. Offices of podiatrists
41. All other outpatient care centers
42. Diagnostic Imaging centers
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
70
43. Home health care services
44. Child Care Center
45. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
46. Independent artists, writers & performers
47. Health and Fitness Club
48. Indoor recreational facility
49. Public Parks and recreational facilities
50. Places of Worship
51. Civic & social organizations
52. Professional organizations
53. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
54. Full-service restaurants
55. Restaurant
56. Other computer related services
57. Administration & general management consulting services
58. Other scientific & technical consulting services
59. Advertising agencies
60. Other services related to advertising
61. Veterinary services / animal hospital
62. Photography studios & videography services
63. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
64. Office administrative services
65. Private mail centers
66. Municipal facilities
67. Fire department facilities
68. Public safety facilities
69. First aid facilities
70. Board of Education facilities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
71
71. Newspaper publishers
72. Book publishers
73. Software publishers
74. Film & sound recording studios
C. Conditional uses.
1. Plumbing, heating & AC contractors
2. Painting & wall covering contractors
3. Electrical contractors
4. Masonry & stone contractors
5. Carpentry contractors
6. Floor laying & other floor contractors
7. Roofing, siding, & sheet metal contractors
8. Glass & glazing contractors
9. Building equipment & other machine installation contractors
10. Electricity regulating substations
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
3. Parking for principal use
4. Telephone communication distribution
5. Coaxial cable communication distribution
6. Emergency services radio communication facilities
7. Natural gas distribution
8. Electric power transmission & distribution
9. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
10. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. Regulations set forth in Schedule B-1 for the Corridor Commercial (C-
2) Zone shall govern.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
72
[NOTE: The previous section has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 404.09 C-6 – Route 33 East Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-6 Zone District provides for business uses appropriate to the Route 33
highway corridor of Neptune Township situated east of Route 18.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Radio, television & other electronics stores
2. Computer & software stores
3. Musical instrument Stores
4. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
5. Convenience stores
6. Retail bakeries
7. Delicatessens
8. Butcher shops
9. Fish & seafood markets
10. Fruit & vegetable markets
11. Beer, wine & liquor stores
12. Pharmacies & drug stores
13. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
14. Food (health) supplement stores
15. Health & personal care stores
16. Family clothing & apparel stores
17. Lingerie and corset stores
18. Swimwear stores
19. Jewelry stores
20. Shoe stores
21. Hobby, toy & game stores
22. Bicycle stores
23. Sporting goods stores (exluding firearms)
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
73
24. Arts & craft shops
25. Family book stores
26. Magazine/newspaper stands
27. Florists / flower shops
28. Gift shops
29. Greeting card stores
30. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
31. Pet food & pet supplies stores
32. Pet stores
33. Tobacco shops
34. Art dealers
35. Antique shops
36. Commercial banking
37. Savings institutions
38. Bank
39. Credit unions
40. Consumer lending
41. Real estate credit
42. All other nondepository credit intermediation
43. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
44. Investment banking & securities dealing
45. Securities brokerage
46. Direct life Insurance carriers
47. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
48. Insurance agencies & brokerages
49. Claims adjusting
50. All other insurance related activities
51. Offices of real estate agents
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
74
52. Offices of real estate appraisers
53. Other activities related to real estate
54. Video tape & disc rental
55. Home health equipment rental
56. Musical instrument rental
57. Private or Public Elementary, Middle or High School
58. Early childhood education center
59. Computer training facility
60. Apprenticeship training
61. Sports & recreation instruction
62. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
63. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
64. Offices of physicians, mental health
65. Offices of dentists
66. Offices of chiropractors
67. Offices of optometrists
68. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
69. Offices of podiatrists
70. All other outpatient care centers
71. Diagnostic Imaging centers
72. Home health care services
73. Child Care Center
74. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
75. Independent artists, writers & performers
76. Marinas
77. Health and Fitness Club
78. Public Community Centers
79. Public Parks and recreational facilities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
75
80. Community swimming pool, indoor
81. Theater, Motion Picture (indoor)
82. Theater, Performing Arts
83. Civic & social organizations
84. Professional organizations
85. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
86. Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)
87. Food service contractors / catering
88. Full-service restaurants
89. Restaurant
90. Restaurant, take-out
91. Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
92. Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
93. Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
94. Manicure salon or nail services
95. Wig grooming service
96. Diet & weight reducing centers
97. Baths (steam, Turkish, vapor, mineral)
98. Depilatory salons (hair removal)
99. Ear piercing services
100. Body piercing services
101. Electrologist's studio
102. Electrolysis studio
103. Massage parlor
104. Scalp treatment
105. Hair replacement
106. Tanning salons
107. Musical instrument repair shop
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
76
108. Leather goods repair services
109. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
110. Bicycle repair shops
111. Locksmiths
112. Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
113. Tailor and mending of garments
114. Film developing services, retail
115. Pet grooming services
116. Offices of lawyers
117. Offices of certified public accountants
118. Other accounting services
119. Architectural services
120. Landscape architectural services
121. Professional planning services
122. Engineering services
123. Building inspection services
124. Testing laboratories
125. Custom computer programming services
126. Computer systems design services
127. Computer facilities management services
128. Other computer related services
129. Administration & general management consulting services
130. Other scientific & technical consulting services
131. Advertising agencies
132. Other services related to advertising
133. Photography studios & videography services
134. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
135. Office administrative services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
77
136. Private mail centers
137. Quick printing
138. All other business support services
139. Travel agencies
140. Investigation and security services
141. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
142. Municipal facilities
143. Fire department facilities
144. Public safety facilities
145. First aid facilities
146. Board of Education facilities
147. Frozen specialty food manufacturing
148. Newspaper publishers
149. Book publishers
150. Software publishers
151. Film & sound recording studios
C. Conditional uses.
1. Restaurant, drive-through
2. Public Utility Facility
3. Electricity regulating substations
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Outdoor Displays and Sales
3. Educational support services
4. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
5. Outdoor Dining Facility
6. Parking for principal use
7. Telephone communication distribution
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
78
8. Coaxial cable communication distribution
9. Emergency services radio communication facilities
10. Natural gas distribution
11. Electric power transmission & distribution
12. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
13. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. Regulations set forth in Schedule B-1 for the Town Commercial (B-1)
Zone shall govern.
[NOTE: The previous section has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 404.10 C-7 – Route 35 Commercial
A. Purpose. The C-7 Zone District provides for business uses appropriate to the Route 35
highway corridor of Neptune Township situated south of the West Lake Avenue Town
Commercial Zone.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Furniture stores
2. Floor covering stores
3. Home furnishings stores
4. Household appliance stores
5. Radio, television & other electronics stores
6. Computer & software stores
7. Musical instrument Stores
8. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
9. Hardware stores
10. Grocery (except convenience) stores
11. Convenience stores
12. Retail bakeries
13. Delicatessens
14. Butcher shops
15. Fish & seafood markets
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
79
16. Fruit & vegetable markets
17. Beer, wine & liquor stores
18. Pharmacies & drug stores
19. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
20. Food (health) supplement stores
21. Health & personal care stores
22. Family clothing & apparel stores
23. Lingerie and corset stores
24. Swimwear stores
25. Jewelry stores
26. Shoe stores
27. Hobby, toy & game stores
28. Bicycle stores
29. Sporting goods stores (exluding firearms)
30. Arts & craft shops
31. Family book stores
32. Magazine/newspaper stands
33. Florists / flower shops
34. Gift shops
35. Greeting card stores
36. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
37. Pet food & pet supplies stores
38. Pet stores
39. Tobacco shops
40. Art dealers
41. Antique shops
42. Commercial banking
43. Savings institutions
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
80
44. Bank
45. Credit unions
46. Consumer lending
47. Real estate credit
48. All other nondepository credit intermediation
49. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
50. Investment banking & securities dealing
51. Securities brokerage
52. Direct life Insurance carriers
53. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
54. Insurance agencies & brokerages
55. Claims adjusting
56. All other insurance related activities
57. Offices of real estate agents
58. Offices of real estate appraisers
59. Other activities related to real estate
60. Video tape & disc rental
61. Home health equipment rental
62. Musical instrument rental
63. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
64. Community Shelter
65. Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
66. Independent artists, writers & performers
67. Public Community Centers
68. Theater, Motion Picture (indoor)
69. Theater, Performing Arts
70. Civic & social organizations
71. Professional organizations
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
81
72. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
73. Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)
74. Food service contractors / catering
75. Banquet facilities
76. Full-service restaurants
77. Restaurant
78. Restaurant, take-out
79. Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
80. Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
81. Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
82. Manicure salon or nail services
83. Wig grooming service
84. Diet & weight reducing centers
85. Baths (steam, Turkish, vapor, mineral)
86. Depilatory salons (hair removal)
87. Ear piercing services
88. Body piercing services
89. Electrologist's studio
90. Electrolysis studio
91. Massage parlor
92. Scalp treatment
93. Hair replacement
94. Tanning salons
95. Funeral homes
96. Musical instrument repair shop
97. Leather goods repair services
98. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
99. Bicycle repair shops
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
82
100. Locksmiths
101. Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
102. Tailor and mending of garments
103. Film developing services, retail
104. Pet grooming services
105. Offices of lawyers
106. Offices of certified public accountants
107. Other accounting services
108. Architectural services
109. Landscape architectural services
110. Professional planning services
111. Engineering services
112. Building inspection services
113. Testing laboratories
114. Custom computer programming services
115. Computer systems design services
116. Computer facilities management services
117. Administration & general management consulting services
118. Other scientific & technical consulting services
119. Advertising agencies
120. Other services related to advertising
121. Photography studios & videography services
122. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
123. Office administrative services
124. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
125. Private mail centers
126. Quick printing
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
83
127. All other business support services
128. Travel agencies
129. Investigation and security services
130. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
131. Beverage Wholesale
132. Newspaper publishers
133. Book publishers
134. Software publishers
135. Film & sound recording studios
C. Conditional uses.
1. Reserved (no conditional uses specified in use schedule)
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Outdoor Dining Facility
3. Telephone communication distribution
4. Coaxial cable communication distribution
5. Natural gas distribution
6. Electric power transmission & distribution
7. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
8. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. Regulations set forth in Schedule B-1 for the Town Commercial (B-1)
Zone shall govern.
[NOTE: The previous section has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 404.11 LI - Light Industrial
A. Purpose. The LI Zone District provides for light industrial uses, as well as office uses
according to design standards set forth in this Chapter.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Planned Commercial Development [editorial note: see §404.11.F]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
84
2. Christmas tree sales (outdoor)
3. Heating/fuel oil dealers & distributors
4. Commercial banking
5. Savings institutions
6. Bank
7. Credit unions
8. Consumer lending
9. Real estate credit
10. All other nondepository credit intermediation
11. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
12. Investment banking & securities dealing
13. Securities brokerage
14. Direct life Insurance carriers
15. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
16. Insurance agencies & brokerages
17. Claims adjusting
18. All other insurance related activities
19. Offices of real estate agents
20. Offices of real estate appraisers
21. Computer training facility
22. Apprenticeship training
23. Other technical & trade schools
24. Sports & recreation instruction
25. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
26. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
27. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
28. Offices of physicians, mental health
29. Offices of dentists
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
85
30. Offices of chiropractors
31. Offices of optometrists
32. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
33. Offices of podiatrists
34. All other outpatient care centers
35. Diagnostic Imaging centers
36. Home health care services
37. Ambulance and first aid services
38. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
39. Child Care Center
40. Health and Fitness Club
41. Indoor recreational facility
42. Public Community Centers
43. Public Parks and recreational facilities
44. Grantmaking foundations
45. Civic & social organizations
46. Professional organizations
47. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
48. Hotels (excluding casino hotels)
49. Hotels, Extended Stay Lodging Facilities
50. Full-service restaurants
51. Restaurant
52. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
53. General automotive repair & maintenance (mechanical & electrical systems)
54. Automotive body repair, painting & interior repair & maintenance
55. Automotive oil change & lubrication shops
56. Installation of auto phones
57. Automotive Body Repair and Painting
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
86
58. Automotive Service Station
59. Welding shops and blacksmiths
60. Machine shops
61. Offices of lawyers
62. Offices of certified public accountants
63. Other accounting services
64. Architectural services
65. Landscape architectural services
66. Professional planning services
67. Engineering services
68. Building inspection services
69. Testing laboratories
70. Custom computer programming services
71. Computer systems design services
72. Computer facilities management services
73. Other computer related services
74. Administration & general management consulting services
75. Other scientific & technical consulting services
76. Advertising agencies
77. Other services related to advertising
78. Veterinary services / animal hospital
79. Photography studios & videography services
80. All other professional, scientific & technical services
81. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
82. Office administrative services
83. Facilities support services
84. Employment placement agencies
85. Private mail centers
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
87
86. Quick printing
87. All other business support services
88. Travel agencies
89. Investigation and security services
90. Security systems services (except locksmiths)
91. Janitorial services
92. Landscaping maintenance services
93. Carpet & upholstery cleaning services
94. Other services to buildings & dwellings
95. Municipal facilities
96. Fire department facilities
97. Public safety facilities
98. First aid facilities
99. Board of Education facilities
100. Public works facilities
101. Plumbing, heating & AC contractors
102. Painting & wall covering contractors
103. Electrical contractors
104. Masonry & stone contractors
105. Carpentry contractors
106. Floor laying & other floor contractors
107. Roofing, siding, & sheet metal contractors
108. Concrete contractors
109. Structural steel erection contractors
110. Glass & glazing contractors
111. Excavation contractors
112. Landscaping contractors
113. Building equipment & other machine installation contractors
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
88
114. All other special trade contractors
115. Frozen specialty food manufacturing
116. Animal slaughtering
117. Meat processed from carcasses
118. Rendering & meat by-product processing
119. Commercial wholesale bakeries
120. Knit fabric & lace mills
121. Canvas & related product mills
122. All other miscellaneous textile product mill
123. Lumber millwork (including flooring)
124. Commercial lithographic printing
125. Other commercial printing
126. Prepress services
127. Medicinal & botanical manufacturing
128. Research Laboratory
129. Pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing
130. All other miscellaneous chemical product & prep manufacturing
131. Fabricated structural metal manufacturing
132. Sheet metal work manufacturing
133. Electroplating, polish, anodize, color
134. Industrial mold manufacturing
135. Other metalworking machinery manufacturing
136. Radio, TV broadcast & wireless communications equipment manufacturing
137. Other electronic component manufacturing
138. Automatic environmental control manufacturing
139. Surgical & medical instrument manufacturing
140. Dental laboratories
141. Sign manufacturing
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
89
142. All other miscellaneous light manufacturing
143. Automobile & other motor vehicle wholesale
144. Furniture wholesale
145. Home furnishing wholesale
146. Computer & peripheral equip & software wholesale
147. Other professional equipment & supplies wholesale
148. Metal service centers & offices wholesale
149. Electrical equipment, wiring supplies, construction materials wholesale
150. Other electronic parts & equipment wholesale
151. Hardware wholesale
152. Refrigeration equipment & supplies wholesale
153. Industrial machinery & equipment wholesale
154. Industrial supplies wholesale
155. Service establishment equipment & supplies wholesale
156. Recyclable material wholesale
157. Other miscellaneous durable goods wholesale
158. Stationery & office supplies wholesale
159. Industrial & personal service paper wholesale
160. Drugs & druggists' sundries wholesale
161. Women's, children's, infants' clothing wholesale
162. General line grocery wholesale
163. Packaged frozen food wholesale
164. Dairy product (excluding dried or canned) wholesale
165. Poultry & poultry product wholesale
166. Fish & seafood wholesale
167. Meat & meat product wholesale
168. Fresh fruit & vegetable wholesale
169. Other grocery & related products wholesale
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
90
170. Plastics materials & basic forms, shapes wholesale
171. Flower, nursery stock, florists' supplies
172. Tobacco & tobacco product wholesale
173. Other miscellaneous nondurable goods wholesale
174. General freight trucking, long-distance (Truckload)
175. General freight trucking, long-distance (Less Than Truckload LTL)
176. Long term storage of wholesale goods
177. Flex storage space
178. Household & office goods moving
179. Business & other motor vehicle transit systems
180. Taxi service
181. School & employee bus transportation operations
182. Motor vehicle towing operations
183. Freight transportation arrangement
184. Couriers
185. Local messengers & local delivery
186. Newspaper publishers
187. Book publishers
188. Software publishers
189. Film & sound recording studios
190. Television & radio antenna broadcasting
191. Data Center
C. Conditional uses. [Editorial Note: retail type uses specified below are subject to
conditional use standards prescribed in §415, entitled Retail Sales and Service]
1. Mobile home park
2. Floor covering stores
3. Home furnishings stores
4. Household appliance stores
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
91
5. Radio, television & other electronics stores
6. Computer & software stores
7. Musical instrument Stores
8. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
9. Building material and plumbing supply dealers
10. Power equipment stores
11. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
12. Food (health) supplement stores
13. Health & personal care stores
14. Family clothing & apparel stores
15. Lingerie and corset stores
16. Swimwear stores
17. Jewelry stores
18. Shoe stores
19. Hobby, toy & game stores
20. Bicycle stores
21. Sporting goods stores (excluding firearms)
22. Arts & craft shops
23. General merchandise stores
24. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
25. Pet food & pet supplies stores
26. Electronic shopping & mail-order houses
27. Restaurant, drive-through
28. Self-storage facility
29. Billboard
30. Centralized telephone utility installations
31. Centralized coaxial cable utility installations
32. Public Utility Facility
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
92
33. Electricity regulating substations
34. Wireless telecommunications facility
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Health and fitness club as an accessory use to a principal permitted office or
hotel use
3. Helistops
4. Surface level parking lots or multi-level parking structures
5. Energy facilities located on or within principal buildings. Facilities may not
exceed the height of the principal structure by more than twenty-five (25) feet and
may generate no more than 250% of the energy demanded by said principal use,
or 50 kilowatts per year per square foot of space.
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
F. Planned commercial development. Planned Commercial Development in the LI Zone
shall conform to the requirements set forth at Section 414 and the design standards set
forth in §414.D.
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended and reassigned with a new section number per
Ordinance No. 03-035; prior section number was §404.06]
§ 405 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT
A. Purpose. The objectives of the following regulations and standards are to encourage
innovations in residential, commercial and public development and redevelopment to
achieve greater variety in type, layout and siting of buildings and the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to those buildings or tracts of land under a
comprehensive plan of development. Such comprehensive control over an entire
development, rather than lot-by-lot regulations, should produce a well designed
development that will have a beneficial effect upon the health, safety, general welfare and
morals of the Township and the neighboring areas. Zoning Ordinance regulations
specific to Planned Commercial Development in the LI and C-1 Zone Districts are
contained in §414.
B. Regulations. [NOTE: The following use regulations, §405.B.1, 2, & 3, have been
amended as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No. 03-035]
1. Permitted uses.
(a) Adult Retirement Community
(b) Detached Single Family Residence
(c) Multi-family Dwellings
(d) Townhouses
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
93
(e) Commercial uses in conjunction with a Planned Unit Development
(P.U.D.) to the extent such non-residential use is designed and intended
to be compatible with the Planned Unit Development (P.U.D.), including:
(i) Floor covering stores
(ii) Home furnishings stores
(iii) Household appliance stores
(iv) Radio, television & other electronics stores
(v) Computer & software stores
(vi) Musical instrument Stores
(vii) Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
(viii) Home centers
(ix) Hardware stores
(x) Outdoor lumberyards
(xi) Building material and plumbing supply dealers
(xii) Power equipment stores
(xiii) Grocery (except convenience) stores
(xiv) Convenience stores
(xv) General stores
(xvi) Retail bakeries
(xvii) Delicatessens
(xviii) Butcher shops
(xix) Fish & seafood markets
(xx) Fruit & vegetable markets
(xxi) Beer, wine & liquor stores
(xxii) Pharmacies & drug stores
(xxiii) Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
(xxiv) Food (health) supplement stores
(xxv) Health & personal care stores
(xxvi) Family clothing & apparel stores
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
94
(xxvii) Lingerie and corset stores
(xxviii) Swimwear stores
(xxix) Jewelry stores
(xxx) Shoe stores
(xxxi) Hobby, toy & game stores
(xxxii) Bicycle stores
(xxxiii) Sporting goods stores (excluding firearms)
(xxxiv) Arts & craft shops
(xxxv) Family book stores
(xxxvi) Magazine/newspaper stands
(xxxvii) Department stores
(xxxviii) General merchandise stores
(xxxix) Florists / flower shops
(xl) Gift shops
(xli) Greeting card stores
(xlii) Seasonal holiday stores
(xliii) Christmas tree sales (outdoor)
(xliv) Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
(xlv) Pet food & pet supplies stores
(xlvi) Pet stores
(xlvii) Membership warehouse club (retail)
(xlviii) Tobacco shops
(xlix) Art dealers
(l) Antique shops
(li) Commercial banking
(lii) Savings institutions
(liii) Bank
(liv) Credit unions
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
95
(lv) Consumer lending
(lvi) Real estate credit
(lvii) All other nondepository credit intermediation
(lviii) Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
(lix) Investment banking & securities dealing
(lx) Securities brokerage
(lxi) Direct life Insurance carriers
(lxii) Direct health & medical insurance carriers
(lxiii) Insurance agencies & brokerages
(lxiv) Claims adjusting
(lxv) All other insurance related activities
(lxvi) Offices of real estate agents
(lxvii) Offices of real estate appraisers
(lxviii) Other activities related to real estate
(lxix) Consumer electronics & appliances rental
(lxx) Video tape & disc rental
(lxxi) Home health equipment rental
(lxxii) Consumer goods rental
(lxxiii) Musical instrument rental
(lxxiv) General rental centers
(lxxv) Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
(lxxvi) Offices of physicians, mental health
(lxxvii) Offices of dentists
(lxxviii) Offices of chiropractors
(lxxix) Offices of optometrists
(lxxx) Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and
audiologists
(lxxxi) Offices of podiatrists
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
96
(lxxxii) All other outpatient care centers
(lxxxiii) Diagnostic Imaging centers
(lxxxiv) Home health care services
(lxxxv) Ambulance and first aid services
(lxxxvi) Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including
adult day care
(lxxxvii) Child Care Center
(lxxxviii) Family Day Care
(lxxxix) Agents, managers for artists & other public entertainers
(xc) Independent artists, writers & performers
(xci) Amusement arcades
(xcii) Bowling centers
(xciii) Billiards / pool halls
(xciv) Golf course, full size
(xcv) Golf course, miniature
(xcvi) Golf course driving range
(xcvii) Indoor recreational facility
(xcviii) Public Community Centers
(xcix) Public Parks and recreational facilities
(c) Theater, Motion Picture (indoor)
(ci) Theater, Performing Arts
(cii) Places of Worship
(ciii) Grantmaking foundations
(civ) Civic & social organizations
(cv) Professional organizations
(cvi) Labor unions & similar labor organizations
(cvii) Food service contractors / catering
(cviii) Banquet facilities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
97
(cix) Full-service restaurants
(cx) Restaurant
(cxi) Restaurant, take-out
(cxii) Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
(cxiii) Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
(cxiv) Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
(cxv) Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
(cxvi) Manicure salon or nail services
(cxvii) Wig grooming service
(cxviii) Diet & weight reducing centers
(cxix) Depilatory salons (hair removal)
(cxx) Ear piercing services
(cxxi) Electrologist's studio
(cxxii) Electrolysis studio
(cxxiii) Scalp treatment
(cxxiv) Hair replacement
(cxxv) Tanning salons
(cxxvi) Funeral homes
(cxxvii) Consumer electronics repair & maintenance
(cxxviii) Household item repair and maintenance
(cxxix) Computer & office machine repair & maintenance
(cxxx) Communication equipment repair & maintenance
(cxxxi) Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical) repair &
maintenance
(cxxxii) Appliance repair & maintenance
(cxxxiii) Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops
(cxxxiv) Musical instrument repair shop
(cxxxv) Leather goods repair services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
98
(cxxxvi) Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
(cxxxvii) Bicycle repair shops
(cxxxviii) Locksmiths
(cxxxix) Welding shops and blacksmiths
(cxl) Machine shops
(cxli) Gunsmiths (no retail)
(cxlii) Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance services
(cxliii) Coin-operated laundries & drycleaners
(cxliv) Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
(cxlv) Linen supply
(cxlvi) Tailor and mending of garments
(cxlvii) Film developing services, retail
(cxlviii) Pet grooming services
(cxlix) Offices of lawyers
(cl) Offices of certified public accountants
(cli) Other accounting services
(clii) Architectural services
(cliii) Landscape architectural services
(cliv) Professional planning services
(clv) Engineering services
(clvi) Building inspection services
(clvii) Testing laboratories
(clviii) Custom computer programming services
(clix) Computer systems design services
(clx) Computer facilities management services
(clxi) Other computer related services
(clxii) Administration & general management consulting services
(clxiii) Other scientific & technical consulting services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
99
(clxiv) Advertising agencies
(clxv) Other services related to advertising
(clxvi) Veterinary services / animal hospital
(clxvii) Photography studios & videography services
(clxviii) All other professional, scientific & technical services
(clxix) Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
(clxx) Office administrative services
(clxxi) Facilities support services
(clxxii) Employment placement agencies
(clxxiii) Private mail centers
(clxxiv) Quick printing
(clxxv) All other business support services
(clxxvi) Travel agencies
(clxxvii) Investigation and security services
(clxxviii) Security systems services (except locksmiths)
(clxxix) Janitorial services
(clxxx) Landscaping maintenance services
(clxxxi) Carpet & upholstery cleaning services
(clxxxii) Other services to buildings & dwellings
(clxxxiii) Municipal facilities
(clxxxiv) Fire department facilities
(clxxxv) Public safety facilities
(clxxxvi) First aid facilities
(clxxxvii) Board of Education facilities
(clxxxviii) Soil preparation, planting, & cultivating (for profit)
(clxxxix) Commercial nurseries
(cxc) Greenhouses
(cxci) Silviculture
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
100
2. Conditional uses.
(a) Assisted Living Facility
(b) Homes for the elderly
(c) Restaurant, drive-through
(d) Electricity regulating substations
3. Accessory uses.
(a) Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
(b) Home Occupation
(c) Home Professional Office
(d) Swimming pools, private
(e) Tennis courts, private
(f) Health and Fitness Club
(g) Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
(h) Parking for principal use
(i) Telephone communication distribution
(j) Coaxial cable communication distribution
(k) Emergency services radio communication facilities
(l) Natural gas distribution
(m) Electric power transmission & distribution
(n) Public water supply purveyance & distribution
(o) Sanitary sewer lines
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
101
4. General development standards. The following general development standards
shall be met by any P.U.D.:
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Minimum gross area 100 acres
Minimum section or phase area 10 acres
Maximum P.U.D. overall
residential density
2.4 dwelling units per acre
Minimum number of dwelling units
per section or phase
50
Minimum floor area for
commercial uses
10,000 square feet, singly or in
combination
Adult Retirement Community
Maximum density for adult
retirement community
Six (6) dwelling units per acre; per
section or phase
Bulk requirements per detached
single family residential lot
Interior lots shall conform to R-4
Zone requirements and corner lots
shall conform to R-3 Zone
requirements
Minimum gross area for adult
retirement community
10 acres
5. A P.U.D. in excess of 100 acres shall include a golf course as part of its overall
development.
6. In order to encourage and enable a P.U.D. of desirable and imaginative design
and to maintain the standards of this section, it is required that all sections or
phases be developed in accordance with a comprehensive final plan for the
overall development of the property as approved by the Planning Board. If
developed in sections or phases, the first section or phase shall include, at a
minimum, the golf course and all improvements necessary to serve the golf
course, residential and commercial components of this section or phase. This is
to ensure that each section or phase can be self supported and complete.
7. Residential development.
(a) The residential area in which the dwelling units are constructed which will
be over the entire P.U.D., excluding the acreage fronting on State
Highway 66 to a depth of 500 feet, which is designated for commercial
use (as to the Jumping Brook site approximately 14.98 acres) and
excluding 104 acre golf course, shall include sixteen (16) single family
homes, which must be adjacent to the R-1 Zone. The residential
component of the P.U.D. shall be constructed in accordance with the
following standards:
(i) The residential development shall be permitted on any portion of
the development except any portion that fronts on State Highway
66 to a depth of five hundred (500') feet.
(ii) Compatible commercial uses shall be allowed, in the area
described in subparagraph a. above, but shall be a golf course,
clubhouse, restaurant, banquet facility or hotel. An adult
retirement community shall provide a clubhouse or other
community facility to allow for active recreation and social
opportunities
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
102
(iii) Coverage of the residentially developed portion of the site, by
buildings, shall not exceed thirty (30%) percent.
(iv) In a townhouse development, there shall not be more than eight
(8) nor less than four (4) attached townhouses in any row.
(v) No townhouse structure shall exceed a height of three (3) stories
or thirty-five (35) feet.
(vi) No structure containing a group of attached townhouses shall
exceed a length of two hundred (200) feet.
(vii) The minimum floor area for attached townhouse shall be at least
1,200 square feet for one (1) story structures and 1,600 square
feet for two (2) story structures. Detached single family
dwellings shall have a minimum floor area 1,400 square feet for
one (1) story structures 1,700 square feet for two (2) story
structures.
(viii) A minimum distance of thirty (30) feet shall be maintained
between each building not located on a detached single family
lot. Buildings not located on a detached single family lot shall
have a minimum setback of thirty (30) from any detached single
family lot line. Buildings not located on a detached single family
lot shall have a minimum front yard setback area of ten (10) feet,
measured as the distance between the front building line and the
street right-of-way line, private roadway & utility easement or
parking lot, whatever the case may be.
(ix) There shall be a perimeter setback of at least fifty (50') feet from
all sides of the residential developed portion of the site. Where
the development abuts existing residences, this buffer area shall
be landscaped to provide a visual screen.
(x) Inner courts shall be prohibited; the minimum width of outer
courts shall be thirty (30') feet; the depth thereof shall not exceed
its width.
(xi) For each dwelling unit there shall be provided at least two (2) onsite
parking spaces as defined in this chapter and one (1) of the
two (2) parking spaces shall be contained in a fully enclosed
garage. In addition, there shall be provided at least one (1)
visitor parking space for every three (3) dwelling units, distributed
in locations throughout the entire development that will be most
convenient for callers to the residents in the development.
Wherever open surface parking spaces are provided for four (4)
or more vehicles, such spaces shall be individually identified by
pavement markings and shall be screened by a substantial wall,
fence of a design compatible with that of the principal buildings
or a thick hedge four (4') feet in height above the average
finished grade of the parking area. No parking spaces shall be
located in any part of the required perimeter minimum setback
area.
(xii) All townhouse units and buildings shall be of designs which are
compatible with other residential structures in the neighborhood
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
103
to achieve a maximum of architectural harmony. In siting rows of
townhouses, individual dwelling units contained within each row
must be staggered to avoid a monotonous, uniform appearance.
(xiii) Every dwelling unit within the residential development shall be
served by public water and public sanitary sewer facilities which
shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer. In
addition, the developer shall, at his own expense, install and
maintain roads, driveways, guest parking facilities, street lights,
fire hydrants, landscaping and recreation facilities and any other
improvements such as drainage facilities as required according
to the standards of the Township and as provided for major
subdivisions and site plans under Section 40:55D-1 et seq. of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
(xiv) All utilities within a residential development shall be installed
underground.
(xv) Garbage and refuse storage and collection shall be provided at
appropriate and convenient locations by the developers.
(xvi) When seventy-five (75) percent of the dwelling units of an
approved phase of the development are occupied, the control of
the Condominium Association shall be turned over to the
Homeowners' Association.
(b) Golf Course. A golf course shall have an area of at least one hundred
four (104) acres and shall contain eighteen (18) holes. In the case of the
Jumping Brook site the golf course shall contain at least the same
playing yardage 6,479 yards as currently exists. Owners of residential
units in the P.U.D. shall have a right to be members of the golf course
and the golf course shall be owned and maintained by an Association.
The golf course shall remain as open space in perpetuity and nothing
shall be constructed on its playing area except for necessary and
appropriate structures such as maintenance sheds. The provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 shall be in effect with
respect to an open space organization.
(c) Additions to P.U.D. No construction permit shall be issued for
construction of an addition to the P.U.D. except in areas having a
minimum size of one hundred fifty (150) acres.
8. Commercial Land Uses. Commercial land uses shall be permitted subject to the
following standards:
(a) Commercial uses, excluding a golf course, shall not occupy more than
fifteen (15) percent of the P.U.D. With the exception of a golf course,
clubhouse, restaurant, nightclub, banquet facility or hotel which may be
located anywhere on the site that the Planning Board deems appropriate,
all of the commercial development of the site shall only take place along
that portion of the site which has frontage along State Highway 66 to a
depth of 500 feet; as to the Jumping Brook site approximately 14.98
acres.
(b) The Planning Board may in its discretion permit expansion of the area of
the site to be developed commercially, so long as the total amount of
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
104
property used for commercial purposes, excluding the golf course, does
not exceed twenty (20) percent of the P.U.D.; as to the Jumping Brook
site not to exceed approximately forty (40) acres. The Planning Board
may only permit the expansion of the commercial area pursuant to this
subparagraph so long as the expansion does not reduce the area
reserved for the golf course as set forth in paragraph d. of this section.
(c) Commercial uses, as described above, shall be limited to the following:
general office buildings, computer centers, research laboratories,
banking facilities, hotels, restaurants and designed shopping centers
which include retail and service establishments. Outdoor displays and
outdoor storage of goods and/or merchandise are specifically prohibited.
(d) A minimum front yard setback of fifty (50) feet shall be provided from
New Jersey State Highway 66.
(e) Minimum side yards of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided.
(f) A minimum rear yard of fifty (50) feet shall be provided. This rear yard
buffer shall be landscaped to provide a screen for the residential portion
of the development; landscaping shall be located entirely on the
commercial portion of the site.
(g) A maximum building height of six (6) stories or sixty-five (65) feet shall
be allowed.
(h) A minimum building floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall
be allowed.
(i) A maximum lot coverage, by buildings, of thirty (30) percent shall be
allowed.
(j) Parking for office, retail and services uses shall be a minimum of four (4)
spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(k) Parking for hotels and motels shall be a minimum of one (1) space for
each room plus one (1) space for each full time employee.
(l) Parking for restaurants shall be a minimum of one (1) space for each
forty (40) square feet devoted to patron use plus one (1) space for each
full time employee.
(m) Loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the standards set
forth in Article IV.
(n) Signs shall be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in
Article IV.
9. Common Open Space. There shall be provided at least twenty (20) percent of
the gross area of a P.U.D. for open space use, in such dimensions and locations
as to be utilized to the maximum extent for active and passive recreation
facilities. The common open space requirement may be reduced to ten (10)
percent in conjunction with an adult retirement community, provided adequate
active recreation facilities are provided. Open space set-asides shall be in
addition to parking and loading areas, streets, pedestrian walks or principal
recreational land uses such as a golf course, swim club, etc. The type of
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
105
improvement and the organization having responsibility for maintenance of the
open space, including the golf course, shall be clarified as required in this section
and included in the Master Deed and reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board and State Department of Community Affairs.
10. Open Space, Streets and Other Requirements. All open spaces between
buildings shall be protected by fully recorded covenants running with the land,
conveyances or dedications. The right- of-way and pavement widths for all
internal streets, roads or other access ways for vehicles and/or pedestrians shall
be determined on the basis of the Township's planning and engineering
standards and shall be based on the projected needs of the full development of
all land uses, proposed in the comprehensive final plan, and the traffic to be
generated by such land use as well as the need for access for fire fighting,
ambulances and other emergency vehicles.
11. Common Open Spaces and Other Common Uses. Every structure, use or land
designated for common private usage or in common ownership or control by
occupants or which functions as an independent corporate property owner or
agent of management shall be located on a plot of land which shall be fully
dimensioned and designated as representing the area of responsibility and
extent of such ownership or management on the final plan or a plan for a section
or stage of a P.U.D. and the Master Deed.
12. Responsibility for Utilities and Services. Within the P.U.D., all private roads,
walkways, services, utilities, maintenance and expenses which are comprised of
or incurred in any of the interior sections of the P.U.D. shall be the obligation of
the unit owners, and under no circumstances shall an application be considered,
whether to the Planning Board or to the governing body, which seeks to have the
Township agree to pay all or any portion of such expenses. Services, utilities
and maintenance shall be defined to mean all those services normally rendered
by the municipality (except Police, Fire and First Aid to the extent normally
provided), including but not limited to garbage collection, snow-plowing, lighting
changes, road, sanitary sewer and storm sewer maintenance and replacement,
water hydrants, etc. Each contract of sale and deed of conveyance for units in
the P.U.D. shall specifically set forth a complete copy of this paragraph (with
sufficient identifying language) so that all purchasers shall be aware of the
conditions therein set forth.
C. Tentative Approval.
1. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to official submittal of an application for
consideration of a P.U.D., the applicant shall meet with the Planning Board, or
duly designated officer thereof, for a pre-application conference as to the
location, scope and nature of the proposed development.
2. All planning and subdivision data relating to the platting, use and development of
the P.U.D. and subsequent modifications of the regulations relating thereto, shall
be determined and established by the Planning Board.
3. The application and development plan for tentative approval shall include plans
and data as required in Articles VII and VIII of this Chapter, in addition to the
following information:
(a) Location and size of the site and the nature of the applicant's interest in
the land proposed to be developed.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
106
(b) An accurate topographic and boundary line map of the site; if applicable,
areas to be filled and evidence that such treatment would be in
accordance with the ordinances of the Township.
(c) Density computations of all land uses proposed for various parts of the
site, number of dwelling units and other similar data pertinent to a
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
(d) Use, type, approximate bulk, height and location of proposed structures.
(e) Location and size of any common open space and the form of
organization proposed to own and maintain such open space.
(f) Copy of the proposed organizational structure related to Property
Owners Association, protective covenants, deeds of dedication, by-laws,
regulations and master deeds, proposed easements or grants for public
utilities.
(g) Proposals for the sanitary waste and storm water disposal systems as
they affect the P.U.D. site and surrounding property.
(h) Proposed public and private roads, driveways and parking and loading
facilities, drawn to scale. A traffic study, which discusses potential
impacts and mitigation measures, shall be submitted.
(i) Location of any golf course or other recreation facility to be retained, if
applicable.
(j) Proposed schedule within which applications for final approval of all
sections of the P.U.D. are intended to be filed.
(k) Variations, if any, from land use regulations otherwise applicable to
subject property.
(l) The substance of covenants, grants of easement or other restrictions
imposed on the use of land and buildings.
4. The fee for P.U.D. applications shall be as determined in Article X of this
Chapter.
5. The application shall include a written statement by the applicant setting forth the
reasons why, in his opinion, a P.U.D. would be consistent with the purposes and
objectives set forth in this Subsection.
6. Prior to approval of an application for P.U.D., the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning
ordinance standards set forth for Planned Unit Developments;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
107
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment
are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonable
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction
over a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect
the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of
the proposed development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(f) Review and approval of an application for P.U.D. shall be in accordance
with the procedures for site plan approval as contained in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township and the Municipal Land Use Law.
[NOTE: Section 405 has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-42]
§ 406 PUBLIC USE ZONE DISTRICT
§ 406.01 C - Civic
A. Purpose. The C Zone District intends to provide for public and quasi-public uses, as well
as community and service facilities that serve a general public purpose.
[NOTE: The following use regulations, §406.01.B, C, and D have been amended as prescribed
by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No. 03-035]
B. Permitted uses.
1. Adult Retirement Community
2. Detached Single Family Residence [Editorial note: see §406.01.F]
3. Commercial banking
4. Savings institutions
5. Bank
6. Credit unions
7. Consumer lending
8. Real estate credit
9. All other nondepository credit intermediation
10. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
11. Investment banking & securities dealing
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
108
12. Securities brokerage
13. Direct life Insurance carriers
14. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
15. Insurance agencies & brokerages
16. Claims adjusting
17. All other insurance related activities
18. Offices of real estate agents
19. Offices of real estate appraisers
20. Other activities related to real estate
21. Private or Public Elementary, Middle or High School
22. Early childhood education center
23. Vocational School
24. Computer training facility
25. Sports & recreation instruction
26. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
27. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
28. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
29. Offices of physicians, mental health
30. Offices of dentists
31. Offices of chiropractors
32. Offices of optometrists
33. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
34. Offices of podiatrists
35. All other outpatient care centers
36. Diagnostic Imaging centers
37. Home health care services
38. Ambulance and first aid services
39. General medical & surgical hospitals
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
109
40. Hospital
41. Assisted Living Facility
42. Homes for the elderly
43. Long term care facility
44. Nursing care facilities
45. Other residential care facilities
46. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
47. Child Care Center
48. Family Day Care
49. Golf course, full size
50. Golf course, miniature
51. Golf course driving range
52. Indoor recreational facility
53. Public Community Centers
54. Public Parks and recreational facilities
55. Theater, Performing Arts
56. Places of Worship
57. Offices of lawyers
58. Offices of certified public accountants
59. Other accounting services
60. Architectural services
61. Landscape architectural services
62. Professional planning services
63. Engineering services
64. Building inspection services
65. Testing laboratories
66. Custom computer programming services
67. Computer systems design services
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
110
68. Computer facilities management services
69. Other computer related services
70. Administration & general management consulting services
71. Other scientific & technical consulting services
72. Advertising agencies
73. Other services related to advertising
74. Veterinary services / animal hospital
75. Photography studios & videography services
76. All other professional, scientific & technical services
77. Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office
78. Office administrative services
79. Facilities support services
80. Employment placement agencies
81. Private mail centers
82. Quick printing
83. All other business support services
84. Municipal facilities
85. Fire department facilities
86. Public safety facilities
87. First aid facilities
88. Board of Education facilities
89. Public works facilities
90. Medicinal & botanical manufacturing
91. Research Laboratory
92. Pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing
93. Dental laboratories
94. Taxi service
95. School & employee bus transportation operations
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
111
96. Couriers
97. Local messengers & local delivery
C. Conditional uses.
1. Centralized telephone utility installations
2. Centralized coaxial cable utility installations
3. Wireless telecommunications facility
4. Public Utility Facility
5. Electricity regulating substations
6. Sanitary sewer treatment plant
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Home Occupation
3. Home Professional Office
4. Swimming pools, private
5. Tennis courts, private
6. Educational support services
7. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
8. Helistops
9. Parking for principal use
10. Telephone communication distribution
11. Coaxial cable communication distribution
12. Emergency services radio communication facilities
13. Natural gas distribution
14. Electric power transmission & distribution
15. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
16. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
112
F. Single-family detached residential development. Pre-existing nonconforming singlefamily
detached residential development in the C Zone District shall conform to the bulk
requirements set forth for the R-1 Zone District per Schedule B-1.
§ 407 HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
§ 407.01 HD-R-1 – Historic District Single Family Residential
A. Purpose. The HD-R-1 Zone District provides for single-family residential development at
a density not exceeding 24.2 dwelling units per acre that is consistent with the
established scale and pattern of development in the Ocean Grove portion of the
Township.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Community center
2. Community shelter
3. Detached single family residence
4. Park
5. Place of worship
6. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
C. Conditional uses.
1. Professional Office
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home occupation
4. Home professional office
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 407.02 HD-O – Historic District Oceanfront
A. Purpose. The HD-O Zone District recognizes the character and historic land use pattern
of the oceanfront blocks in the Ocean Grove portion of the Township, east of Central
Avenue. All zoning regulations applicable in the HD-O Zone District are intended to
protect, preserve and perpetuate the historical framework in Ocean Grove. This
framework includes single-family residences, bed and breakfasts, and historic hotels.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
113
B. Permitted uses.
1. Community shelter
2. Detached single-family dwellings
3. Park
4. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
C. Conditional uses.
1. Bed & breakfast guesthouse
2. Bed & breakfast homestay
3. Historic hotel
4. Historic hotel restaurant/retail
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home professional office
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 407.03 HD-R-2 – Historic District Multi-family Residential
A. Purpose. The HD-R-2 Zone District provides for single-family and multi-family residential
development at a density of 48 dwelling units per acre, limited to areas that are already
devoted to this use.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Detached single-family dwellings
2. Long-term care facility
3. Multi-family dwellings
4. Park
5. Townhouses
6. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
C. Conditional uses.
1. Assisted living facility
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
114
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Family day care
3. Home professional office
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 407.04 HD-B-1 – Historic District Mixed-use
A. Purpose. The HD-B-1 Zone District serves as the commercial core for the Ocean Grove
portion of the Township, and intends to serve the specific retail sales and service needs
of local residents and seasonal visitors. This Zone District also acknowledges the
suitability of residential uses located at upper stories of mixed-use buildings, with the
ground story devoted to permitted uses in the district.
[NOTE: The following use regulations, §407.04.B, C, and D have been amended as prescribed
by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No. 03-035]
B. Permitted uses.
1. Detached Single Family Residence
2. Furniture stores
3. Floor covering stores
4. Home furnishings stores
5. Household appliance stores
6. Radio, television & other electronics stores
7. Computer & software stores
8. Musical instrument Stores
9. Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records)
10. Hardware stores
11. Convenience stores
12. General stores
13. Retail bakeries
14. Delicatessens
15. Butcher shops
16. Fish & seafood markets
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
115
17. Fruit & vegetable markets
18. Pharmacies & drug stores
19. Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store
20. Food (health) supplement stores
21. Health & personal care stores
22. Family clothing & apparel stores
23. Swimwear stores
24. Jewelry stores
25. Shoe stores
26. Hobby, toy & game stores
27. Bicycle stores
28. Sporting goods stores (exluding firearms)
29. Arts & craft shops
30. Family book stores
31. Magazine/newspaper stands
32. General merchandise stores
33. Florists / flower shops
34. Gift shops
35. Greeting card stores
36. Seasonal holiday stores
37. Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores
38. Art dealers
39. Antique shops
40. Commercial banking
41. Savings institutions
42. Bank
43. Credit unions
44. Consumer lending
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
116
45. Real estate credit
46. All other nondepository credit intermediation
47. Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities
48. Investment banking & securities dealing
49. Securities brokerage
50. Direct life Insurance carriers
51. Direct health & medical insurance carriers
52. Insurance agencies & brokerages
53. Claims adjusting
54. All other insurance related activities
55. Offices of real estate agents
56. Offices of real estate appraisers
57. Other activities related to real estate
58. Consumer electronics & appliances rental
59. Video tape & disc rental
60. Home health equipment rental
61. Consumer goods rental
62. Musical instrument rental
63. General rental centers
64. Sports & recreation instruction
65. Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction
66. All other miscellaneous schools & instruction
67. Offices of physicians (exc mental health)
68. Offices of physicians, mental health
69. Offices of dentists
70. Offices of chiropractors
71. Offices of optometrists
72. Offices of physical, occupational and speech therapists, and audiologists
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
117
73. Offices of podiatrists
74. All other outpatient care centers
75. Diagnostic Imaging centers
76. Home health care services
77. Ambulance and first aid services
78. Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled persons, including adult day care
79. Child Care Center
80. Public Parks and recreational facilities
81. Theater, Performing Arts
82. Grantmaking foundations
83. Civic & social organizations
84. Professional organizations
85. Labor unions & similar labor organizations
86. Full-service restaurants
87. Restaurant
88. Restaurant, take-out
89. Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars
90. Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors, hairdressers
91. Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services
92. Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops
93. Manicure salon or nail services
94. Wig grooming service
95. Diet & weight reducing centers
96. Scalp treatment
97. Consumer electronics repair & maintenance
98. Household item repair and maintenance
99. Computer & office machine repair & maintenance
100. Communication equipment repair & maintenance
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
118
101. Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical) repair & maintenance
102. Appliance repair & maintenance
103. Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops
104. Musical instrument repair shop
105. Leather goods repair services
106. Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
107. Bicycle repair shops
108. Locksmiths
109. Coin-operated laundries & drycleaners
110. Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op)
111. Linen supply
112. Tailor and mending of garments
113. Film developing services, retail
114. Offices of lawyers
115. Offices of certified public accountants
116. Other accounting services
117. Architectural services
118. Landscape architectural services
119. Professional planning services
120. Engineering services
121. Building inspection services
122. Custom computer programming services
123. Computer systems design services
124. Computer facilities management services
125. Other computer related services
126. Administration & general management consulting services
127. Other scientific & technical consulting services
128. Advertising agencies
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
119
129. Other services related to advertising
130. Photography studios & videography services
131. All other professional, scientific & technical services
132. Office administrative services
133. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
134. Facilities support services
135. Employment placement agencies
136. Private mail centers
137. Quick printing
138. All other business support services
139. Travel agencies
140. Couriers
141. Local messengers & local delivery
C. Conditional uses.
1. Accessory apartments
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
D. Accessory uses.
1. Uses customarily incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use
2. Outdoor Displays and Sales
3. Educational support services
4. Recreational clubhouse, concession stand
5. Outdoor Dining Facility
6. Telephone communication distribution
7. Coaxial cable communication distribution
8. Emergency services radio communication facilities
9. Natural gas distribution
10. Electric power transmission & distribution
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
120
11. Public water supply purveyance & distribution
12. Sanitary sewer lines
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1.
§ 407.05 HD-R – Historic District Recreation
A. Purpose. The HD-R Zone District intends to provide for the active and passive
recreational use of land by the general public in the Township’s Historic District. All uses,
including parking and amenities for the use and comfort of residents and visitors to the
District should be consistent with, and representative of, the historic character of the
area.
B. Permitted uses.
1. Beach and beach related uses
2. Boardwalk and fishing pier
3. Non-Commercial Recreational facilities
4. Parks
5. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) facilities in accordance with
permitted, conditional and accessory uses in the district
C. Conditional uses.
1. Light food concessions
2. Parking
D. Accessory uses.
1. Drinking fountains and rest rooms
2. Pavilion, not fully enclosed, for passive recreation use only
3. Benches, street lamps and other street furniture
4. Fences for tennis courts, volleyball courts and tot lots to a maximum height of
twelve (12) feet shall be permitted as an accessory use in the area zoned HD-R
along the entire length of Fletcher Lake from the southerly extension of the
easterly boundary of Ocean Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue and Blocks 78 and
107 on Inskip Avenue. Privacy slats or other barrier to vision in or on such
fences are prohibited.
E. Bulk requirements.
1. Minimum lot depth: Sixty (60) feet
2. Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
121
§ 408 SCHEDULE A-1 – USE REGULATIONS - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 409 SCHEDULE A-2 – USE REGULATIONS – MIXED USE AND NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONE
DISTRICTS
§ 410 SCHEDULE B – ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
§ 411 SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES
§ 411.01 Adult Retirement Communities
Adult Retirement Communities for adults aged at least fifty-five (55) years or older shall be permitted in
the Civic and PUD/R1 District in accordance with the standards governing residential development in the
Planned Unit Development Zone District as set forth in Section 405 of this Land Development Ordinance.
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 411.02 Community Shelters
Community Shelters. Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for
victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be allowed in any residential district permitting single family detached
housing, provided that:
A. No more than six (6) persons, excluding resident staff, shall occupy the premises except
as permitted herein.
B. The facility is duly licensed pursuant to N.J.S. 30:11B-1 et seq. for community residences
for the developmentally disabled, N.J.S. 30:14-1 et seq. for community shelters for
victims of domestic violence, and N.J.S. 30:11B-1 et seq. for community residences for
persons with head injuries.
C. The residential character of the building shall remain unchanged.
D. Community shelters as described herein may exceed the permitted number of persons
allowed above. upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning Board provided
that the following conditions have been met:
1. No more than fifteen (15) persons, including resident staff, shall occupy the
premises.
2. The facility shall be duly licensed.
3. The residential character of the building and lot shall remain unchanged.
4. Adequate off-street parking sufficient for resident staff shall be provided. If staff
exceeds 5 persons, buffering of the parking lot shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
5. No such facility shall be located within 1,500 feet of another such facility.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
122
E. All other applicable regulations of this Ordinance shall apply.
§ 411.03 Home Occupations and Home Professional Offices
Home occupations and home professional offices shall be permitted as an accessory use to any
residence in the Township, unless otherwise specified below and in Zoning Schedules A-1 and A-2. All
such uses shall require an approved zoning permit prior to commencement of use and are subject to the
following provisions:
A. Home occupations and home professional offices shall only be permitted provided they
do not change the character of the principal residence from a home to a business or
change in any way whatsoever the character of the surrounding neighborhood from a
residential neighborhood to a commercial neighborhood. Specifically, the characteristics
of the home occupation cannot differ from that expected in a residential neighborhood in
the following areas of concern:
1. The appearance of the premises, including color, materials, construction, or lighting;
2. The risk of physical harm to persons or property due to the nature or volume of any
materials stored on site;
3. The creation of noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare, radiation or electrical
interference;
4. The volume and frequency of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
B. No more than one home occupation or home professional office may be conducted within
a single dwelling unit. Said home occupation or home professional office shall not
involve more than thirty (30) percent of one (1) floor of the principal dwelling unit,
including the floor area of an attached garage.
C. No person other than the occupants of the dwelling may be involved or employed on the
premises in the home occupation or home professional office.
D. The home occupation or home professional office must be conducted entirely within the
principal residence and cannot involve outdoor storage.
E. The home occupation cannot involve commercial vehicles, other than as permitted in
Section 411.04, and/or an occasional cartage vehicle for the delivery of materials related
to the home occupation to or from the premises.
F. A zoning permit shall be required prior to initiating a home occupation or home
professional office.
G. Family day care homes are permitted home occupations. Child-care centers shall not be
considered permitted home occupations. In order to provide for the safety of the children
in the family day care homes, the following regulations must be followed:
1. Family day care is permitted only in single family residential dwellings.
2. The provider must be the resident of the premises, and must present the Zoning
Officer with documentation of substantial compliance with all Division of Youth and Family
Services requirements on an annual basis. The family day care home must be registered
pursuant to the “Family Day Care Provider Registration Act,” per N.J.S.A. 46:8D-1 et seq.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
123
3. Any side or rear yard which is utilized for recreation activity must be fenced in
accordance with this Ordinance. No recreation area may be located in a front yard area.
Any associated equipment shall be restricted to the fenced yard.
4. The facility shall comply with all applicable BOCA, State of New Jersey and Township
building safety regulations.
H. In the case of a dwelling unit which is part of an apartment complex or a community in
which at least some of the property is owned in common by all of the residents, the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to supersede any deed restriction,
covenant, agreement, master deed, by-laws, lease, rental agreement or other documents
which prohibit a family home occupation within a dwelling unit.
§ 411.04 Motor Vehicle Parking in Residential Areas
The following regulations shall apply to motor vehicle parking on any lot located in a residential district or
used for residential purposes. See Section for applicable regulations in Historic zone districts.:
A. Permitted motor vehicles. Motor vehicles registered as passenger vehicles, livery
vehicles and commercial vehicles having a gross weight of 7,000 pounds or less shall be
permitted to be parked on such lots, with the following exceptions:
1. Passenger and livery vehicles. One passenger or livery vehicle having a gross
weight in excess of 7,000 pounds, but not exceeding 10,000 pounds, may be
parked in a garage or a driveway in a side or rear yard, provided that such is
substantially screened from view from all adjacent lot lines and the street line.
Such screening shall consist of a six (6) foot high solid wooden fence and/or
minimum six (6) foot- high evergreen shrubs or trees. Any such screening shall
be approved by the Zoning Officer prior to installation to ensure that such will
provide necessary screening to satisfy the intent of this provision.
2. One commercial vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 5,000 pounds, but
not exceeding 8,000 pounds, may be parked in a wholly enclosed garage. Such
vehicle shall be stored in the garage at all times when such is parked on the lot.
In no instance shall any person other than the resident of the property on which
the commercial vehicle is parked operate such vehicle. Additionally, no
materials, tools, equipment or other items used in connection with the business
that such commercial vehicle is associated with shall be stored anywhere on the
residential property, except in or on the commercial vehicle itself.
B. Permitted motor vehicle dimensions. No motor vehicle shall be parked on such lot with
linear dimensions exceeding the following:
1. Twenty (20) feet in length;
2. Eight (8) feet in width, excluding rearview mirrors;
3. Eight (8) feet in height, excluding radio antennas;
C. Prohibited motor vehicles. Trucks, tractors, trailers, semitrailers, tow trucks and buses
may not be parked on a lot primarily used for residential purposes, except as provided in
§411.06 Parking of Trucks and Buses.
D. Recreational vehicles, trailer coaches, campers and boats.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
124
1. One recreational vehicle, trailer coach, camper and/or boat may be stored or
parked on any lot used solely as a single-family residence, provided that such
vehicle shall be stored in a garage or in a side or rear yard and substantially
screened from view from all adjacent lot lines and the street line. In the case of
corner lots, said vehicle must be screened from view from all street lines
bounding the lot. No such vehicles shall be occupied for living, sleeping or
recreational purposes while stored or parked on such lot.
2. Must be registered to occupant of that premises.
E. Driveways. No motor vehicle shall be parked in the side or front yards of such lot, except
in a driveway located pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter.
F. Corner lots. Nothing herein shall permit the parking or storage of any vehicle on a corner
lot property that obstructs, impairs or obscures vision of motor vehicle traffic at an
intersection, as determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 411.05 Number of Principal Buildings and Principal Uses in a Residential Zone District
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, not more than one principal dwelling or principal building
shall be permitted on one lot in any residential zone district.
§ 411.06 Parking of Trucks and Buses
Parking of Trucks and Buses in Residential Zones. No trucks or buses shall be regularly parked in any
residential district, except that one truck or bus of a rated capacity not exceeding 5 tons (10,000 lb.) gross
vehicle weight (manufacturer's rating), owned or used by a person resident on the premises, shall be
permitted to be regularly garaged on a residential lot which also contains the primary residence of the
owner, or on a residential lot which is contiguous to and also owned by the owner of the primary
residence. This provision shall not be deemed to limit the number of vehicles used in the operation of a
farm, or construction equipment in active use during the time of construction on a lot approved for
development.
§ 411.07 Porches and Decks
A. Applicability. This Subsection includes regulations for attached, accessory porches and
decks located on properties used for residential purposes outside the historic zone
districts. Subsection §413.06 includes applicable regulations associated with porch
locations in historic zone districts.
B. Deck setbacks. For single family dwellings, a deck may extend no further than fifteen
(15) feet into a required rear yard setback area, provided the principal structure conforms
to minimum rear yard setback requirements. In no instance shall a deck be closer than
ten (10) feet to a rear or side lot line. No deck for a single-family dwelling may extend
into a side setback area. No deck shall be located in a front yard area. No deck
associated with a multi-family residential use may extend into any required setback area.
C. Porch setbacks. For single family dwellings, a porch may extend no more than eight (8)
feet into the required front and/or rear setback area. No porch for a single-family dwelling
may extend into a side setback area. No porch associated with any multi-family
residential use may extend into any setback area. The front yard setback of a porch shall
not be considered the front yard setback of the principal building to which it is attached.
D. Enclosure. A porch shall not be heated or air-conditioned and at least fifty (50) percent of
the exterior wall area shall be open and non-glazed.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
125
E. Entry platforms. An entry platform not more than six (6) feet in height above the average
finish grade, nor greater than fifty (50) square feet in area, may project six (6) feet into a
required front yard and not more than four (4) feet into any required side yard.
§ 411.08 Private Garages
Private garages, where permitted on single-family residential lots shall comply with the following
provisions:
A. The garage must be a fully enclosed detached accessory structure, or a portion of a
principal building, used primarily for the storage of no more than two (2) motor vehicles
owned or used by the occupant of the principal structure.
B. A one car parking garage, not to exceed 14’ x 28’, or 392 sq. ft., for a single-family unit,
or a two car garage not to exceed 28’ by 28’, or 784 sq. ft., for a two- family dwelling unit,
shall be provided for all new residential dwellings. A two car garage may be constructed
on a single family dwelling lot provided it does not exceed the above maximum garage
size (784 sq. ft.).
C. A detached garage may be placed at least five (5) feet from a side property line and at
least five (5) feet from a rear property line, except in historic zone districts. Attached
garages must conform to principle building setback requirements. Any private, detached
garage or accessory building is specifically prohibited in a required front yard area.
§ 411.09 Recreational Vehicle Storage
The following requirements apply to recreational vehicle storage:
A. Trailers, boats or boat trailers which are twenty-one (21) feet or less in length as
measured from outside dimensions, shall be parked or stored inside the confines of a
building only.
B. All trailers, boats or boat trailers shall be stored in side or rear yard areas only; no trailer,
boat, or boat trailer shall be parked or stored in the front yard area of a lot.
C. Each occupied single-family residential property may have outside parking or storage
upon it for one recreational vehicle or trailer, in safe and effective operating condition. All
recreational vehicles and trailers shall display thereon a current State license and/or
registration. No self-propelled recreational vehicle stored on the property shall exceed
forty (40) feet in length unless within the confines of a building.
D. Any trailer, boat or boat trailer parked in the side or rear yard area of any lot shall meet
the applicable zoning district regulations governing setbacks of accessory buildings from
property lines and buildings.
E. To obscure from public view to the maximum extent possible, any trailer, boat or boat
trailer parked or stored in a side or rear yard area and not in an enclosed building shall be
screened by evergreen plantings at least six (6) feet in height, spaced three (3) feet
apart, or as necessary to form a 100% visually impervious buffer after two (2) years.
F. At no time shall any recreational vehicle parked or stored on any lot be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
126
§ 411.10 Satellite Dish and Ham Radio Antennas
A. Satellite Dish Antennas. No satellite dish antenna larger than one (1) meter in diameter
shall be installed in any residential zone except that one (1) satellite dish antenna may be
permitted as an accessory use to a single family dwelling or multifamily apartment use
pursuant to Federal Communication Commission (FCC) regulations, subject to the
following standards:
1. The requirements of this section shall apply to all satellite dish antennas,
regardless of diameter, proposed to be located in historic districts subsequent to
the designation thereof in the Neptune Township Master Plan and successful
petition to the Federal Communications Commission by the Township for a
waiver of preemption.
2. Except where otherwise specified herein, the reflective surface of the satellite
dish shall not exceed six (6) feet in diameter.
3. A freestanding satellite dish regulated by this section shall be subject to the same
location requirements as other principal buildings in the same zoning district. No
roof-mounted antenna of any kind shall be located on any part of the roof facing
the front yard of the dwelling or apartment building or exceed the height
provisions of set forth by Article IV of this Ordinance.
4. A freestanding satellite dish shall be located as close to the center of the rear
yard and rear facade of a principal building as possible without causing
significant interference with reception. A waiver may be sought from the board of
jurisdiction for a location within the required yard area of a principal building, but
in no case shall it be permitted nearer to a property line than is allowed for
accessory buildings in the zoning district. For aesthetic and safety purposes, the
rear yard shall be enclosed with a fence that is opaque to a height of at least four
(4) feet and that otherwise conforms to the fence requirements of the Township
of Neptune. The perimeter of the base of the supporting structure shall be
landscaped with appropriate plant materials to a height of three (3) feet or the
lowest part of a dish antenna, whichever is higher.
5. A freestanding satellite dish antenna shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height
measured from the base to the top of the antenna in an upright position.
6. Satellite dish antennas and supporting structures shall be maintained in good
physical condition and comply with all applicable building and safety codes
B. Ham Radio Antenna. A ham radio antenna is permitted as an accessory use to a single
family dwelling pursuant to FCC regulations and in accordance with the following:
1. A freestanding ham radio antenna shall be subject to the same location
requirements as a principal building in the same zoning district and as further
provided herein, and shall not exceed the average height of principal buildings on
adjoining lots by more than fifteen (15) feet to a maximum of fifty (50) feet in
height
2. No roof-mounted antenna of any kind shall be located on any part of the roof
facing the front yard of the dwelling or apartment building or exceed the height
provisions of Article IV of this Ordinance.
3. A freestanding ham radio antenna shall be located as close to the center of the
rear yard and rear facade of a principal building as possible without causing
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
127
significant interference with reception. A waiver may be sought from the board of
jurisdiction for a location within the required yard area of a principal building, but
in no case shall it be permitted nearer to a property line than is allowed for
accessory buildings in the zoning district. For aesthetic and safety purposes, the
rear yard shall be enclosed with a fence that is opaque to a height of at least four
(4) feet and that otherwise conforms to the fence requirements of the Township
of Neptune. The perimeter of the base of the supporting structure shall be
landscaped with appropriate plant materials to a height of three (3) feet.
4. Ham radio antennas and supporting structures shall be maintained in good
physical condition and comply with all applicable building and safety codes.
§ 411.11 Storage Sheds
Private residential storage sheds shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Size. No shed shall exceed 175 square feet in floor area.
B. Height. No shed shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
C. Location. No shed shall be located in a front yard.
D. Setback. Sheds may be placed no closer than five (5) feet from a side or rear property
line, except in historic zone districts. Sheds in historic zone districts must conform to
principal building setback requirements.
E. Quantity. No more than one (1) tool shed per lot shall be permitted, except that on lots
12,500 square feet or larger, two (2) tool sheds may be permitted.
§ 411.12 Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts
Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be permitted on all lots used for single family dwellings in
residential districts and on any tract developed for multi-family development. Swimming pools and tennis
courts are considered accessory structures, and shall require an approved zoning permit prior to
construction, and shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Location. Any swimming pool or tennis court shall only be permitted in a rear or side yard
area.
B. Coverage. The surface area of a swimming pool or tennis court shall be considered
impervious. Tennis courts consisting primarily of grass shall not be considered
impervious. Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be subject to the applicable lot
coverage requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Any area paved with concrete,
asphalt, brick or other solid surface which functions as a walkway to or completely
surrounds a swimming pool or tennis court shall also be considered impervious.
C. Setbacks. No part of the surface area of a swimming pool or tennis court, including
structures attached thereto, or any pool filtering equipment whether or not such is
attached, shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line. Any impervious
area which functions as a walkway to or completely surrounds a swimming pool or tennis
court shall be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from any lot line.
D. Swimming pool fencing. A continuous fence consisting of a minimum of four (4) feet in
height shall enclose the perimeter of the entire swimming pool area. Such fence shall be
designed to securably control access to the swimming pool area. Where such fence is
located on a corner lot, and the fence on the side facing the street is non-solid, that
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
128
portion of the fence shall be adequately screened with evergreen shrubs not less than
four (4) feet in height.
E. Tennis court fencing. A fence consisting of a minimum of eight (8) feet in height to a
maximum of twelve (12) feet in height for tennis courts shall be required. Said fence may
not be located within a required setback area.
F. Swimming Pool Drainage. No swimming pool shall drain into a public sanitary sewer or
be located in such a manner that water from the pool or filtering equipment drains onto
another property.
§ 411.13 Yard and Garage Sales
Yard and garage sales shall be permitted in any residential district for a period not to exceed three (3)
days. Such sales shall not exceed two (2) in any one calendar year.
§ 412 SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS
The following supplementary regulations shall be deemed to be appended to the Schedule of Bulk
Regulations for Neptune Township (Schedules B-1 and B-2) and are hereby adopted as a part thereof.
§ 412.01 Accessory Buildings and Structures
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, all accessory buildings and structures (principal or accessory)
shall conform to the regulations and standards contained in this Land Development Ordinance which
govern the principal building for the applicable zone district within which they are located.
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 412.02 Boatyards
Seasonal storage of boats and marine related vehicles not being serviced or repaired on the premises
shall be permitted in the B-3 Zone only as an accessory use to a marina or a marine related sales and
services establishment subject to the following supplementary regulations:
A. The boatyard shall be located on a parcel that is contiguous with the principally permitted
use or on a non-contiguous parcel located within sixty (60’) feet of the parcel devoted to
the principal use.
B. A boatyard situated on a parcel that is non-contiguous to the principal use parcel shall be
no greater than one (1) acre in area.
C. The height of watercraft storage shall not exceed three (3) boats stacked vertically and
thirty-five (35) feet.
D. Storage areas shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any lot line, however,
whenever a buffer from a use other than a boatyard is required, the minimum buffer
width, as set forth in this subsection, shall govern as the minimum setback requirement to
said adjacent use.
E. When located adjacent to any property devoted to a use other than a boatyard, the
boatyard establishment shall maintain the following between any outdoor activity and the
adjacent property:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
129
1. A fifteen (15) foot wide buffer area. Said buffer area shall be placed in a
conservation easement.
2. A six (6) foot high stockade or board-on-board fence to be located at least fifteen
(15) feet from the adjoining property line. Said fence may not be located within a
front yard setback area.
3. A landscaped screening located in the buffer area consisting of evergreen
plantings with a minimum height of ten (10) feet at the time of planting, spaced
fifteen (15) feet on-center.
F. Site triangle required. No outdoor storage or display area shall be located within a
required site triangle as defined elsewhere herein.
G. An adequate quantity of off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided.
Automobile parking areas shall be black-topped and used only for the parking of
automobiles associated with patrons and employees.
H. Designated areas for boat or marine related vehicle storage or display need not conform
to standards for parking lot paving and design standards but, shall be segregated from
parking areas by means of a raised concrete curb of at least six (6) inches in height.
Concrete wheel stops shall not be utilized to meet this curbing requirement.
I. Seasonal or long term storage of cars, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles not marine
related shall not be permitted in a boatyard.
J. No derelict, discarded or junked boats, no parts, scrap, partially dismantled boats, boat
motors, or trailers shall be stored out-of-doors.
K. Designated fifteen (15’) foot wide fire lanes shall be provided at regular intervals and shall
be maintained and open at all times. Said fire lanes shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Fire Official.
L. All applicable requirements of any State or Federal agency including local health and fire
authorities having jurisdiction shall be met.
§ 412.03 Cemeteries
Buildings associated with principal cemetery uses shall be permitted provided the following requirements
are met:
A. Building setbacks.
1. Minimum front yard shall be forty (40) feet
2. Minimum Side yard shall be twenty (20) feet
3. Minimum rear yard shall be twenty five (25) feet
B. Height. Maximum building height shall be twenty five (25) feet.
C. Fence or wall. A wrought-iron fence or stone wall may be provided at the perimeter of a
cemetery tract. Said fence or wall may not exceed five (5) feet in height, except that
intermittent piers may reach six (6) feet in height. A main entrance gate may exceed the
permitted fence or wall height by 50%.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
130
§ 412.04 Child Care Centers
Child care centers shall be permitted in any nonresidential district. In those districts combining residential
and nonresidential areas under a unified plan for development, the child care center shall be permitted
only in the non-residential area. Any child care center shall be duly licensed pursuant to N.J.S. 30:5B-1
et seq. A child care center functionally integrated within a non-residential development owned or
operated for the benefit of their employees, their tenant's employees, or employees within an office or
business park or research and development complex shall not be required to provide additional off-street
parking for the use. In the calculation of any floor area ratio applicable to an office or business park or
research and development complex, the area occupied by a child care center shall not be included.
§ 412.05 Corner and Through Lots
Whenever a lot shall be bounded by more than one (1) street line, the following provisions shall apply
(see also Appendix A):
A. All provisions of this Ordinance with respect to setbacks and all other restrictions and
regulations relating to street lines and front yards shall apply to each street line as a front
yard.
B. For the purposes of determining the rear yard on a corner lot, the interior lot line opposite
the street line with the shortest frontage shall be considered to be the rear lot line and
any remaining interior lot lines shall be considered side lot lines.
C. Each lot shall have a rear yard. In an instance of a through lot and in an instance of a
corner lot where the frontage is equal, the yard opposite the street address of the
property shall be deemed the rear yard.
D. In an instance where a lot is bound by three (3) or more streets, the property shall contain
multiple front yards and at least one (1) side yard.
§ 412.06 Driveways
A. No non-residential driveway shall be located within ten (10) feet of an existing adjacent
residential property nor within five (5) feet of any other property line, unless otherwise
regulated in this Chapter.
B. Access to a commercial parking garage or parking area for twenty-five (25) or more
vehicles shall not be closer to the intersections of any two (2) streets than fifty (50) feet.
C. No access drive or driveway shall be located in any residential district to provide access
to uses other than those permitted in such residential zone.
D. No driveway shall serve any use other than the permitted use on the lot upon which the
driveway is located.
E. A barrier-free walkway system shall be provided to allow pedestrian access to a building
or use from both a parking lot within the site and from the Township sidewalk system.
F. No lot containing a detached single-family dwelling shall contain more than one (1)
principal driveway. In the case of a through lot, a driveway is to be provided only within
the front yard area.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
131
G. New driveways shall be prohibited in all Historic Zone Districts.
H. For other specific driveway design standards, see Article V.
§ 412.07 Fences and Walls
Fences and walls shall be permitted in all districts, but shall be considered structures requiring an
approved zoning permit prior to construction. Adequate surveys, plans and details are to be submitted to
the Zoning Officer in accordance with Article X in order for a determination to be made as to the proposed
fence zoning conformance.
A. Fences and walls in historic zone districts. Fences and walls in historic zone districts
shall be permitted accessory structures subject to the following provisions (see also
Appendix B):
1. Design guidelines. All fences and walls are subject to the review and approval of
the Historic Preservation Commission for conformity to its Guidelines and for
compatibility with the particular design and style of the structure on the lot.
2. Prohibited locations. No fence or wall shall be erected in any required flared
setback area, as described elsewhere herein, east of Central Avenue. For all
properties east of Central Avenue, no fence or wall shall be erected in a front
yard area or on front yard lot lines.
3. Front yard fence height. Fences located in a front yard area or on lot lines
abutting a front yard area, where permitted, shall not exceed a height of two and
one-half (2 ½’) feet. The height of any decorative elements, articulated corners,
gateways and posts shall be included in the fence height measurement.
4. Front yard fence type. Fences located in a front yard area or on lot lines abutting
a front yard area, where permitted, shall be constructed so that at least fifty (50)
percent thereof is non-solid and open. Fence types such as stockade and boardon-
board shall be considered solid fences and are prohibited in or along front
yards.
5. Side yard fence height. Fences located in or along a side yard area shall not
exceed a height of four (4) feet. The height of any decorative elements,
articulated corners, gateways and posts shall be included in the fence height
measurement.
6. Rear yard fence height. Fences located in a rear yard area or on lot lines
abutting a rear yard area shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. The height of
any decorative elements, articulated corners, gateways and posts shall be
included in the fence height measurement.
7. Wall height. Walls located in or along any front, side or rear yard, where
permitted, shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height. The height of decorative
elements, articulated corners, gateways and wall piers shall be included in the
wall height measurement.
8. Finished exterior side. All fences or walls shall be constructed so that a finished
side, with no fully exposed structurally supporting members, is located on the
exterior facing outward away from the property upon which it is located.
9. Prohibited materials. Chain link type fences shall be prohibited in any historic
zone district. In addition, no fence or wall shall be constructed or installed with
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
132
barbed wire, metal spikes or topped with concertina or razor wire, broken bottles
or similar materials so as to be dangerous to humans or animals.
10. Drainage. Fences and walls shall be constructed in a manner so as to permit the
continued flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be
blocked or dammed to create ponding, either on the property upon which such is
located or on any adjacent lot. Those applying for a zoning permit to erect a
fence or decorative wall may consult with the Township Engineer to ensure
compliance with this provision.
11. Retaining walls. Any permitted wall proposed to be used as a retaining wall shall
be required to be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit.
12. Use of vegetation. Except where specifically prohibited under the terms of this
chapter or any other applicable ordinance or regulations of the Township, nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of hedges, trees or other planting
anywhere on the lot.
13. Utility easement. Prior to installing a fence in a utility easement area, a property
owner shall secure written approval from the appropriate utility company or
appropriate public body. Evidence of approval shall be submitted as a
prerequisite to issuance of a zoning permit.
14. Fence height sketch. Appendix B represents the maximum permitted height for
fences relative to their location on the property.
B. Fences and walls in non-historic zone districts. Fences and walls in non-historic zone
districts shall be permitted accessory structures subject to the following provisions:
1. Front Yards.
(a) For residential uses, fences shall be permitted to be located in front
yards, provided such fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, as
measured from ground level, and shall be constructed so that at least
fifty (50) percent thereof is non-solid and open. Fence types such as
board-on-board and stockade shall be considered solid fences.
Decorative walls are permitted to be located in front yards for residential
uses, provided such shall not exceed two and one half (2 ½) feet in
height, as measured from ground level. Fence posts, corners, gateways,
and wall piers and entryways may not exceed five (5) feet in height.
(b) For non-residential uses, fences and decorative walls may be erected in
the front yard extending to the rear or side lot lines, provided:
(i) When such fences and walls are located within fifteen (15) feet
of a street line they shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, as
measured from the ground level. Fence posts, corners,
gateways, and wall piers and entryways shall not exceed five (5)
feet in height.
(ii) When such fences and walls are located more than fifteen (15)
feet from a street line they shall not exceed six (6) feet in height,
as measured from the ground level. Fence posts, corners,
gateways, and wall piers and entryways shall not exceed seven
(7) feet in height.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
133
(c) Chain link fences shall be prohibited in front yards in all zone districts.
2. Side and Rear Yards.
(a) For residential uses, both solid and non-solid fences shall be permitted to
be located in side or rear yards, provided such shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height, as measured from the ground level. Decorative walls for
residential uses are permitted to be located in side or rear yards,
provided such shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, as measure from
the ground level. Fence posts, corners, gateways, and wall piers and
entryways may not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
(b) For non-residential uses, both decorative walls and solid or non-solid
fences shall be permitted to be located in side or rear yards, provided
such shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, as measured from the ground
level. Fence posts, corners, gateways, and wall piers and entryways
may not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
3. Finished Exterior Side. All fences or walls shall be constructed so that a finished
side, with no fully exposed structurally supporting members, is located on the
exterior facing outward away from the property upon which it is located.
4. Materials. No fence or wall shall be constructed or installed with barbed wire,
metal spikes, or topped with concertina or razor wire, broken bottles or similar
materials so as to be dangerous to humans or animals. In addition, chain link
fences are specifically prohibited in front yard in all zones.
5. Drainage. Fences and decorative walls shall be constructed in a manner so as
to permit the continued flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface
water to be blocked or dammed to create ponding, either on the property upon
which such is located or on any adjacent lot. Those applying for a zoning permit
to erect a fence or decorative wall may consult with the Township Engineer to
ensure compliance with this provision.
6. Obstruction. No fence shall be constructed within any sight triangle as defined in
this article, or installed so as to constitute a hazard to traffic or public safety.
7. Utility easement. Prior to installing a fence in a utility easement area, a property
owner shall secure written approval from the appropriate utility company or
appropriate public body. Evidence of approval shall be submitted as a
prerequisite to issuance of a zoning permit.
8. Retaining Walls. Any permitted wall proposed to be used as a retaining wall may
be required to be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit.
9. Exceptions. Fences or walls that constitute a permitted buffer area screen
approved as part of a site plan application shall be excepted from the above
height and location provisions. In addition, fencing required to enclose a tennis
court shall be excepted from the above maximum height provisions. Said fence
shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, as measured from ground level, and
may not be located within a required setback area.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
134
§ 412.08 Frontage on Public Street
Every principal use shall be located on a lot with frontage upon a public street which has been improved
in accordance with the applicable Township standards or for which such improvement has been insured
by the posting of a performance guarantee in accordance with this Ordinance.
§ 412.09 Helistops
The following regulations shall apply to helistops where permitted as an accessory use to principal office
and/or hospital uses in the LI, C-1 or C Zone Districts:
A. A statement detailing the proposed use of the site including a description of the proposed
level of activity measured in flights per hour or per day, hours of operation and any other
pertinent information shall be provided.
B. Helistops shall be permitted only upon site plan review by the appropriate board of
jurisdiction. A plan. drawn to scale, depicting the layout of the site shall be provided,
inclusive of the following:
1. Site security measures, including a fence of not less then four (4) feet in height
on three sides and/or security personnel, employed by the applicant, to supervise
take-offs and landings for safety purposes, subject to the approval of the New
Jersey Office of Aviation (NJOA);
2. Marking indicators at each corner of the landing area pursuant to minimum
requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and New Jersey Office
of Aviation (NJOA);
3. Wind sock or equivalent;
4. Passenger shelters and walkways, if any;
C. The helistop shall not include the fueling or maintenance of helicopters and helicopters
shall not be parked at the helistop except when loading or discharging passengers.
D. A helistop may not be located within 100’ of an adjacent residential property line.
E. The hours of operation of the helistop within the C-1 Zone District shall not include flights
prior to 6:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M., unless under special circumstances approved by
the board of jurisdiction.
F. Any approved passenger shelters shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.
G. The approval of a helistop shall be subject to favorable determination by the NJOA after
impact tests and public hearings conducted during the nine-month period of that agency’s
Temporary Permit.
§ 412.10 Holiday Sales
Christmas Tree Sales. The annual sale of Christmas trees is permitted in any non-residential zone
between the Friday after Thanksgiving and December 25, inclusive.
§ 412.11 Light Fixture Mounting Height
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
135
Lighting shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height not more than fourteen (14) feet or the height
of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source.
§ 412.12 Loading Requirements
A. Loading space requirements. In all zone districts in connection with every commercial,
institutional and industrial use, there shall be provided, at the time that any building or
structure is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or has a change of use, loading
spaces in accordance with the requirements of the following schedule:
TABLE 4.1: LOADING BERTH STANDARDS
USE TOTAL FLOOR AREA
(in square feet)
NUMBER OF
LOADING BERTHS
Up to 5,000 1
Funeral homes
5,000 or more 2
Up to 10,000 0
From 10,001 to 23,999 1
From 24,000 to 39,999 2
All other businesses and
commercial uses
40,000 or more 3
Up to 5,000 1
5,000 to 9,999 2
10,000 to 19,999 3
20,000 to 39,999 4
Light industrial and
warehouses
40,000 or more
5 + 1 for each
additional 20,000
square feet
B. Loading space dimensions. Standard institutional and light industrial/warehouse loading
spaces shall measure at least fifteen (15) feet wide by sixty (60) feet long, with a height
clearance of not less than twenty (20) feet. All other loading spaces shall measure at
least fifteen (15) feet wide by forty-five (45) feet long, with a height clearance of not less
than fifteen (15) feet.
C. All loading areas shall be located on the same lot as the use being served.
D. No loading area shall be located in a front yard.
E. There shall be no loading in a yard abutting, or in a public right-of-way.
F. No loading space shall be located within forty (40) feet of an intersection of any two
public right-of-ways. The off-street loading space shall be located on the property so as to
permit any vehicle to be parked in the loading space with no portion of the vehicle
extending into the public street.
§ 412.13 Marinas
Marinas shall be permitted in the B-3 Zone District provided that such uses satisfy the supplementary
regulations set forth in this section as follows:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
136
A. At least one (1) off-street parking street parking space shall be provided for each boat
dockage space. When a marina includes launching facilities, the parking space shall be
large enough to accommodate boat trailers.
B. Adequate land space shall be provided for the loading of supplies.
C. The purveyance of goods or services not including boats or motors shall take place in an
enclosed structure.
D. A seasonal boatyard shall be permitted as an accessory use provided that the number of
boats stored does not exceed the total number of boat slips in the marina and provided
that all of the supplementary regulations for a boatyard are satisfied.
E. Storage or display of rental watercraft shall be permitted as an accessory use to a marine
related sales and service establishment, provided it does not take place within a setback
area.
F. A marine related sales and services establishment shall be permitted as an accessory
use provided that all of the conditional use standards for a marine related sales and
services establishment are satisfied.
G. Automobile parking areas shall be black-topped. Designated motor vehicle parking areas
shall be used only for the parking of vehicles associated with customers and employees.
H. All applicable requirements of any State or Federal agency including local health and fire
authorities having jurisdiction shall be met.
§ 412.14 Marine Related Sales and Services
Marine related sales and services shall be permitted in the B-3 Zone District provided that such uses
satisfy the supplementary regulations set forth in this section as follows:
A. The purveyance of goods or services not including boats or motors shall take place in an
enclosed structure.
B. Principal setbacks. The following shall be located on-site within the principal building
envelope:
1. Any building, including accessory buildings, within which sales, repair, service or
other work shall take place.
2. Designated outdoor areas where repair, service or other work shall take place.
3. Storage of watercraft and marine related apparatus left by customers to await
service.
4. Storage of any boat or marine related vehicle requiring hull repairs, body work or
which is inoperable because of major repairs.
5. Storage of mechanical or repair equipment necessary for the operation of the
principal use. All equipment shall be stored indoors unless it can be shown that
outdoor storage of particular equipment is the only reasonable method of storage
in which case such equipment shall be stored on a paved surface.
C. Outdoor display and storage.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
137
1. Outdoor sales display areas and temporary storage of watercraft (dry-dock
storage) shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any lot line, however,
whenever a buffer from a use other than a marine related sales and services
establishment is required, the minimum buffer width, as set forth in this
subsection, shall govern as the minimum setback requirement to said adjacent
use.
2. The height of watercraft storage shall not exceed three (3) boats stacked
vertically and thirty-five (35’) feet.
3. No derelict, discarded or junked boats shall be stored out-of-doors nor shall any
parts, scrap, partially dismantled boats, boat motors, or trailers.
4. Storage of cars, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles not marine related shall not be
permitted unless such storage activity is approved by the board of jurisdiction for
that purpose.
5. The seasonal storage of boats or any other marine related vehicles not being
serviced, repaired or sold on the premises shall be deemed to be a boatyard and
must conform to regulations for such.
6. Storage or display of rental watercraft is permitted as an accessory use to a
marine related sales and services establishment. Such storage or display may
not take place in a setback area.
D. Buffer requirements. When located adjacent to any property devoted to a use other than
a marine related sales and services establishment, the marine related sales and services
establishment shall maintain the following between any outdoor activity and the adjacent
property:
1. A fifteen (15) foot wide buffer area. Said buffer area shall be placed in a
conservation easement.
2. A six (6) foot high stockade or board-on-board fence to be located at least fifteen
(15) feet from the adjoining property line. Said fence may not be located within a
front yard setback area.
3. A landscaped screening located in the buffer area consisting of Spruces or
Douglas Firs with a minimum height of ten (10) feet at the time of planting,
spaced fifteen (15) feet on-center.
E. Site triangle required. No outdoor storage or display area shall be located within a
required site triangle as defined elsewhere herein.
F. All loading or unloading of watercraft and marine related apparatus shall occur on-site.
G. All permitted uses and activities established in conjunction with marine related sales and
services uses shall be clearly accessory in nature.
H. Automobile parking areas shall be black-topped. Designated motor vehicle parking areas
shall be used only for parking of vehicles associated with customers and employees.
I. Designated areas for boat or marine related vehicle storage or display need not conform
to standards for parking lot paving and design standards but, shall be segregated from
parking areas by means of a raised concrete curb of at least six (6) inches in height.
Concrete wheel stops shall not be utilized to meet this curbing requirement.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
138
J. Watercraft transport services shall be permitted as an accessory use to a marine related
sales and services establishment.
K. All new boat construction shall be carried on within an enclosed building.
L. Designated fifteen (15) foot wide fire lanes shall be provided at regular intervals and shall
be maintained and open at all times. Said fire lanes shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Fire Official.
M. All applicable requirements of any State or Federal agency including local health and fire
authorities having jurisdiction shall be met.
§ 412.15 Multifamily Development in B-3 Zone
A. Any development located between the northerly and southerly legs of Seaview Circle
opposite Spray Lane shall provide a roadway connection between said northerly and
southerly legs.
B. Multifamily residential development shall conform to the bulk requirements set forth in the
R-5 Zone District.
C. Multifamily Development shall be permitted on lots within a maximum of five hundred
(500) feet of NJ Route 35.
§ 412.16 Minimum Improvable Lot Area
A. The building envelope on a lot as defined by the minimum yard requirements for the
location of a principal building, or, in the case of uses other than single-family residential,
the location of an off-street parking lot, or a loading area, shall enclose a contiguous
improvable area, as defined herein, which is not less than the minimum improvable area
required by Schedule B-1 and B-2, “Zoning District Bulk Regulations.”
B. The contiguous improvable area shall be of such dimensions that it shall be able to
contain within it the shape of a circle whose minimum diameter is not less than as
prescribed by Schedule B, “Zoning District Bulk Regulations,” for the diameter of the
minimum improvable area.
C. Any existing detached single-family dwelling which is a conforming use but which is on a
lot made nonconforming by the provisions of this subsection, may be enlarged or
expanded within its improvable area provided that such expansion conforms to all other
zone district regulations.
§ 412.17 Parking Requirements
A. The total number of off-street parking spaces and loading spaces required for all uses or
combination of uses shall be provided as specified in this Section. Any building or site
containing more than one use shall meet the combined parking space and loading
requirements for all uses, based on the area utilized for each separate use. The parking
space schedule and loading space schedule in this Section represents general parking
and loading requirements acceptable to the Township. Since a specific use may
generate parking usage and/or loading/unloading activities that deviates from the
requirements enumerated in this Section, documentation and testimony shall be
presented to the Board as to the anticipated parking usage and loading activities. The
parking requirements for any use not specifically indicated shall be determined by the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
139
Board based on evidence presented at the time of the application and based on
requirements for similar type uses. Based upon the above, the Board may take action as
follows:
1. Grant a variance from parking requirements to permit a lesser number of spaces,
provided, however, that spaces shall be shared by two or more separate uses
with non-conflicting parking usage schedules;
2. Grant a variance from parking space requirements contingent upon the applicant
obtaining a specified number of reserved off-street parking spaces from another
source, including, but not exclusively, the Township of Neptune;
3. Require construction of a greater number of spaces.
B. Parking space dimensions. Standard parking spaces shall measure nine (9) feet wide by
eighteen (18) feet long. Handicapped parking spaces shall measure twelve (12) feet
wide by eighteen (18) feet long.
C. Multi-level parking structure.
1. Building coverage and floor area ratio. That portion of a multi-level parking
structure specifically designed to accommodate parking and driveway areas shall
not be included in determining the maximum permitted building coverage and/or
maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) on a particular tract.
2. Standards. Where allowed as an accessory structure for a permitted principal
use in the C-1, LI, PUD and C Zones, a multi-level parking structure shall
conform to the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not exceed six (6) levels and fifty-five (65) feet. In no
instance shall a multi-level parking structure exceed the height of the
principal structure.
(b) The required setbacks for multi-level parking structures shall be the
same as those set forth for principal permitted structures. No multi-level
parking structure may be located closer to a residential property line than
a distance equal to the height of the structure.
(c) A security office and/or attendant area not to exceed five-hundred (500)
square feet in area may be located within the multi-level parking
structure.
(d) The architectural design for the facades of parking structures shall
incorporate features such as articulated parapet walls, ornamental
projections, varied planter widths and similar items to add visual interest
and improve the overall appearance of the structure as viewed from the
street.
(e) Adequate lighting shall be provided at all levels of a multi-level parking
structure to ensure motorist and pedestrian safety and security. Bollardstyle
light fixtures are encouraged at the uppermost level of the structure
to mitigate off-site light spillage. The maximum mounting height of a light
fixture as measure from the uppermost level of the structure shall be
twelve (12) feet.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
140
D. Number of parking spaces. In all zone districts, except for uses in designated historic
zone districts, there shall be provided, at the time that any building or structure is erected,
enlarged, increased in capacity or has a change of use, parking spaces in accordance
with the requirements in Table 4.2.
TABLE 4.2: PARKING REGULATIONS
USE OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENT
Residential Single-family or Multifamily SEE RSIS STANDARDS except for residential
historic districts
Uses in historic zone districts No off-street parking permitted or required,
except for new historic hotels as note below.
Assisted living facility 1 space per 3.5 rooms
Automobile service station 1 space per 3 gas dispenser
Automotive body repair and painting 2 spaces per bay and work area
Automotive sales (indoor) 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet per gross
floor area of interior sales space + 3 spaces
per service bay
Bank 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Bed & breakfast homestay None
Bed & breakfast guesthouses and inns None
Car wash 5 spaces per washing lane + 1 space per fulltime
employee
Community center 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Community residence for the developmentally
disabled
1 space per employee
Computer training facility 1 space per computer training terminal space +
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Family day care 1 space per employee
Funeral home 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Garden center/nursery 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
+ 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of outdoor
storage or nursery area
Health club 1 space per 75 square feet of gross floor area
Historic hotel 0.4 space per room for historic hotels on lots
40,000 square feet or larger
Home Occupation 1 space per employee + applicable RSIS
requirements based on dwelling unit type
Hospital 3 spaces per bed
Hotel 1 space per guest room + 1 space per 300
square feet of banquet, restaurant and
conference space
Laundromat 1 space per 3 washer or dryer machines
Long-term care facility 1 space per 3 beds
Manufacturing and assembly 1 space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor
area
Marina 1 off-street parking street parking space for
each boat dockage space
Marine related sales and service 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet per gross
floor area + 1 space per full-time employee
Nightclub 1 space per 50 square feet
Office 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Office / Flex Space 1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area
Personal service 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
141
USE OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENT
Place of worship 1 space per 4 seats; Every three (3) feet of a
pew measured horizontally shall be considered
a seat.
Research 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurant 1 space per 3 seats
Restaurant, take-out • Freestanding & freestanding drive-through:
1 space per 60 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per employee on
peak shift
• Other than freestanding or freestanding
drive-through: 1 space per 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Retail sales and service 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
School 1 space per classroom and other rooms used
by students and/or faculty + 0.25 per student
over driving age
Self-storage facility 1 space per employee + 1 space per 10,000
square feet of gross floor area
Shopping center 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Tavern 1 space per 2 seats
Theater 1 space per 3 seats
Warehouse & distribution facility 1 space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor
area
E. Design standards. Standards for the design of parking lot areas are located at §514.
F. For uses not specifically described herein, parking requirements shall be determined by
the approving authority during a public hearing. These requirements are considered
minimum standards, and parking may be provided in excess of these requirements, but in
no case shall the provided parking for non-residential uses exceed these minimum
requirements by more than twenty (20%) percent. This restriction shall not apply to
single-family dwelling units.
G. All permitted and required accessory off street parking spaces shall be located on the
same lot as the use to which the spaces are accessory, or upon an adjacent lot in
common ownership.
§ 412.18 Parking in Front Setback
For all uses except single-family dwellings in non-historic zone districts, individual parking spaces shall be
prohibited in any front yard setback area. Parking is prohibited in all districts on lawn areas within front
yard setback.
§ 412.19 Places of Worship
Places of worship shall be permitted as specified in Article IV in accordance with the following
supplementary regulations:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
142
A. Setbacks.
1. Bulk requirements. Places of worship shall conform to the following bulk
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet
(b) Maximum height: 35’ and 2.5 stories
(c) Min. front yard setback: 15’
(d) Min. side yard setback: 20’
(e) Min. rear yard: 20’
(f) Any building shall be set back from any residential property line at least
one-and-one-half (1-1/2) times the height of the main roof line, or the
applicable zone district requirement, whichever is greater.
2. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) No parking lot shall be permitted in a front yard; however, this shall not
exclude drop off and pick up lanes.
(b) Parking lots shall be setback from any side property line twenty (20) feet
and any rear yard line ten (10) feet.
B. Residential use. A detached accessory single-family dwelling shall comply with the yard
requirements for such uses in the respective zone. A single accessory apartment within
the principal structure may be provided.
C. Child-care facility.
1. An accessory child-care facility that meets the definition of same as provided herein
shall be permitted.
2. Adequate and safe provisions shall be made for on-site drop-off and pick-up areas.
(a) The provider must be the resident of the premises, and must present the
Zoning Officer with documentation of substantial compliance with all
Division of Youth and Family Services requirements on an annual basis.
The family day care home must be registered pursuant to the “Family
Day Care Provider Registration Act,” per N.J.S.A. 46:8D-1 et seq.
(b) Any side or rear yard which is utilized for recreation activity must be
fenced in accordance with this Ordinance. No recreation area may be
located in a front yard area. Any associated equipment shall be
restricted to the fenced yard.
§ 412.20 Setbacks for Buildings in the B-1 Zone
In the B-1 Zone District, the side yard setback requirement may be reduced to 0’ along any portion of a
side lot line where a building on an adjacent lot is built at a 0’ setback to the same side lot line. Either the
required 10’ minimum side setback requirement or the reduction to 0’ shall be permitted. The remaining
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
143
side yard shall meet the combined side yard setback requirement for the B-1 Zone District as set forth in
Schedule B-1.
§ 412.21 Temporary Trailers
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit trailers hauling, loading or unloading merchandise in
the course of their customary function. No trailer shall be used except as specified hereunder.
A. Natural calamity. Trailers used for temporary residency by any occupant of a dwelling
that is being reconstructed due to damage from a fire, flood, or other natural calamity
shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. The trailer is placed only on the same lot which contains the dwelling that is
being reconstructed.
2. An approved zoning permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to the
placement of such temporary trailer on the site. The Zoning Officer, under the
advisement of the Construction Code Official and Chief of the Fire Department
shall be responsible for determining the most practical location for such trailer.
3. The time period of occupancy of such trailer shall not exceed six (6) months,
provided however, that the Zoning Officer may extend the time period of
occupancy for an additional time period of occupancy for an additional time
period of up to three (3) months due to exceptional circumstances that prevent
the reconstruction and re-occupancy of the damaged building within the initial six
(6) month time period. However, in no instance shall such trailer be occupied for
a time period to exceed nine (9) months, unless extended by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. Construction and storage trailers. Trailers used for construction offices and for storage of
materials and supplies on a job site may be used during the period of construction only.
Such trailers may be used only during the construction phase of a development. All
material storage and construction office trailers must be removed if no site work or
construction activity has occurred on-site for forty-five (45) days or more, or if
construction activity has substantially slowed. Such trailers must be removed upon the
completion or final occupancy of the new structure(s).
C. Office and classroom trailers. Trailers for temporary use including but not limited
modified mobile homes for office use and classroom space may be placed on a lot in a
non-residential zone provided that:
1. “Temporary use” means use prior to final occupancy of a permanent structure;
2. The temporary use is in conjunction with a principal building and a permitted use
being undertaken, or approved to be undertaken on the lot;
3. Trailers are not be located between a principal structure and the front street line
and all required setbacks and yards specified for the respective zone are
observed;
4. On a corner lot, trailers shall not be located between a principal building and any
adjacent street line and shall observe all required setbacks and yards specified
for the respective zone;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
144
5. Site plan approval for a permanent principal structure on the same lot is obtained
prior to placement of a trailer;
6. Use of a trailer permitted under this section does not commence prior to site plan
approval and does not exceed one year from the date of such site plan approval
unless extended by Planning Board;
7. The time period of occupancy of such trailer shall not exceed six (6) months,
provided however, that the Zoning Officer may extend the time period of
occupancy for an additional time period of occupancy for an additional time
period of up to three (3) months due to exceptional circumstances within the
initial six (6) month time period. However, in no instance shall such trailer be
occupied for a time period to exceed nine (9) months, unless extended by the
Planning Board.
D. Sales offices.
1. In subdivisions and site plans approved for residential construction, the Zoning
Officer may permit a temporary sales office, provided that, prior to issuance of a
construction permit for such temporary sales office, final approval for the tract
upon which the temporary sales office is to be located shall be effective. Only
one (1) temporary sales office is permitted per tract.
2. A site plan must be submitted to the Zoning Officer for review for compliance with
all area and yard requirements and all design standards required in the zone
district where it is located. Any relief from the aforesaid requirements or
standards may only be granted by the appropriate board of jurisdiction.
3. Parking on other than accepted public roadways. The following minimum on-site
parking spaces must be provided
(a) One (1) space for each employee
(b) One (1) space for each ten (10) units or portion thereof for the first fifty
(50) units in any project
(c) One (1) space for each twenty-five (25) additional units or portion thereof
in any project greater than fifty (50) units
The parking area surface may be gravel if maintained in a dust-free manner.
However, the area of the driveway at least twenty-five (25) feet from the street
cartway shall be constructed of bituminous asphalt to prevent tracking of stone or
dirt onto the public street.
4. A zoning permit and a certificate of occupancy are required for all temporary
sales offices.
5. The temporary sales office may only be located on the site until the 15th or final
certificate of occupancy is issued for the dwelling units, whichever occurs first. At
that time, the developer shall have thirty (30) days to remove the temporary sales
office and any appurtenances from the site and restore any area disturbed. If the
developer desires to continue a sales office use, it must thereafter be from within
a proposed dwelling unit.
6. Sales shall be limited to dwelling units being marketed in the tract on which the
temporary sales office is located; sales of off-tract dwelling unites are prohibited.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
145
Building materials and all other materials except those directly related to the
promotion and sale of dwellings in the tract, such as decorating samples,
brochures and office supplies, may not be stored in the sales office. Use of the
sales office for living quarters is prohibited
7. The municipal agency may also approve a temporary sales office in conjunction
with its review and approval of the site plan or subdivision application, provided
that the site plan and traffic control plan therefor have been submitted.
D. Storage. No trailer may be temporarily or permanently used for storage of materials in
any zone district.
§ 412.22 Yards
A. No building erected on any lot need be set back farther from the street line than the
average alignment of existing buildings within 200 feet on each side of the lot and within
the same block front and district; however, regardless of the alignment of neighboring
buildings, no building erected between two existing buildings on immediately adjacent
lots need be set back farther than that of the two said buildings which is farther from the
street line.
B. No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of complying with
the front, side, or rear yard requirements of this Ordinance shall be considered as
providing for the required yard areas of another principal building.
C. For special yard requirements particular to properties located in historic zone districts,
see Section 413.
D. Yard setback requirements within the LI zone east of Route 35 shall be fifty percent
(50%) less than required setbacks in all other LI zones.
§ 412.23 Senior Citizen Apartment Buildings in the B-1 Zone
Senior citizen apartment buildings shall be permitted in the B-1 Zone District east of State Highway 35 on
lots with frontage of West Lake Avenue in accordance with the following regulations which shall be
deemed to supplement the underlying zoning regulations. Where a regulation contained herein conflicts
with an underlying zoning regulation, the regulation herein shall apply.
A. The maximum permitted floor area ratio (FAR) shall be no greater than the sum of one
and one-tenth (1.10) and the FAR specified for the B-1 Zone.
B. Minimum Setbacks.
1. Minimum Front Yard: Ten (10) feet.
2. Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet.
C. The maximum building coverage shall be no greater than forty-five percent (45%).
D. The maximum building height as measured by the number of stories shall be no greater
than four (4) stories.
E. No dwelling unit shall have a floor area less than five-hundred and fifty (550) square feet
(minimum floor area design standards for multifamily dwelling units shall not apply).
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
146
F. Outdoor seating areas shall be provided with an aggregate minimum area that is no less
than two (2) square feet per one (1) dwelling unit.
G. Alternative parking standards to those required by Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) shall be accepted if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed
parking standard better reflects local conditions and household characteristics.
[NOTE: The previous section, 412.23, has been added per Ordinance No. 02- 14]
§ 413 SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS
§ 413.01 Alcoholic Beverages
The sale of alcoholic beverages either in packaged form or in by-the-drink shall be prohibited in all historic
zone districts.
§ 413.02 Flared Avenue Open Space Areas
A. Purpose. The HD-O Zone District is subject to special setback provisions dating to the
late 1870’s, providing for a flared setback that widens toward the ocean from Central
Avenue to Ocean Avenue. This flared setback is a unique and invaluable resource that is
recognized within planning, urban design and historic preservation circles as one of the
first evidences of this type of streetscape treatment in the country.
B. Ornamentation. Aside from an access walkway and sidewalk no greater than six feet (6’)
in width, shrubbery, flowers and other similar ornamentation installed and maintained at a
height of less than thirty (30) inches, no structures may be placed within, or may project
into, the area defined as the Historic Flared Avenue Open Space area. The area
between the curb and the sidewalk shall be maintained as a planted grass strip.
C. Vehicles. No vehicles of any type may be parked within a flared avenue open space
area. This shall not preclude the parking of vehicles within the established public right-ofway.
§ 413.03 Outdoor Commercial Displays and Sales
Purpose. This Subsection acknowledges that business owners and consumers will benefit from
what are commonly known as "sidewalk sales" and that the proper regulation of such sales is
required.
A. Location. Sidewalk sales may be held only in the HD-B-1 Zone District.
B. Limitations and Regulations.
1. The merchandise to be sold must be directly related to the retail establishment.
2. The display of merchandise shall be restricted to the regular hours of the
business’ operation and shall be removed at the close of business each day.
3. The display area must be immediately adjacent to the building façade or curbline
and shall not extend more than four (4) feet beyond the façade or curbline.
4. The area devoted to the display shall be a maximum of 100 square feet for a
linear distance not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet or the entire length of the
façade, whichever is smaller.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
147
5. The display shall not obstruct doorways nor impede pedestrian traffic or
wheelchair accessibility. When displays are located adjacent to curb areas, a
four (4) foot wide passage shall be provided between on-street parking and the
sidewalks area every twenty (20) feet.
6. No display shall be allowed in off-street parking areas, loading areas or
emergency lanes.
7. The retail merchandise shall not be displayed in cardboard boxes, but rather
shall be placed either on the sidewalk itself or upon a display table or rack as
appropriate to the nature of the merchandise.
8. No more than one (1) temporary sign, banner or flag not to exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in size shall be permitted on-site in conjunction with a sidewalk sale.
No off-site signage shall be permitted.
§ 413.04 Outdoor Dining Facilities
A. The intent of this subsection is to establish regulations for establishing an outdoor dining
establishment accessory to a principal restaurant use.
1. The area utilized for dining must be accessory in nature to a fully enclosed eating
establishment.
2. All service areas shall be inside the enclosed restaurant area, or suitably
screened.
3. Walkways with a minimum forty-two (42) inch width shall be provided to facilitate
patron and employee circulation.
4. An outdoor dining facility shall require approval of the Zoning Officer for
compliance with streetscape standards.
5. All furniture, equipment, signs, and other furnishings shall be subject to the
guidelines of the Ocean Grove Streetscape Standards and this ordinance.
6. Outdoor dining shall be restricted to the regular hours of the business’ operation
and the tables, chairs and associated furniture shall be removed at the end of the
business day.
§ 413.05 Prior Non-conforming Hotels
A. Any hotel located east of Central Avenue, which at the time of adoption of this
subsection, is a legal non-conforming use, shall be deemed to be a principal permitted
use to the extent the of the use which exists at any such hotel at the time of adoption of
this subsection. However, any expansion of the use which exists at any such hotel at the
time of adoption of this subsection shall be deemed non-conforming and would thus
require a variance pursuant to NJSA:55D-70-d2 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. The construction of additional cubic volume on the existing footprint of hotels subject to
this section shall not be considered an expansion of the existing hotel use, provided it
does not result in the creation of additional guestrooms. In the event of fire, damage or
any other casualty, hotels subject to this section shall have the right to rebuild or repair
the structure in accordance with its legal use as specified in this section.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
148
§ 413.06 Yard Requirements
A. For lots in the HD-R-1 Zone District, west of Central Avenue, the front building line shall
have a minimum front yard setback of ten (10) feet back from the street line and the front
porch line shall be set back at a minimum distance of four (4) feet from the street line,
except as modified by Paragraph D hereunder.
B. For lots east of Central Avenue, except those fronting Olin and McClintock Streets, the
front building line shall have a minimum front yard setback that is created by a line
running directly from a point ten (10) feet back from the property line at the corner of
Central Avenue to a point two (2) feet back from the property line at the corner of Ocean
Avenue, except as modified by Paragraph D hereunder.
C. For lots fronting Olin and McClintock Streets, the front building line shall have a minimum
front yard setback that is created by a line running directly from a point ten (10) feet back
from the property line at the corner of Central Avenue to a point six (6) feet back from the
property line at the corner of Ocean Avenue, except as modified by Paragraph D
hereunder.
D. No building line or front porch line need be set back farther than the average alignment of
those front building and front porch lines of existing buildings within 200 feet on each side
of the lot and within the same block front and within the same Zone District. This
provision does not permit the encroachment of buildings or porches into the flared open
space area.
E. For lots east of Central Avenue, except those fronting Olin and McClintock Streets, the lot
area and lot depth requirement shall be measured from the curb line rather than the
property line. A calculation of building and lot coverage requirements shall be based on
the resultant lot area. These provisions shall not affect any of the required yard setbacks.
F. All buildings and porches shall be so located that the roofs, steps or extensions of the
same shall not extend upon or overhang any public street, public avenue, public
sidewalk, or any other lot unless permission is granted by that lot owner.
§ 414 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
A. Purpose. While the Zone Plan for the Township is effective in providing for a variety of
land uses and in separating conflicting land uses, it is in the best interests of the
Township to provide an alternative method to the development of larger sites which
permits a greater variety and mix of land uses pursuant to a coordinated plan. Such
Planned Developments may consist of several different types of uses, open space, an
on-site circulation system for vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians and facilities for
community services, such as recreation, social activities and security to benefit the users
of the Planned Development. Finally, Planned Developments are intended to enable
creative design and development of larger sites without adversely impacting surrounding
land uses, particularly existing residential neighborhoods.
B. Applicability.
1. This Section contains requirements for Planned Commercial Development in the
C-1 and LI Zone Districts. Section 405 contains requirements and guidelines
particular to Planned Unit Development in the PUD Zone District.
2. The requirements for Planned Commercial Developments provided in this
Section apply where Planned Commercial Developments are listed as Permitted
Uses in the applicable zoning district. To the extent that the following provisions
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
149
differ from the requirements of the zoning district(s) otherwise applicable to the
site or other requirements of the Township’s Land Development Ordinance, the
provisions of this Section shall govern.
C. Standards.
The following standards shall apply to Planned Commercial Developments as defined in
this Chapter.
1. Development regulations.
(a) Permitted uses within a Planned Development shall be those uses listed
as permitted uses in the zoning district. Accessory uses not specifically
listed in these zones but which are supportive services and customarily
incidental to a principal use are also permitted.
(b) Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall be considered permitted
uses in a planned development with a minimum tract size of 10 acres.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, Planned Commercial
Developments shall be permitted only if the land which is to be used for
the Planned Development is located in the Planned Commercial
Development (C-1) or Light Industrial (LI) Zone Districts.
(d) Minimum Improvable Area requirements shall not apply to Planned
Developments.
(e) Bulk requirements. Bulk zoning requirements for Planned Commercial
Development in the C-1 and LI Zone Districts shall be in accordance with
the following tables:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
150
TABLE 4.3: BULK REGULATIONS FOR PLANNED COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IN THE LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) ZONE
DISTRICT
Minimum total Planned
Commercial Development area
80 acres
Minimum tract area 5 acres
Office
Maximum F.A.R.* 2.7
Maximum principal building
height/stories
150’ / twelve (12) stories
Maximum height of accessory
structures
60’
Front building setback 50’
Building setback from all other
tract boundary lines
75’
Minimum separation between
buildings
50’
Maximum building coverage* 40%
Maximum impervious coverage 70%
Hotel or Extended Stay Lodging Facility
Maximum principal building
height/stories
150’ / twelve (12) stories
Maximum height of accessory
structure
50’
Minimum front building setback 75’
Minimum building setback from all
other tract boundary lines
100’
Minimum separation between
buildings
30’
Maximum building coverage* 40%
Maximum impervious coverage 70%
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
151
TABLE 4.4: BULK REGULATIONS FOR PLANNED COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT: (C-1) ZONE DISTRICT
Minimum total Planned
Commercial Development area
20 acres
Minimum tract area 2.5 acres
Office
Maximum F.A.R.* 2.7
Maximum principal building
height/stories
150’ / twelve (12) stories
Maximum height of accessory
structures
50’
Front building setback 40’
Building setback from all other
tract boundary lines
50’
Minimum separation between
buildings
50’
Maximum building coverage* 30%
Maximum impervious coverage 70%
Hotel or Extended Stay Lodging Facility
Maximum principal building
height/stories
150’ / twelve (12) stories
Maximum height of accessory
structure
50’
Minimum front building setback 40’
Minimum building setback from all
other tract boundary lines
50’
Minimum separation between
buildings
30’
Maximum building coverage* 40%
Maximum impervious coverage 70%
Retail sales and services
Maximum principal building
height/stories
40’ and two (2) stories
Maximum F.A.R* 0.35
Minimum front building setback 40’
Minimum building setback from all
other tract boundary lines
30’
Minimum separation between
buildings
50’
Maximum building coverage* 35%
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
* That portion of a multi-level parking structure specifically designed to
accommodate parking and driveway areas shall not be included in
determining the maximum permitted building coverage and/or maximum floor
area ratio (F.A.R.) on a particular tract.
2. Accessory uses.
(a) Uses customarily incidental and accessory to principal permitted uses.
(b) Helistops
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
152
(c) Hotels or extended stay lodging facilities may provide up to 3,000 square
feet of retail space within the principal structure. Retail uses are limited
to those businesses that are commonly found in hotels, and provide
services or shopping opportunities to hotel guests and the public.
(d) Planned office developments may include accessory uses such as coffee
shops, deli/restaurants, newspaper/ stationary shops and teller bank
machines within principal structures provided:
(i) Such uses shall be included as tenants within the various
principal office buildings and shall not occupy separate buildings
(ii) Not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of any
principal office building may be occupied by accessory uses.
(iii) No accessory use shall have an individual outside entrance,
except for fire/ service access, nor shall there be any display of
outside signage, except as part of the overall building
identification directory.
3. Perimeter buffers.
(a) Planted buffers shall be provided along the perimeter of any Planned
Development in accordance with the minimum width parameters of Table
4.5 below. As set forth in Table 4.5 where a ?proposed use? (vertical
column) within a Planned Development is located near a tract boundary
line that is common with an abutting use (horizontal row), the buffer width
indicated in Table 4.5 shall be provided except as otherwise provided for
herein. Where Route 18 or Route 66 serve as a zone district boundary,
no buffering is required along such boundary. Where a tract boundary
line is also a streetline, the buffer and screening requirements set forth in
Article V (Design and Performance Standards) shall apply.
(b) Every required buffer may contain berms, deciduous and evergreen
trees and shrubs, inclusive of ornamental trees and shrubs, as well as
groundcovers or a combination of these features to achieve an effective
landscape screen. Design of buffer areas to achieve an effective
landscape screen shall follow the guidelines and standards outlined in
Section 503 below. The number, type and size of buffer plantings shall
be shown on the site plan.
(c) To the extent that environmental constraints and physical or Planned
Development design conditions dictate, a variable width planted buffer
may be provided. The Board may approve a buffer width less than the
minimum prescribed in Table 4.5 provided that a commensurate buffer
width greater than the minimum requirement is provided elsewhere on
the site and that site cross-sections depicting a proposed landscape
buffer design treatment between a Planned Development and abutting
residentially zoned lands indicates that an effective landscape screen
can be achieved. No buffer shall be less than ten (10) feet unless the
abutting use is permanently reserved open space.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
153
TABLE 4.5: MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS AT TRACT PERIMETER
OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Abutting Use
Office
Industrial
Warehouse
Residential
Quasi-
Public/
Institutional
Proposed Use
Hotel/Extended
Stay
10 feet
25 feet
50 feet
25 feet
Office
10 feet
25 feet
50 feet
25 feet
Retail Commercial
25 feet
10 feet
50 feet
25 feet
Quasi-
Public/Institutional
25 feet
50 feet
25 feet
10 feet
Other
25 feet
10 feet
50 feet
25 feet
4. Building Height Exceptions Within Planned Developments. In order to encourage
distinctive architectural designs which integrate and effectively screen rooftop
mechanical equipment, elevator penthouses, stair enclosures, and similar
features, screened mechanical equipment enclosures may either be ten (10) feet
from the perimeter walls of a building or integral with the front facade of the
building if designed as an architectural extension of the facade containing similar
building materials. Such rooftop screening structures may exceed the permitted
building height by up to sixteen (16) feet, provided that the mechanical
equipment and appurtenances in the aggregate do not exceed twenty (20)
percent of the roof area on which they are located.
5. Parking and Loading Requirements for Planned Developments. Parking shall be
provided within Planned Developments in accordance with the following:
(a) Non-Residential Uses. Parking for office uses located within Planned
Industrial Developments and Planned Commercial Developments shall
provide off-street parking at a ratio of three (3) parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross leasable floor space. Other permitted uses within a
Planned Development shall provide parking in accordance with the
Parking Requirements of Section §412 of the Land Development
Ordinance.
(b) Parking shall be distributed to minimize the walking distance to building
entrances. Parking decks and parking garages are encouraged.
Parking lots shall be designed to minimize the opportunities to cut across
parking aisles through the use of planting islands. Provisions for safe
pedestrian circulation between buildings and between buildings and
parking shall be included in the design for the Planned Development.
(c) Multi-level parking structure. That portion of a multi-level parking
structure specifically designed to accommodate parking and driveway
areas shall not be included in determining the maximum permitted
building coverage and/or maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) on a
particular tract.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
154
(d) The layout of parking areas shall be in accordance with Article V.
6. Off-Street Loading Requirements. Loading spaces shall be provided for Planned
Developments in accordance with Section 412.12 of the Land Development
Ordinance. Loading spaces may occupy a side or rear yard if such spaces are
effectively screened to shield such spaces from public view to the extent
practicable at the closest access street frontage.
7. Landscaping Requirements.
(a) Design of Buffer Areas. All required buffer areas that include existing
wooded areas that are less than 100 feet in width and containing a plant
association dominated by deciduous trees of 6-inch caliper or greater
shall be supplemented along the exterior edge within the required buffer
area by landscape material that may include naturalized groupings of
native shrubs, evergreen trees (Eastern Red Cedar, American Holly,
indigenous conifers) or combinations of such plantings to the extent
allowed by current environmental regulations. Buffer areas without
existing wooded areas that abut existing residential uses shall be
designed to form an effective landscape screen between non-residential
and residential uses.
For purposes of this Ordinance, an effective screen shall mean that
vision from an abutting residential lot line is screened to a point where
parking areas within the Planned Development will be substantially
blocked from view and filtered views of buildings is achieved. The Board
may approve fencing or hedges where appropriate to supplement or
replace a naturalized screen planting.
(b) Parking Area Buffers. Landscaped buffers of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet in width shall separate all off-street parking areas from the
nearest streetline of a public street. When such street separates the
tract from a residential zone, the required buffer shall be fifty (50) feet.
Treatment of such buffers may contain berms, groupings of trees and
shrubs and groundcovers or a combination of these features to achieve
an effective screen adjacent to such parking areas. Street trees shall be
planted at a minimum size of 3-inch caliper and spaced at intervals of
thirty (30) feet or in an alternate spacing pattern depending on tree
specie and overall site design theme proposed for the Planned
Development. Where berming is provided, it shall be designed with side
slopes not to exceed 3:1 and shall undulate and overlap where space
allows.
(c) Interior Roads. Interior roads within a Planned Development shall be
landscaped with street trees pursuant to the requirements of Article V of
the Land Development Ordinance.
(d) Preserved Open Space. To the greatest extent possible, preserved
open space should be designed into the Planned Development where
the maximum preservation of significant natural features can be
achieved without the need for extensive replacement planting. Where
new plantings are necessary, they should be shown on the Landscape
Plan submitted with the Preliminary Major Site Plan submission. The
Landscape Plan must be professionally prepared and incorporate a
balanced mix of trees and shrubs appropriate to the use of the open
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
155
space.
(e) Tree replacement. Planned development shall be subject to the tree
replacement requirements set forth in Section 525 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
8. Traffic Circulation.
(a) Planned Commercial Development may include new public and private
roadways in accordance with the standards set forth in this ordinance.
(b) Planned Commercial Development in the LI Zone District shall have
principal vehicular access from a Minor Arterial roadway as classified by
the Circulation Element of the Master Plan. Secondary and/or
emergency access may be provided from a Collector Road.
(c) Planned Commercial Development in the C-1 Zone shall have principal
vehicular access from a Major Arterial roadway as classified by the
circulation element of the Master Plan. Secondary and/or emergency
access may be provided from a Collector Road. Access to a Planned
Commercial Development shall not be provided via existing local roads
that primarily serve residential uses.
9. Utility Installations. All utilities for Planned Developments shall be installed
underground at a depth and at such location as will minimize risk or interruption
of services. All utilities shall be installed in accordance with the applicable
ordinances, regulations and standards of any Federal, State, or local
governmental agency, authority or utility unless otherwise authorized by the
regulating entity.
10. Impact Studies.
(a) A thorough and detailed traffic engineering impact analysis to determine
the adequacy of existing streets and intersections in the immediate
vicinity of the Planned Development and the effect of the additional traffic
on the environs and surrounding areas.
(b) A comprehensive fiscal impact analysis.
D. Design Guidelines for Planned Commercial Developments. In addition to complying with
the performance standards and design guidelines set forth in Article V, Planned
Commercial Development shall be designed according to the following guidelines:
1. Clustering of buildings and the provision of structured parking are strongly
encouraged to minimize the amount of site disturbance and stormwater runoff,
preserve open space, provide more efficient distribution of infrastructure and
encourage pedestrian circulation on the site.
2. Buildings shall be designed in accordance with an architectural theme, including
signage, which is coordinated with site lighting, street furniture, landscaping,
architectural project identity features, and other appurtenances in order to create
a sense of place.
3. Loading areas and docks should be designed into building corners or otherwise
be located so as to be at least partially hidden from view.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
156
4. Each facade shall be finished with compatible materials and design treatments.
5. Smaller support businesses and services should either be incorporated within the
ground floor of office buildings or designed to front along connecting interior
roads where short term street parking is permitted in front of businesses without
precluding necessary access by emergency vehicles.
6. Buildings should be arranged to enable and encourage pedestrian movement
between uses and buildings. The site plan should include a pedestrian and
bicycle pathway plan, inclusive of paver crosswalks with appropriate signage.
7. Open space within office or industrial developments shall include sitting and
outdoor eating areas. Provision for active and passive recreational facilities is
encouraged.
§ 415 CONDITIONAL USE CRITERIA
§ 415.01 Adult Entertainment Uses
Adult entertainment uses may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board
in the C-2 Zone District in accordance with the following conditions:
A. In the C-2 Zone District, no adult entertainment use shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of
another adult entertainment use, any lot or building used partially or wholly for residential
purposes, a hospital, a nursing home, an assisted living facility, a school, a public facility,
a day care or child-care center.
B. An adult entertainment use shall not be permitted in any area other than the C-2 Zone
District.
§ 415.02 Assisted Living Facilities
Assisted living facilities may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in
the R-4, PUD/R-1, C-3 and HD-R-2 Zone Districts in accordance with the following conditions:
[NOTE: The C-3 Zone has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No.
03-035]
A. The facility shall provide individual apartment units with, at a minimum, one (1)
unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit
entrance;
B. A Certificate of Need from the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
shall be demonstrated;
C. Bulk requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: One (1) acre
2. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty (20) feet
3. Minimum side yard setback: Twenty (20) feet or the maximum height
of the building, whichever is greater
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
157
4. Minimum rear yard: Fifteen (15) feet
5. Maximum height: Forty (40) feet and three (3) stories
D. A buffer area of at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided to adjacent residential
uses, consisting of massed evergreen and deciduous plantings.
E. A porte-cochere’ may project fifteen (15) feet into the front yard setback area, provided
adequate landscaping is provided between said porte-cochere’ and the front yard line.
§ 415.03 Automotive Body Repair and Painting
Automotive body repair and painting may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the
Planning Board in the C-2 and C-3 Zone Districts in accordance with §415 as follows:
[NOTE: The C-3 Zone has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No.
03-035]
A. All lubrication, repair, painting, or similar activities shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No exterior display or storage of parts shall be permitted.
B. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles incapable of normal operation
upon the highway, shall be permitted on the premises of the repair garage.
C. No vehicle awaiting repair or disposition at the repair garage shall be permitted on the
premises for a period exceeding ten (10) days.
D. No more than thirty (30) percent of the lot may be utilized for temporary outdoor vehicle
storage. Regardless of lot area, a maximum of 15,000 square feet may be devoted to
temporary outdoor vehicle storage.
E. A designated temporary outdoor storage area shall be enclosed by a continuous solid
fence at least eight (8) feet in height for screening purposes. The perimeter of said fence
shall be generously landscaped with ornamental landscaping.
F. No temporary outdoor storage area shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a
residential zone district.
G. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance, a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the front yard shall consist of
landscape screening of the building and front yard parking.
H. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, other forms of
transportation, or equipment for sale shall be permitted.
§ 415.04 Automotive Service Station and Gasoline Fueling Station
A. Automotive service stations may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by
the Planning Board in the C-3 Zone District in accordance the following conditions:
1. Notwithstanding the applicable zone district requirements, the minimum lot size
for service stations shall be 30,000 square feet and the minimum lot frontage
shall be 150 feet.
2. Such use shall only be combined on the same site with another principal use
provided the other use is a principal use permitted in the applicable zone district.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
158
In addition, a gasoline fueling station may be permitted on the same site
provided: (a) the gasoline fueling station is a conditional use permitted in the
applicable zone district; and, (b) the gasoline fueling station components of the
site conform to all of the conditional use standards specified for an automotive
fueling station.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, service stations shall be
permitted two curb cuts – an entrance and an exit – on one street frontage but
not to exceed three per lot.
4. No service station shall be located within 500 feet of any firehouse, school,
playground, church, hospital or public building.
5. All facilities including but not limited to repair appliances, pits, product and part
storage areas, work areas, storage tanks for used automotive fluids, and trash
facilities shall be within a building or under a roofed structure.
6. All lubrication, repair, maintenance or similar activities shall be performed in a
fully enclosed building. No dismantled parts or vehicle assemblies shall be
displayed outside of an enclosed building.
7. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles incapable of normal
operation upon the highway, shall be permitted on the premises of the repair
garage. No motor vehicles awaiting repair or disposition at an automotive
service station shall be permitted on the premises for a period exceeding seven
(7) days of business operation, except that up to three (3) inoperable vehicles in
an enclosed building may be permitted without a time restriction.
8. A designated temporary outdoor storage area for vehicles awaiting repair and/or
service during off-business hours shall be provided, unless all vehicle storage
can be accommodated inside a building. Such temporary outdoor storage area
shall be:
(a) Distinct and separate from visitor and employee parking an of sufficient
size to accommodate the anticipated number of vehicles to be stored
onsite;
(b) Graded and paved to meet applicable Township design standards as
approved by the Township Engineer;
(c) Located outside of a front yard area or a front yard setback area;
(d) Located a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from an adjacent
property situated in a residential zone district;
(e) Located in a minimum distance of five (5) feet from an adjacent property
situated in a nonresidential zone district; and,
(f) Enclosed by a continuous solid fence, which is at least eight (8) feet in
height for screening purposes. The perimeter of said fence shall be
generously landscaped with ornamental landscaping.
9. No more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area may be utilized for temporary
outdoor vehicle storage. Regardless of lot area, a maximum of 15,000 square
feet of outdoor area may be devoted to temporary outdoor vehicle storage.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
159
10. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of
this Ordinance, a minimum of twenty-five (25%) percent of the front yard shall
consist of landscape screening of the building and front yard parking.
11. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, other forms of
transportation, or equipment for sale shall be permitted.
B. Gasoline fueling stations may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the
Planning Board in the C-3 Zone District in accordance with the following conditions:
1. Notwithstanding the applicable zone district requirements, the minimum lot size
for gasoline fueling stations shall be 40,000 square feet and the minimum lt
frontage shall be 200 feet.
2. A gasoline fueling station may be combined on the same site with another
principal use provided the other use is a principal use permitted in the applicable
zone district.
3. An automotive service station may be permitted on the same site provided:
(a) The automotive service station is a conditional use permitted in the
applicable zone district; and
(b) The automotive service station components of the site conform to all of
the conditional use standards specified for an automotive service station.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, fueling stations shall be
permitted two curb cuts – an entrance and an exit – on each street frontage but
not to exceed four per lot.
5. No fueling station shall be located within 500 feet of any firehouse, school,
playground, church, hospital or public building.
6. All facilities including product storage arrears, product display areas, vending
machines, public telephone and trash facilities other than gasoline filling pumps,
vacuum cleaner stations or air pumps shall be within a building or under a roofed
structure.
7. A cantilevered cover or freestanding canopy may be permitted to extend into the
required front yard, provided that it is at least fifteen (15) feet from any front yard
line.
8. Gasoline filling pumps, air pumps vacuum cleaner stations shall be permitted
within the required front yard setback area of service stations but shall be not
closer than twenty (20) feet to any street line. No gasoline filling pump, air pump
or vacuum cleaner station shall be located within a required buffer area or within
a required principal building side yard or rear yard setback area.
9. All fuel tanks shall be installed below grade in accordance with all applicable
local, state and federal regulations. No fuel tank or vent pipe shall be located
within a required buffer area or within any required principal building setback
area.
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 415.05 Bed & Breakfast Guesthouses and Homestays
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
160
Bed and Breakfast guesthouses and homestays shall be permitted in the HD-O and B-3 Zone Districts
provided the following supplementary regulations are met:
[NOTE: The B-3 Zone has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No.
03-035]
A. The building is comprised of a structure originally constructed as a private residence,
hotel or a bed and breakfast;
B. Guesthouses shall includes individual sleeping accommodations for fifteen (15) or fewer
guests;
C. Homestays shall include individual sleeping accommodations for five (5) or fewer guests;
D. At least one (1) dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of the facility as his/her place of
residence during any time the facility is being used for the lodging of guests;
E. The principal structure has not less than three hundred (300) square feet of common
area for the exclusive use of guests, including but not limited to parlors, dining rooms,
libraries and solariums;
F. Cooking and smoking in guests rooms is prohibited;
G. The facility provides a meal to the guests in the forenoon of each day, but does not
operate as a restaurant open to the general public;
H. The facility is not a "rooming house" or "boarding house" as defined by N.J.S.A. 55:13B-
3;
I. The facility is not within two hundred (200') feet of an existing bed and breakfast on the
same street; and,
J. The facility does not allow:
1. Any guest to remain for a period of more than one hundred twenty-four (124)
days between May 15 and September 15 in given calendar year;
2. Any guest to remain more than thirty (30) successive days, or more than sixty
(60) days of any period of ninety (90) successive days between September 15
and May 15.
K. Bed and Breakfast Guesthouses and Homestays shall be located north of Main Avenue,
including those properties fronting on both sides Main Avenue.
§ 415.06 Billboards
Billboards may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in the LI Zone
District in accordance with the following conditions:
A. Maximum distance of 200 feet from the Route 18 right-of-way line;
B. Maximum sign area showing to one direction shall be 700 square feet with copy
extensions beyond the basic billboard sign not to exceed ten (10) of the basic billboard.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
161
C. The minimum setback from the Route 18 right-of-way shall be ten (10) feet. The
minimum set back from all other lot lines shall be twenty-five (25) feet or equivalent to the
height of the billboard, whichever is greater.
D. Maximum billboard height shall be forty (40) feet as measured from the existing grade to
the top of the billboard.
E. No more than three (3) billboard structures shall be permitted on both sides of Route 18
within any linear mile. Minimum distance between billboards shall be 1,500 feet along
the same side of the Highway.
F. Billboards shall be located no closer than 800 feet to a residential zone.
G. Billboards shall be designed and constructed so that the advertising surface is capable of
being seen and comprehended without visual aid only by persons traveling on Route 18.
H. Upon an application for a billboard, the items to be reviewed as part of such an
application shall include traffic safety lighting landscaping visual impact drainage and
other similar elements of site plan reviews. As part of its review the approving agency
shall consider the impact of the proposed billboard on surrounding properties and Route
18 itself.
I. Lighting for any billboard shall be designed to restrict any glare and spillover to the
immediate area of the sign.
J. Any application for construction of a billboard shall require the applicant to comply with
the Roadside Sign Control and Outdoor Advertising Act as contained in N.J.S.A. 27:5-5.
et seq., as well as any other applicable statutes law, and regulations related to billboards.
K. No more than one billboard structure shall be permitted on any one tax lot.
§ 415.07 Community Centers
Community centers may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in the
C-3, R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts in accordance with the following conditions:
[NOTE: The C-3 Zone has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No.
03-035]
A. The site includes or is in close proximity to open space which can be utilized for active
recreation
B. Direct access to at least a collector roadway to serve the use is available.
C. All interior areas designed for potentially noisy activities are sufficiently sound-insulated
or separated from adjacent residential structures so as to avoid any noise nuisance.
D. On-site exterior areas designated for active recreational use shall be screened consistent
with the requirements of §503.
E. A twenty-five (25) foot wide planted screen meeting the standards contained in §503 shall
be provided to all adjacent residential uses.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
162
§ 415.08 Drive-through Restaurants
Drive-through restaurants may be permitted in the B-1, C-1, C-2, LI, PUD, and C-6 Zone Districts when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with the following conditions:
[NOTE: The C-6 Zone has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No.
03-035]
A. Bulk requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet
2. Minimum front yard setback: Thirty (30) feet
3. Minimum side yard setback: Twenty (20) feet
4. Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Maximum total lot cover: Seventy-five (75) percent
B. Buffering.
1. A landscaped buffer area a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width to an
adjacent residential zone district or residential property line shall be provided.
2. A six (6) foot high board-on-board fence shall be provided at the perimeter of the
site at the board of jurisdiction’s discretion. Said fence shall not be located within
a front setback area.
C. Vehicular access.
1. Principal driveway access to a site containing a drive-through restaurant shall
only be provided via a major arterial, minor arterial or collector roadway as
identified by the Circulation Element of the Master Plan. Secondary and
emergency access may be provided via a local roadway.
2. Planned unit development. Except for access points for emergency vehicles,
driveway access shall not be provided from a public right-of-way to a drivethrough
restaurant in the P.U.D. Zone District. Vehicular access shall be
provided either via a private roadway, or an internal connection to an adjacent
retail or office parking area.
D. Drive-through areas.
1. A minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of queuing space shall be provided on-site,
as measured from an ordering area.
2. Two (2) internally illuminated menu boards not to exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area may be provided within the building envelope.
3. A “bail-out” lane shall be provided to allow cars in queue to freely move through
the site.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
163
4. No loudspeaker shall be permitted at yards that abut a residential zone district or
residential property line.
5. No drive-through area located within 150’ of a residential zone district or
residential property line shall be in use past 11:00 P.M. or before 7:00 A.M.
6. A pedestrian area located in the vicinity of a drive-through facility shall be clearly
delineated by raised sidewalk areas, painted crosswalks, distinct paving
materials or any combination thereof. Appropriate signage alerting motorists to
pedestrian areas shall be provided.
E. Indoor recreation. An accessory indoor recreation area not to exceed fifteen (15) percent
of the gross floor area may be included within the principal structure. Only access points
to exterior areas for emergency access may be provided in the vicinity of an indoor
recreation area.
§ 415.09 Historic Hotels
Historic hotels shall be permitted in the Historic District Oceanfront (HD-O) Zone District subject to the
following conditions:
A. All guest rooms shall include full, private bathroom facilities.
B. All guest rooms shall average 175 square feet including required bathroom facilities.
C. A minimum of fifteen (15%) percent of the total floor area of the historic hotel shall be
devoted to common areas for the use and enjoyment of hotel guests and the general
public.
D. All service, garbage and loading facilities shall be located in the rear portion of the
building, shall not be located in required yard setbacks and shall be suitably screened
from adjacent properties.
E. No exterior light levels which exceed 0.5 foot candles shall cross property lines.
F. No parking facility or portion thereof shall be permitted in front yard areas.
G. Pre-existing historic hotel structures which are non-conforming with respect to the bulk
requirements set forth in Zoning Schedule B-1shall be permitted to be altered, enlarged,
or extended provided that all conditions of this subsection are complied with, and existing
nonconforming bulk conditions are not increased.
H. The minimum lot area for a newly constructed historic hotel lot shall be 10,000 square
feet. The minimum lot area for a historic hotel utilizing an existing structure shall be
3,600 square feet.
I. Cooking and smoking in rooms shall be prohibited.
J. The structure shall not be a "rooming house" or "boarding house" as defined by N.J.S.A.
55:13B-3.
K. The facility shall not allow any guest to remain more than thirty (30) days, or more than
thirty (30) days of any period of sixty (60) successive days.
L. Historic hotels shall be located north of Main Avenue, including those properties fronting
on both sides Main Avenue.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
164
M. Parking shall only be provided for new historic hotels with a minimum lot area of 40,000
square feet or greater.
§ 415.10 Light Food Concessions
Light food concessions may be permitted in the HD-R Zone District when authorized as a conditional use
by the Planning Board in accordance with the following conditions:
A. A light food concession area shall be located on the beach
B. A light food concession area shall be prohibited on boardwalk and pier.
C. Each concession area shall provide restroom accommodations for men and women
D. Light food concessions may also provide for the rental, and use of recreational and beach
articles such as umbrellas, chairs, racquets and similar items and for the sale of beach
related sundries.
§ 415.11 Mobile Home Parks
This Ordinance recognizes existing mobile home parks in the LI Zone District. A mobile home park
existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance is considered a conditional use in the LI Zone
District, and shall be governed by the following regulations
A. An open space at least fifteen (15) feet in width is to be provided between mobile home
structures in order to ensure accessibility for emergency vehicles. Mobile homes may be
located at least ten (10) feet from each other end.
B. Clothes-drying and trash container areas shall be adequately screened, conforming to
the screening provisions of this chapter
C. No mobile home, lot or space shall be located further than one thousand (1,000) feet
from a fire hydrant
D. All roadways, sidewalks, curbs and storm drains within a mobile home park must comply
with township standards
E. Mobile home parks may be inspected by the Township Zoning Officer and Health Officer
on an annual basis to determine compliance with all applicable health, fire and sanitary
regulations.
F. A zoning permit must be issued prior to the installation of a mobile home pad to
determine compliance with the provisions of this section.
G. Prior to the placement of a mobile home on an existing or new mobile home pad, the a
valid certificate of occupancy shall be obtained, which includes the mobile home owner's
name and serial number and the body type of the mobile home and pad number or street
address of the pad site.
H. No building or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as regulated by
the height exception provisions of this Chapter
I. All mobile homes shall be served by public potable water and sanitary sewer.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
165
§ 415.12 Accessory Apartments in B-1 and HD-B-1 Districts
Accessory apartment dwelling units may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the
Planning Board in the B-1 and HD-B-1 Zone District in accordance the following conditions:
A. Apartments may be located at the second and third story levels of buildings in the B-1
and HD-B-1 Zone District, provided the first story level is devoted to a permitted use in
the district.
B. Principal access to a second or third story apartment shall be provided via a dedicated
entranceway or vestibule at the building’s face. Apartments shall not be located at the
first story level of buildings in the B-1 and HD-B-1 Zone District.
C. Dwelling unit size. Minimum dwelling unit floor areas based on multi-family dwelling unit
type shall be as follows:
DWELLING UNIT TYPE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA (in
square feet)
Studio/Efficiency Apartment 500 S.F.
One (1) Bedroom Apartments 850 S.F.
Two (2) Bedroom Apartments 1,000 S.F.
Apartments with three (3) or more
bedrooms
1,150 S.F. + 150 S.F. per
additional bedroom
[NOTE: The previous section has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-41 and 03-035]
§ 415.13 Professional Offices in Historic District
Professional Offices may be permitted in the HD-R-1 Zone District subject to the following conditions:
A. The structure devoted to professional office use shall front Main Avenue and be located
between New Jersey Avenue and New York Avenue.
B. A maximum of one (1) dwelling unit may be located within a structure that contains an
office use. The dwelling unit and office use must maintain individual primary entrances to
a structure. This shall not preclude the operation of a home occupation or home
professional office in accordance with this Ordinance.
C. A structure containing a professional office shall have maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of
for 1.7.
§ 415.14 Parking
Parking lots shall be permitted as a conditional use in the HD-R and R-5 Zone Districts as specified in
Article IV in accordance with the following conditions:
A. HD-R Zone
1. Parking shall be provided in surface-level lots only.
2. Parking lots shall be screened from public right of way by a hedge, with a
minimum height of 2.5 feet, to maximum of height of adjacent boardwalk.
3. The lot shall consist of a stabilized permeable surface of light colored gravel,
stone or shell.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
166
4. Lighting shall be provided in accordance with historic fixture design guidelines for
the boardwalk area.
B. R-5 Zone District
1. Parking areas shall be primarily associated with a public educational facility.
2. The maximum permitted distance between the parking lot parcel and a public
educational facility parcel shall be no greater than seven-hundred (700) feet.
3. Parking shall be provided in fully-paved surface-level lots only.
4. No individual parking space shall be located closer than five (5) feet from a front
lot line. The parking lot, including driveways, shall be situated at least ten (10)
feet from all lot lines other than a front lot line.
5. Maximum impervious lot coverage shall not exceed eighty percent (80%).
6. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the lot area shall be devoted to useable
public spaces, such as but not limited to seating areas, public art and plazas.
7. Improvements shall include facilities to accommodate public transportation.
[NOTE: The preceding subsection B.1-7 has been added per Ordinance No. 02-
14]
§ 415.15 Public Utility Facility
Public utility uses shall be permitted as a conditional use in the B-1, B-2, C-1, C-2, LI, PUD/R-1, C, C-3,
C-4, C-5, C-6, R-2 and R-3 Zone Districts as specified in Article IV in accordance with the following
conditions:
[NOTE: The B-2, C-1, C-2, LI, C-3, C-4, C-5, and C-6 Zone Districts have been added as prescribed by
an Amended Schedule A-2 per Ordinance No. 03-035]
A. Site plans, specifications and a statement setting forth the need and purpose of the
installation are filed with the board of jurisdiction.
B. Proof is furnished that the proposed installation in a specific location is necessary and
convenient for the efficiency of the public or private utility system or the satisfactory and
convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is located.
C. The design of any building utilized in connection with such facility conforms to the general
character of the area and shall in no way adversely affect the adjacent properties. No
building may exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
D. A continuous six (6’) foot high board-on-board fence shall be provided to screen the
public utility facility from public view and to ensure security. Other fence types which
provide 50% visibility may be used, provided adequate, continuous landscaping is
provided at the fence perimeter. Said plantings shall be evergreen, and shall be six (6)
feet high at the time of planting.
E. A structure associated with a public utility facility in a non-residential zone district may not
be located closer than fifty (50) feet to residential property line.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
167
F. Building or mounted lighting fixtures may be utilized, provided shielding is provided to
reduce glare to adjacent properties. Motion-sensitive lighting is encouraged.
G. Appropriate safety devices shall be provided at the public utility facility to ensure public
safety.
§ 415.16 Restaurants And Retail Establishments in Historic Hotels
Fully enclosed eating establishments (excluding those which serve alcoholic beverages and offer live
entertainment), and retail and personal service establishments shall be permitted only as an accessory
use within a historic hotel in the HD-O Zone District provided that the following conditions are met:
A. The accessory commercial establishments shall be secondary to the principal use of a
historic hotel; shall be located entirely within the physical structure of the building and the
access or exit shall be within the interior of the structure in which it is located; not more
than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of any historic hotel structure shall be
allotted to or used for accessory commercial purposes. Properties fronting on Main
Avenue may be permitted to use up to 50% of the total floor area for accessory
commercial purposes.
B. Any signs advertising the commercial establishments shall conform to the applicable sign
controls for the specific historic zone district in which the structure is located.
C. Where an owner of a hotel or other transient residential structure makes application on
behalf of an accessory commercial establishment for a variance to provide access
directly from a street, the means of access (or exit) shall be subject to review of the
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
D. Live, non-amplified, musical entertainment shall be permitted with the following
restrictions: live, non-amplified, musical entertainment shall be permitted between the
hours of noon and 10:30 p.m., Sunday to Thursday, and noon and 11:30 p.m., Friday to
Saturday.
E. Exterior kitchen equipment and exhaust fans shall be located according to the following
setbacks:
1. Side yard - minimum of ten (10) feet from any adjacent inhabited structure used
as a dwelling unit.
2. Rear yard - minimum of ten (10) feet from any adjacent inhabited structure used
as a dwelling unit.
§ 415.17 Retail Sales and Services
Retail sales and services shall be considered a conditional use in the LI Zone District subject to the
following regulations:
A. Retail sales and services must be incidental and accessory to a principal permitted use.
B. No more than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of a principal building may be
devoted to retail sales and services.
C. Adequate parking in accordance with the standards set forth in §412 shall be provided for
the accessory retail sales and service use, as well as for the principal permitted use.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
168
D. Goods sold and services provided by the retail component are to be goods and services
traditionally provided by the principal use.
E. An secondary building sign identifying the area devoted to retail use may be provided.
Such sign may not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area, and shall conform to all
other standards set forth for building signs at §416.
§ 415.18 Self Storage Facility
Public self-storage facility may be permitted in the LI Zone District when authorized as a conditional use
by the Planning Board in accordance with the following conditions:
A. Such facility shall be limited to a maximum F.A.R. of 0.90.
B. No storage of hazardous or combustible materials shall be permitted.
C. No sale of material shall be permitted from the premises, except for the purpose of
satisfying unpaid rent pursuant to law.
D. No animals or livestock shall be permitted on the premises.
E. No outside storage shall be permitted except that boats and recreational vehicles may be
stored in the rear yard provided that they are properly screened from the traveling public
in accordance with Section 503.
F. Buildings shall be separated a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet except that the distance
may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet in instances where no access to individual
storage facilities is proposed. The reduction only applies where no access is allowed on
both sides of the drive aisle.
G. The facility will be completely surrounded by architectural fencing or walls a minimum of
six (6) feet in height.
H. The facility shall be landscaped in accordance with Article V.
I. A single residential unit for the use of a caretaker and immediate family shall be
permitted.
J. Any other provisions not herein modified shall apply.
§ 415.19 Wireless Telecommunication Facility
Wireless telecommunication facilities may be permitted in the C-1, C and LI Zone Districts when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with this §415.20 as follows:
[NOTE: The C-1 Zone District has been added as prescribed by an Amended Schedule A-2 per
Ordinance No. 03-035]
A. General requirements.
1. Principal or accessory use. Telecommunications antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding any other
regulation, a different existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or the co-location of an antenna on such lot. If a tower
and its appurtenant structures constitute the sole use of the lot, the tower shall be
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
169
deemed to be the principal use.
2. Leased area. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with zone regulations, including but not limited to setback
requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers
may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
3. State or federal requirements. All wireless communication facilities must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners
of a wireless telecommunication facility shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within ninety (90) days
of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency.
Failure to bring a wireless telecommunication facility into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
wireless telecommunications facility at the owner’s expense.
4. Not essential services. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be regulated
and permitted pursuant to this Ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted
as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
5. Site Plan required. Site plan approval shall be required for all new
telecommunication facilities including modifications to addition of new
telecommunication facilities to pre-existing towers, buildings or other structures.
B. Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna that is not attached to a tower may be
attached to any existing business, industrial, office, utility or institutional structure
provided:
1. Side- and roof mounted personal wireless facilities shall not project more than
ten (10) feet above the height of an existing building or structure nor project more
than ten (10) feet above the height limit of the zoning district within which the
facility is located. Personal wireless service facilities may locate on a building or
structure that is legally nonconforming with respect to height, provided that the
facilities do not project above the existing building or structure height.
2. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations.
3. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
4. Equipment structure. An equipment structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than ten (10) feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures that are less than forty-eight (48) feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located on the ground
and shall not be located on the roof or other structure.
C. Co-location and tower reconstruction. Co-location of antennas by more than one carrier
on existing towers and the reconstruction of existing towers shall be consistent with the
following:
1. A tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of
additional antenna shall be the same tower type as the existing tower, unless
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
170
reconstruction of a monopole is proposed.
2. Height. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a height no taller than the
existing tower height.
3. Reconstruction of existing towers.
(a) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to the
reconstruction of an existing tower:
(i) Towers must be setback a distance equal to at least seventy-five
(75) percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining nonresidential
lot line.
(ii) Towers must be setback a distance equal to the height of the
tower from any adjoining residential zone or property line.
(iii) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zone
district setback requirements.
(b) A tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an
additional antenna may be relocated from its existing location, provided
the foregoing setback requirements are met.
(c) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one (1) tower
may remain on the site.
(d) A reconstructed tower shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color to
reduce visual obtrusiveness. The use of camouflage structures,
materials and treatments (“trees, steeples, clock towers”) shall be
required in locations where vegetative conditions or architectural
conditions warrants said treatment.
4. Security. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight (8)
feet in height. Towers shall also be equipped with anti-climbing measures.
5. Lighting. No lighting is permitted on an existing or reconstructed tower except
lighting that is specifically required by the FAA. Such required lighting shall be
focused and shielded to reduce glare to adjacent and nearby properties to the
greatest extent possible.
6. Ancillary buildings.
(a) Any proposed building enclosing related electronic equipment shall not
contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor area or be more than
ten (10) feet in height.
(b) Only one (1) such building shall be permitted on the lot for each provider
of wireless telecommunication services located on the site.
(c) Such buildings must satisfy the minimum zone district setback
requirements.
(d) One (1) light may be provided at the entrance of the building, provided
that the light is attached to the building, is focused downward and is
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
171
switched so that the light is turned on only when workers are at the site.
D. Abandonment or discontinuation of use.
1. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of
a wireless telecommunication facility, such carrier shall notify the Township Clerk
by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of
operations. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (3) days prior to
abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the even that a licensed carrier
fails to give such notice, the wireless telecommunication facility shall be
considered abandoned upon discontinuation of operations.
2. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, at the option of the Township, the
carrier shall physically remove the facility within ninety (90) days from the date of
abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security barriers
for the subject property;
(b) Proper disposal of waste materials from the site in accordance with local,
county and state solid waste disposal regulations;
(c) Restoring the location of the facility to its original and/or natural
condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the
after-condition as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer.
3. If a carrier fails to remove a wireless telecommunication facility in accordance
with this section, the Township shall have the authority to enter the subject
property and physically remove the facility. The board of jurisdiction shall require
the posting of a bond at the time of approval to cover the costs for the removal of
the facility.
§ 416 SIGNS
§ 416.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Subsection is as follows:
A. To protect the public health, safety and welfare by restricting signs which impair the
public's ability to receive information, violate privacy, or which increase the probability of
accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision.
B. To encourage signs that promote a desirable visual environment through creative yet
orderly design arrangements.
C. To encourage signs that aid orientation, identify activities, describe local history and
character or serve other educational purposes.
D. To encourage the replacement of nonconforming signs by conforming signs through the
strict enforcement of the procedures and requirements of this Article.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
172
§ 416.02 General Provisions
A. Permit Required.
1. An application shall be made to the Zoning Officer for the issuance of a zoning
permit by any person wishing to erect, alter, modify, or expand any sign, except
exempt signs as described in this Article.
2. A zoning permit and any other permits that may be required for the erection or
modification of a sign may only be issued subsequent to the issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Officer.
3. If the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed sign does not conform to the
requirements contained herein, the Officer shall instruct the applicant that
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment approval of an application for
development is required, and the Officer shall further advise the applicant which
Board has jurisdiction.
B. Site plan. On properties involved in an application for site plan review, all signs shall be
approved by the Board as part of the site plan application prior to the issuance of permits
for signs.
C. Measurement. For the purposes of this section, the size of any sign shall be computed
by determining the total area of any sign board, sign face or sign background at its
largest horizontal and vertical dimensions, including framing, trim or molding. Where
there is no framing, the sign area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest
rectangular figure that can encompass all of the figures and their supporting logos or
elements, if any. For double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in
computing the total sign area where the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior
angles formed by the faces are forty-five (45) degrees or less. Maximum permitted size
does not include the supporting structure, as long as the supporting structure is not
designed to convey a message. The supporting structure shall not in itself convey any
type of message, except for the property address and for permitted appurtenances
specified in this section.
D. Content. The content or advertising which may be displayed on signs shall be limited to
the identification and location of the premises, identification of its owners or occupants
and information concerning the activities conducted on the premises or the goods and
services offered in connection therewith, unless specified otherwise herein.
E. Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated. All signs, together with all supports,
braces, anchors and other parts, shall be kept in continual repair, including cleaning,
painting, replacing of defective parts and otherwise maintaining a presentable condition.
Lack of proper maintenance shall be considered abandonment, and the sign shall be
repaired, painted, cleaned or otherwise returned to a presentable condition or removed
within ten (10) days upon notification by the Zoning Officer or Construction Code Official.
F. Appurtenances. Notwithstanding the restrictions found elsewhere in this article
concerning sign face shape and area, sign appurtenances shall be permitted only when
designed as an integral part of the sign, constructed of similar materials, and graphically
compatible in color, shape, position, and scale with the permitted sign face. Sign
appurtenances cannot increase the proposed sign area by greater than fifteen (15%)
percent. Sign appurtenances cannot extend above or to the side of the sign face by a
distance greater than forty (40%) percent of the sign face height. Sign appurtenances
cannot project outward beyond the face of the proposed sign. Sign appurtenances for
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
173
Type B freestanding signs only may identify the name of a retail or office development in
accordance with the foregoing standards.
G. Setback. The sign setback shall be measured from the property line to the nearest part
of the sign, including any base, frame or decorative elements. No freestanding type A or
B sign may be located within fifteen (15) feet of adjacent residential use.
H. Height. Sign height shall be measured between average grade immediately below the
sign and the highest point of the highest element of the sign. Wall signs shall not project
above the top or beyond the ends of the wall surface upon which they are placed, nor
shall wall signs be placed on a parapet or similar architectural device such that the sign
would project above the elevation of the roof behind such parapet or other device.
I. Projection. No wall sign may project more than nine (9) inches from the outer face of a
wall and shall not extend over any public right-of-way, unless otherwise provided for in
this article. An awning shall not be construed in any way to be a wall sign.
J. Change of use, occupancy or vacancy. Whenever any change of use, occupancy or
vacancy occurs, all existing signs no longer relating to the current use and occupancy of
the premises shall be immediately removed. In addition, any signs not conforming to any
requirement of this Section and removed in accordance to this requirement shall not be
replaced unless it conforms to all requirements of this article.
K. Nonconforming signs. Any lawfully nonconforming sign may be altered as follows:
1. Minor and nonstructural maintenance and/or repairs to the sign support structure
and/or frame may be completed.
2. Re-lettering of an existing sign face containing the same specific message or
letters may be completed.
3. An existing sign face may be replaced, provided there is no expansion in sign
area, and provided the general provisions of this Subsection are satisfied.
§ 416.03 Design Requirements
A. Illumination. Except for signs in historic zone districts regulated by municipality’s
regulations, signs may be floodlighted, spotlighted or internally illuminated from the rear
with a diffused light source, unless such illumination is specifically prohibited elsewhere in
this Ordinance. All illumination shall be subject to the following:
1. All lighting sources shall be completely shielded from the view of vehicular traffic.
2. Such illumination shall not project light above the highest elevation of the front
wall of the building for wall-mounted signs or more than five feet above ground
level for freestanding signs.
3. Internally illuminated signs shall not have a white or light-colored background or
signboard.
4. Where a sign is located on a lot adjacent to a lot used primarily for residential
purposes, such shall not be illuminated in a manner that permits any light to
shine or cause a nuisance to the adjacent residential use.
5. No illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any
residential district and visible from such residential district shall be illuminated
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
174
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the use to which the sign
pertains is open for business during those hours.
6. No sign shall contain exposed neon, blinking, flashing, flickering, tracer or
sequential lighting. All signs shall remain stationary and constant in intensity and
color at all times.
7. All wiring for permanent illuminated signs shall be installed and maintained so
that it is not within public view. The running of wiring or conduit along the exterior
wall of a building to access a sign is specifically prohibited unless in the judgment
of the Construction Official there is no practical way to run the conduit so that it is
not within public view.
8. No illuminated sign shall be of such a color or located in such a manner as to be
confused with, or to diminish or detract in any way from, the effectiveness of any
traffic signal or similar official safety or warning device.
B. Landscaping. The base of a freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped with a
combination of shrubs, ground cover, flowers or other plant material.
C. Painting and Cleaning Required. All signs shall be maintained in good condition and
have a neat appearance. The owner of any painted sign shall be required to repaint the
same when necessary to maintain the sign in good condition and give it a neat
appearance.
D. Skirting. Freestanding signs shall be skirted to enclose the supporting pole or pylon of
the sign, except for signs in historic zone districts. The skirting shall extend the full
dimensions of the sign at its lower edge from ground to sign. The skirting shall not be
included in the sign size calculation unless it displays a message.
§ 416.04 Exempt Signs
The following signs are permitted and are exempt from zoning permit requirements:
A. Real estate signs. Non-illuminated real-estate signs for residential uses, provided they
do not exceed ten (10) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height; No more than one
such sign shall be erected on a property. Real estate signs for residential uses must
pertain to the property on which it is located, and may not be placed within any sight
triangle or public right-of-way. Such sign shall be removed immediately upon execution
of a contract and/or closing for the lease or sale of the property.
B. Credit or charge card signs. Credit or charge card signs within window areas for
commercial uses, or signs indicating membership in professional or trade organizations,
provided such signs do not exceed one (1) square foot. Credit card signs may not be
pole-mounted.
C. Gasoline pumps signs. Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot attached to gasoline
pumps, provided that their sole purpose is to communicate fuel prices;
D. Traffic, parking, informational and street identification signs. Traffic, parking,
informational and street identification signs that conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) as approved by any Township agency or any county, state or
federal agency shall be permitted in any district or public right-of-way. Any other signs
required by any provision of law shall be permitted in any district or public right-of-way.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
175
E. Political signs. Any political sign that is protected under the free speech provisions of the
United States and New Jersey Constitutions shall be permitted in any Zoning District,
provided that such is not located in a public right-of-way.
F. Temporary window advertising signs. Temporary window advertising signs shall be
prohibited in all districts, with the exception of permitted ground level retail and personal
service business uses and eating and drinking establishments located in the B-1 and HDB-
1 Zone Districts, subject to the following conditions:
1. Such signs may be constructed of paper, cardboard or plastic, and any written,
numerical, graphic or photographic material or information shall constitute such a
sign.
2. Such signs shall be contained solely within the ground level window of the
subject business.
3. Maximum total area of such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the
total area of ground level windows, excluding window portions of doors, fronting
on a public street. For the purposes of this subsection, any window area covered
with a permitted permanent window sign, pursuant to this article, shall be
excluded from the calculation of the total area of all ground floor windows.
4. Information on such signs shall be limited to advertisements for special
promotions, temporary sales and other such similar nonpermanent sales
promotions.
5. Such signs shall be removed after a period of thirty (30) days and shall have the
date of installation printed clearly in the lower right-hand corner of such, as
viewed from the exterior.
6. Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all times.
7. This section shall not be interpreted in such a manner as to limit or prohibit any
business from displaying merchandise in an interior window display area.
G. Residential uses. Signs for residential uses, based on the type of residential structure
pursuant to the following provisions.
1. Single-family dwellings and shall be permitted one residential nameplate sign
indicating the name and/or address of the occupants. The maximum size of such
sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area and shall not contain advertising
of any kind. In addition, one informational sign indicating the private nature of a
driveway, no trespassing or other such similar private property usage shall be
permitted, provided the maximum size of such sign shall not exceed one (1)
square foot in area.
2. Apartments, townhouses, and other multifamily residential uses shall be
permitted the following:
(a) One wall-mounted residential directory nameplate sign indicating the
name and/or address of the occupants, provided it does not exceed five
(5) square feet in area. Such sign must be located at the building’s main
entrance and may consist of either changeable lettering or individual
nameplates. If the multifamily residential use cannot be accommodated
by such directory sign, then individual exterior wall-mounted nameplate
signs indicating the name and/or address of each dwelling unit shall be
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
176
permitted. Said individual nameplate signs shall not exceed forty-eight
(48) square inches in area and must be located at the main entrance of
the respective dwelling unit. Nameplate signs may not be illuminated and
shall not contain advertising of any kind.
(b) Two wall signs per building identifying the name or number of the
multifamily structure, provided the maximum size of such sign shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign. Such sign may be indirectly
illuminated and shall not be backlighted. Or internally illuminated.
(c) One non-illuminated wall sign indicating the location of the management
office, provided the maximum size of such sign shall not exceed one (1)
square foot in area.
H. Sandwich Board signs in B-1 and HD- B-1. Sandwich Board signs shall be permitted
provided they not exceed twenty inches (20”) in width, forty-two inches (42”) in height and
six (6) square feet in area.
I. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association signs.
1. Public safety and informational signs.
2. Bronze memorial signs.
3. Street signs
(a) Standard street signs.
(b) Monument street sign not to exceed twenty-four inches (24”) in height.
J. Portable Location Signage. Portable location signage is permitted pursuant to the
following standards:
1. Maximum height Three (3) feet
2. Maximum width Twenty-four (24) inches
3. Maximum area Four (4) square feet
4. Maximum quantity One (1) per location
5. Signage must be associated with a permitted use.
§ 416.05 Permitted Temporary Signs
The following temporary signs may be installed in all zone districts:
A. Banners, pennants and bunting may be used for special promotional events, holidays
and grand openings. Such banners, pennants and bunting may not be displayed more
than two (2) times per calendar year, and may be in place for no more than two (2)
months at a time. Banners, pennants and bunting may constitute an aggregate area not
to exceed sixteen (16) square feet, must be attached flush to a wall, and may not be
illuminated in any fashion.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
177
B. Project signs may be permitted for new major residential and non-residential
development pursuant to final approval from the approving authority. No more than one
(1) project sign shall be permitted on any lot identifying builders, contractors, architects,
engineers or others associated with the construction of any building situated on any such
lot. Such signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all property lines, and shall
not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in height. Project signs are
to be removed within two (2) weeks of the completion of a project, or if work on the
project has substantially slowed.
C. Freestanding or wall mounted real-estate signs of up to twenty (20) square feet for nonresidential
uses may be erected in non-residential zones for a period of ninety (90) days.
A window sign of up to twelve (12) square feet may be used for the same purposes.
Freestanding signs must be setback from all property lines at least ten (10) feet. The
Zoning Officer may extend the ninety (90) day period by an additional ninety (90) days if it
is shown that this additional time period is necessary to facilitate the sale or rent of a
particular site.
D. Contractor signs are permitted in all zone districts to a maximum area of fifteen (15)
square feet. Such sign shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property line,
and may not be illuminated. Contractor signs may be permitted for the duration of the
exterior improvement activity, and must be removed within two (2) weeks of completion of
improvement.
E. All temporary signs shall require a zoning permit.
§ 416.06 Prohibited Signs
The following signs shall be prohibited in all zone districts within the Township of Neptune, unless
otherwise specified within this Ordinance:
A. Signs utilizing inert ionized gas sign lighting, commonly called neon, when the neon tube
is visible, including window surrounds and similar inert gas illumination with or without a
distinct message;
B. Signs in the public right-of-way unrelated to the public health, safety and welfare;
C. Signs which project more than nine (9) inches from a wall surface, except for projecting
signs in historic zone districts which are governed by 416.08;
D. Any sign for advertising purposes that mimics or is substantially similar to a public
purpose sign;
E. Signs with lights or illuminations which flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in
intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation;
F. Signs within designated sight triangles, and signs which directly obstruct driver’s lines-ofsight;
G. Non-public banners that stretch across a public right-of-way between telephone poles,
trees or other structure;
H. Roof signs;
I. Freestanding signs of any type in historic zone districts;
J. Reader board signs;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
178
K. Any sign that, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, presents an immediate danger to the
public health, safety or welfare;
L. Signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of
any description or other apparent visible movement;
M. Signs that advertise or identify a use which has ceased operation;
N. Any illegal non-conforming sign, as defined herein;
O. The continuous parking or storage of a motor vehicle or other mobile unit displaying an
advertising message;
P. Signs containing obscene, pornographic or lewd messages;
Q. Signs that obstruct a fire escape, door, window or other required access way;
R. Signs that are not accessory to a principal use on a property;
S. Signs for a commercial purpose painted on a wall;
T. Any sign not expressly permitted by this Ordinance is prohibited;
§ 416.07 Permitted Signs
The following signs shall be permitted in all zones except historic zone districts per Zoning Schedule C.
Standards for permitted signs in historic zone districts are contained in §416.08.
A. Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs may be located within the Township according
the regulations set forth below (see also Appendix C):
1. Freestanding Type A. Freestanding Type A signs may erected as follows:
(a) Size: 24 square feet maximum
(b) Height: 8’ maximum
(c) Quantity: 1 maximum
(d) Setback: 5’ minimum
(e) Horizontal dimension: 8’ maximum
2. Freestanding Type B. Freestanding Type B signs may be erected as follows:
(a) Size: 48 square feet maximum
(b) Height: 15’ maximum
(c) Quantity: 1 maximum
(d) Setback: 10’ minimum
(e) Horizontal dimension: 10’ maximum
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
179
3. Freestanding Type C. Freestanding Type C signs may be as follows:
(a) Size: 24 square feet
(b) Height 6’ maximum
(c) Quantity: 1 maximum
(d) Setback: 8’ minimum
(e) Horizontal dimension: 8’ maximum
4. No more than a total of two (2) Freestanding Type A, B or C signs in any
combination may be constructed on a single lot except as provided in this
chapter.
5. An additional Freestanding Type B sign may be erected for properties in the B-1
Zone District with 1,000’ or more of uninterrupted street frontage as follows:
(a) Size: 72 square feet
(b) Height 15’ maximum
(c) Setback: 10’ minimum
(d) Horizontal dimension: 8’ maximum
6. An additional Freestanding Type B sign may be erected by Planned Commercial
Development in the PUD ,C-1 and LI Zone District as follows:
(a) Size: 72 square feet
(b) Height: 15’ maximum
(c) Setback: 10’ minimum
(d) Horizontal dimension: 12’ maximum
(e) Such signs may be situated so as to be visible only from a Major Arterial
roadway as identified by the Township Master Plan.
B. Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted signs may be constructed as follows (see also
Appendix D):
1. Single tenant structures.
(a) Size:
48 square feet, or one-and-two
tenths (1.2) square feet for each
lineal foot of wall face that the sign
is mounted on, whichever is less.
(b) Mounting Height:
15’ maximum and not to extend
above the
(c) Quantity:
1 maximum
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
180
(d) Horizontal sign dimension: 12’ maximum
2. Multi-tenant retail structures.
(a) Quantity:
1 sign per tenant
(b) Vertical sign dimension:
3’ maximum
(c) Horizontal sign dimension:
16’ maximum
(d) The maximum size of such signs shall be forty-eight (48) square
feet, or one-and-two tenths (1.2) square feet for each lineal foot of
wall face that the sign is mounted on, whichever is less.
(e) The mounting height of such signs shall not exceed the height of
the ground floor.
3. Secondary wall-mounted signs.
(a) Business uses that have a side or rear building facade fronting on a
parking lot or face a secondary street frontage may have a secondary
wall-mounted sign not to exceed 50% of the area of the primary building
sign. This provision shall not apply in situations where a parking lot is
located between a building and a public street.
(b) Service station canopies may have a secondary wall-mounted sign not to
exceed 50% of the area of the primary building sign. In no instance may
a service station canopy sign face a residential use, or have changeable
lettering.
4. Wall-mounted signs on larger buildings in Planned Development Districts.
Buildings and uses in the Planned Development Districts (LI, PUD and C-1) in
excess of 75,000 square feet in floor area may provide two (2) wall signs per
building with a maximum area of up to five (5%) percent of the wall area, not to
exceed two hundred and forty (240) square feet.
C. Awning signs. Awning signs may be constructed as follows (see also Appendix D):
1. Quantity:
maximum 2 per awning
2. Sign face vertical dimension:
max. eighteen (18) inches
3. Letter/number/
character/image height:
10” maximum
4. Letter/number/
character/image width:
1’ maximum
5. Colors: 2 maximum including sign
lettering
6. Awning signs shall only be permitted on first-story awnings.
7. The minimum height from ground level to lowermost portion of
awning shall be eight (8) feet.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
181
8. The maximum horizontal projection dimension of an awning
from the building wall, including any appurtenances, shall not
exceed five (5) feet. Such awning may project over a public
sidewalk only and shall not extend over any other portion of any
other public right-of-way. No canopy may project over a public
right-of-way, unless approved by the Township Committee.
9. The maximum vertical dimension of an awning shall not exceed
the horizontal projection dimension.
10. The sign shall only be located on a portion of the awning that is
both parallel to the vertical orientation of the building wall to
which it is attached and is parallel to the building line of the
building wall to which it is attached. This portion is more
commonly known as the “valance.”
11. The horizontal dimension of the sign shall not exceed fifteen
(15) feet, or sixty percent (60%) of the length of the awning
occupied by the use, whichever is less.
D. Directory Nameplate.
1. Size: maximum 12 square feet
2. Height: maximum 5’
3. Quantity: maximum 1 per lot
4. A directory sign may not be located so as to be visible from a public
street or any adjacent property.
E. Directional Signs.
1. Size: maximum 3 square feet
2. Height: maximum 3’
3. Setback: minimum 0’
4. No directional sign may be located within a sight triangle.
5. A directional sign must contain a clear message which directs the flow of
traffic, and should be designed to blend harmoniously with other on-site
signage
6. No directional sign shall extend into or over any public right-of-way.
F. Permanent Window Signs. A business establishments located below the third
story of a building shall be permitted to display permanent window sign(s),
subject to the following regulations:
1. Sign Content. The sign(s) shall be limited to the resident business
name, resident business logo, resident business type, street address,
and/or telephone/fax number. No permanent window sign shall depict
brand names and/or logos of products, commodities, services, etc. other
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
182
than those owned by the local resident business establishment itself.
2. Sign materials and placement. A permanent window sign shall be:
(a) Professionally painted on the interior side of a window; and/or
(b) A fixture constructed by a professional sign manufacturer hung
on the interior side of a window
3. Sign Area. Maximum area of any and all permanent window signs shall
not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total window area within which
it is displayed, not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
4. Quantity. One (1) sign per business per window shall be permitted, up to
a maximum of two (2) signs per business on any wall, not to exceed four
(4) signs per business on any building.
5. Location. No permanent window sign shall be permitted in a window
above the second-story of a building.
6. Visibility. No permanent window sign shall be displayed in a window
unless it is visible from a public street or an approved parking area.
7. Illumination. The sign(s) may be internally illuminated or externally
illuminated from the interior of the building. Framing of a window with
neon lights and/or tubing shall not be permitted as a method of
illumination for window signs.
[NOTE: The previous subsection, “F” has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 416.08 Signs in Historic Districts
A. Applicability. This Sub-section applies to all signs in any historic zone district.
B. Illumination.
1. No sign may be internally illuminated.
2. Neon signs shall not be permitted.
3. All illuminated signs shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. each night during all
seasons of the year.
C. Materials. Signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or other solid or rigid material.
D. Permitted Signs. The following types and sizes of signs shall be permitted:
1. Professional nameplates not exceeding one (1) square foot in area.
2. Bulletin boards not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area for religious or
other semi-public and public institutions when they are located on the same
premises as the buildings.
3. Signs for ground floor business establishments, other than historic hotels, shall
be permitted in accordance with the following regulations:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
183
(a) Wall mounted signs. One (1) wall-mounted sign having a maximum area
not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet and one (1) wall-mounted sign
having a maximum area not to exceed six (6) square feet. Where the
business is located at a corner lot, four (4) signs are permitted; two (2)
on each road frontage meeting the above specified area requirements.
The maximum height of such signs shall be fifteen (15’) feet or the sill
level of the second (2nd) story, whichever is less. The signs shall be
applied flat against the wall and shall conform to all other applicable
requirements contained herein.
(b) Projecting signs. One (1) projecting sign may extend from the primary
building face to a maximum horizontal dimension of 42”. Such sign is to
be perpendicular to a building face, and shall be situated to be visible to
those traversing sidewalk areas. The maximum area for such a sign
shall be five (5) square feet. The bottom of the sign must be a minimum
eight (8) feet from ground level.
(c) Awnings signs. A maximum of two (2) awning signs shall be permitted.
Such signs may only state the name of the establishment associated
with the awning. Maximum image height shall be ten (10) inches, and
maximum image width shall be one (1) foot. Awning signs shall only be
permitted on first-story awnings. The sign shall only be located on a
portion of the awning that is both parallel to the vertical orientation of the
building wall to which it is attached and is parallel to the building line of
the building wall to which it is attached. This portion is more commonly
known as the “valance.” The horizontal dimension of the sign shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet, or sixty percent (60%) of the length of the
awning occupied by the use, whichever is less. The minimum height
from ground level to lowermost portion of awning shall be eight (8) feet.
The maximum horizontal projection dimension of an awning from the
building wall, including any appurtenances, shall not exceed five (5) feet.
Such awning may project over a public sidewalk only and shall not
extend over any other portion of any other public right-of-way. No
canopy may project over a public right-of-way, unless approved by the
Township Committee. The maximum vertical dimension of an awning
shall not exceed the horizontal projection dimension.
(d) Permanent window signs. Permanent window signs shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations:
(i) Sign Content. The sign(s) shall be limited to the resident
business name, resident business logo, resident business type,
street address, and/or telephone/fax number. No permanent
window sign shall depict brand names and/or logos of products,
commodities, services, etc. other than those owned by the local
resident business establishment itself.
(ii) Sign materials and placement. A permanent window sign shall
be professionally painted on the interior side of a window; and/or
a fixture constructed by a professional sign manufacturer hung
on the interior side of a window.
(iii) Sign Area. Maximum area of any and all permanent window
signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total window
area within which it is displayed, not to exceed twelve (12)
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
184
square feet.
(iv) Quantity. One (1) sign per business per window shall be
permitted, up to a maximum of two (2) signs per business
displayed on any building.
(v) Location. No permanent window sign shall be permitted in a
window above the first-story of a building.
(vi) Visibility. No permanent window sign shall be displayed in a
window unless it is visible from a public street or an approved
parking area.
(vii) Illumination. The sign(s) may be internally illuminated or
externally illuminated from the interior of the building. Neon light
window framing shall not be permitted as a method of
illumination for window signs.
[NOTE: The previous subsection D.3(d) has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
4. Signs for historic hotels, rooming houses and other transient residential
establishments shall be permitted based on the number of guest rooms, as
follows:
(a) Under 20 rooms. One (1) sign with a maximum area of ten (10) square
feet and one (1) sign with a maximum area of four (4) square feet. Wall
mounted signs. One (1) wall-mounted sign having a maximum area not
to exceed fifteen (15) square feet and one (1) wall-mounted sign having
a maximum area not to exceed six (6) square feet.
(b) Each permitted accessory use is permitted one wall mounted sign not to
exceed fifteen square feet in area on each street frontage.
(c) Awning signs as described in §416.08.D.3.c.
(d) Signs shall not be located in the historic flared open space area.
5. Memorial signs or tablets not to exceed two (2) square feet in area are permitted,
when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material or when cut into the
masonry surface of the building to commemorate the name of the building and/or
the date of construction.
6. Temporary signs not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in area denoting the
architect, engineer or contractor when placed on the work under construction
shall be permitted for three (3) months and renewable for five (5) month periods.
7. A single real estate sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area which
advertises the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is located
or a name sign for a residential building shall be permitted, when attached to the
lowest floor of the building, parallel to the street.
8. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, notice of dangerous conditions and
other temporary emergency or non-advertising signs of public interest shall be
permitted by approval of the Neptune Chief of Police in cases of emergency or
the Township Committee in all other cases.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
185
E. Signage for Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) shall be permitted, as
follows:
1. Internally illuminated religious symbols sixteen (16’) feet in height placed at an
elevation not to exceed seventy-five (75) feet high.
2. Wall mounted identification signs not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area
with a maximum height of fifteen (15’) feet.
3. Wall mounted informational signs not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in area with a
maximum height of fifteen (15’) feet.
4. Public safety and informational signs.
5. Bronze memorial signs.
6. Street signs
(a) Standard street signs per Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(b) Monument street signs not to exceed twenty-four (24”) inches in height.
§ 416.09 Enforcement
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of all regulations
contained within this article. The Zoning Officer may initiate enforcement procedures if any of the
regulations contained herein are in violation. The Zoning Officer may call upon the Chief of Police and
any duly authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this title. If in the opinion of the Zoning Officer
a particular sign presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, appropriate action
may be initiated to cause said sign to be immediately removed.
§ 417 SCHEDULE C: TABLE OF PERMITTED SIGNS
§ 418 HEIGHT EXEMPTIONS AND PERMITTED PROJECTIONS
A. Height exemptions. The maximum height requirements for each zone district shall apply
to all structures in all zone districts, except as follows:
1. Chimneys, flues, ventilators, skylights, towers, water tanks, cooling towers,
church spires, cupolas, belfries, clock towers, flagpoles and all other decorative
features and necessary mechanical appurtenances and similar features usually
carried above the roof level, shall be exempt from the height provisions of this
Ordinance provided:
(a) The aggregate area covered by all such features shall not exceed 20%
of the area of the roof of the building of which they are a part.
(b) The height of each such feature shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above
the level of such roof, except for church spires which may exceed the
required height by thirty-five (35’) feet.
(c) All such features shall be constructed, or enclosed within walls, of a
material and design in harmony with that of the main walls of the building
of which they are a part.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
186
2. Where the height of a building conforms to the requirements of this Chapter on
that side or sides thereof which face(s) the street, but where, due to the
topography of the lot, the said height is in excess of said requirements along one
or more sides of such building other than the side or sides which face(s) the
street, the Zoning Officer may issue a zoning permit provided that at no point
along the periphery of the building does the height thereof exceed by ten (10)
feet, and/or by one (1) story, the maximum height prescribed by this Chapter for
the zone district in which such building is located.
3. Parapet walls not extending more than four (4) feet above the maximum height
limitation shall be exempt from height requirements set forth in this Chapter.
B. Permitted projections. The following shall not be considered to be obstructions and shall
be permitted when located in a required yard and/or setback area:
1. Fire escapes, provided they do not project more than four (4) feet into a required
yard and they are no closer than two (2) feet to a property line; Fire escapes are
not permitted in a front yard.
2. Weather protecting and energy efficiency enhancing front door enclosures that
project no more than five feet into a required front setback area, and are no
larger than forty (40) square feet in total area, provided the principal structure
complies with the required front yard setback;
3. Ground story bay windows, provided they project no more than two (2) feet into
the required yard;
4. Cornices, eaves, cantilevered roofs, gutters and chimneys, provided they do not
project more than twenty-four (24) inches from an exterior building wall into any
required yard setback, and provided they remain at least two (2) feet from all
yard lines;
5. Entrance platforms and steps leading to a basement or first floor, provided they
do not project more than four (4’) feet into a required side or rear yard setback.
Front yard steps and entry platforms may project no more than six (6’) feet into
the required front yard setback.
§ 419 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to do the following:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
187
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of
special flood hazard;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the reuse and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified if a property is in an area of special flood
hazard; and
8. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
B. Methods and provisions. In order to accomplish its purposes, this section includes
methods and provisions for the following:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses, buildings or structures which are dangerous to
health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2. Requiring that uses, buildings or structures vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
3. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
flood damage; and
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
C. Applicability. This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards are located
within the Township of Neptune. Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-
Floodway Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of the
National Flood Insurance Program dated March 1, 1984 identifying areas of special flood
hazard are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section.
D. Interpretation. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this section and any other
ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that properties outside the
area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. Additionally, this section shall not create liability on the part of
the Township, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
F. Permit required. A zoning permit and a construction permit must be obtained before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
188
this section. In addition to the normal information required for a zoning permit
application, the following specific information is required to be reviewed by the Township
Engineer prior to the issuance of an approved zoning permit:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of
all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood
proofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the flood proofing criteria
in subsection J.2. Below;
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development;
5. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of any ground areas to be disturbed, filled,
graded or re-graded;
6. Certification that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal,
State or County governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
and
7. All base flood elevation and floodway data used to determine whether the
proposed development is located in the floodway shall assure that the
encroachment provisions of sub-section K. below are complied with. When base
flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
C. above, the Township Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer sub-section J. below.
G. Township requirement. The Township shall perform the following when a watercourse
may be altered:
1. Notify the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection prior to any
watercourse alteration or relocation activity watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and,
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
H. Areas of special flood hazard. In all areas of special flood hazards the following
standards shall be complied with:
1. Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to use of over-the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable U.C.C. anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
2. Construction Materials and Methods.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
189
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3. Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
4. Enclosure Openings.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall have fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(b) Design for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or shall meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
I. Applications for development. All applications for development shall be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage. Development plans shall comply with the following
provisions:
1. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
2. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
3. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for applications for development
which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
190
J. New construction. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
have been provided as set forth in sub-sections F., the following standards shall be
required:
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
2. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
other non-residential structure shall comply with the following:
(a) The lowest floor, including basement, shall be either:
(i) Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or
(ii) Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(b) The construction of improvement shall be certified by a New Jersey
registered professional engineer or architect that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this section.
3. All manufactured homes and any such structure placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood
elevation.
K. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazards established in subsection C.
above, are areas designated as floodways. The following provisions shall apply to all
floodways:
1. Encroachments on floodways, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be prohibited, unless a technical
evaluation by the Township Engineer demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. If the Township Engineer determines that encroachment will not result in any
increase in flood levels, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sub-section H.
above; and in all areas of special flood hazards in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the cumulative
effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a foot at any point.
§ 420 SOIL CONSERVATION
A. Findings. The Township Committee of the Township of Neptune hereby finds that the
uncontrolled and unregulated removal of topsoil and subsoil from various areas of the
Township to other areas both within and without the Township has resulted in and will
continue to result in serious erosion and acid promoting conditions detrimental to the
public safety, health and general welfare.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
191
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate soil removal in the
Township of Neptune by requiring adequate provisions for the retention of topsoil and
subsoil whenever necessary to prevent erosion and sedimentation, exposed acid
concentration and such other harmful and objectionable conditions as are detrimental to
the safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the Township of Neptune.
C. Permit Required to Remove Soil. No person shall disturb or remove soil in the Township
without having first obtained a permit from the Construction Official. Soil placement or
disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet associated with a permitted residential use
shall be exempt from this requirement.
D. Review and Approval of Application for Permit. No permit shall be issued hereunder until
the application required to be filed hereunder shall have been reviewed and approved by
the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall, upon receipt of an application,
review and verify the data contained therein and inspect the site to determine the type
and quantity of soil which may be removed consistent with this Subsection.
If the Township Engineer, upon inspection of the site and review and verification of the
data submitted by the applicant, determines that the type and amount of soil proposed to
be removed may be removed consistent with this section and the requirements of
Chapter 251, PL 1975, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, he shall direct the
Construction Official to issue the permit for the type and amount of soil requested and
upon such terms as the Township Engineer shall require under this chapter. If the
Township Engineer, upon inspection of the site and review and verification of the data
submitted by the applicant, determines that the type and amount of soil proposed to be
removed cannot be removed consistent with this section and the requirements of
Chapter 251, PL 1975, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, he shall direct the
Construction Official to deny the permit. The Township Engineer may require the
applicant to provide such additional data as the Township Engineer may determine to be
necessary in order to properly review the application. In the event that he directs the
Construction Official to deny the permit, the Township Engineer may specify for the
benefit of the applicant the type and quantity of the soil which could be removed, if any,
consistent with the requirements of Chapter 251, P.L. 1975, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control. The Construction Official shall issue or deny the permit as the Township
Engineer shall direct. The Township Engineer shall either approve or reject the
application for a permit hereunder and the Construction Official shall either issue or deny
the permit within sixty (60) days of the filing of the application therefor.
E. Data Required. The applicant shall submit to the Construction Official for review by the
Township Engineer, a written application for a permit on a form to be supplied by the
Construction Official. The application shall specify:
1. Site location indicating both street address and Lot and Block number according
to the official Tax Map of the Township.
2. Name and address of the owner of the site and the names and addresses of all
persons owning property located within two hundred (200') feet of the site.
3. The type and quantity of soil proposed to be removed including but not limited to:
(a) Existing pH of both topsoil and subsoil.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
192
(b) Mixture of soil including percentage of organic compounds, sand, clay,
gravel, etc.
(c) Other soil characteristics described in terms which shall conform as
nearly as practical to the terms employed by the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control as adopted by the State Soil Conservation
Committee.
4. A description of the proposed improvements to the property which necessitate
the removal of the soil.
5. A designation of the zone in which the site is located according to the provisions
of this Chapter.
6. Location to which soil is to be removed.
7. Measures proposed by the applicant for the control of acid formation or exposure
and the maintenance or improvement of existing soil pH levels.
8. Such other data as the Township Engineer may require in order to properly
review the application.
F. Soil Mixture and pH Maintenance Standards.
1. Limitation on Soil Removal. Except as hereinafter provided, the removal of soil
permitted by this chapter is here expressly limited to that volume of soil equal to
the subsurface volume of any natural vegetation or man-made structure which
has been placed on the site as an improvement thereto, diminished by that
volume of soil which may be required under the provisions of Chapter 251, P.L.
1975, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, to be retained on the site for the
purposes of, soil erosion and sediment control. The excavating or stripping of
land or engaging in any other land disturbance activity involving removing soil
from a site solely for the purposes of resale is hereby expressly prohibited. The
limitations provided here shall not be construed to in any way prohibit the
removal of soil from the site in order to correct any existing or readily anticipated
erosion conditions in accordance with Chapter 251, P.L. 1975, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control.
2. General Control Standards. During the removal of soil as permitted under this
chapter:
(a) Stripping of vegetation, grading or any other disturbance shall be done in
a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
(b) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
(c) The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall be
kept within practical limits.
(d) All construction or land disturbances shall be conducted in a manner
consistent with the requirements of Chapter 251, P.L. 1975, Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control.
(e) Whenever the soil removed consists of both topsoil and subsoil of a
lesser quality, the topsoil shall be retained for the purposes of grading.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site unless prior thereto all subsoil
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
193
and soil of a lesser quality shall have been removed from the site. For
the purposes of this section, topsoil shall mean the arable soil, shall
contain no stone, shall be loamy, free of debris, and shall contain no
toxic substance that may be harmful to plant growth. Topsoil shall have a
minimum organic content of not less than two and three quarters (2.75%)
percent by weight, a pH range of not less than 5.0 nor more than 7.5,
and a soluble salt content not exceeding five hundred (500) ppm. For the
purpose of this section, subsoil shall mean all soils of lesser quality than
topsoil.
(f) Excavated soil shall not be placed adjacent to streams, other bodies of
water or man-made or natural water flow channels in a manner that will
cause it to be washed away by high water or runoff.
(g) Prior to the installation of any natural vegetation or manmade structure or
the backfilling or grading required under the provisions of either this
chapter or Chapter 251, P.L. 1975, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,
any exposed soil having a pH value of less than 4 shall be covered with
a minimum of twelve (12) inches of soil material no coarser than a sandy
loam which can be corrected to a minimum pH of 6.5. Any soil which
shall remain exposed during the disturbance activity and for a period in
excess of three (3) working days shall be maintained at a minimum pH of
6.5.
(h) Whenever the removal of soil requires the removal of any trees, tree
stumps, or other vegetation, the trees, tree stumps or vegetation so
removed shall be removed from the site and shall not be buried or used
as fill on the site.
G. Inspection and Enforcement. The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the
Construction Official who shall also inspect the approved removal activity. If the
Construction Official finds existing conditions not as stated in the approved application,
he shall refuse to approve further work and may seek other penalties as provided in
Article XI.
H. Fees.
1. No permits required hereunder shall be issued by the Construction Official unless
the applicant shall have paid to the Township Clerk the fees required by Article X.
The Township Clerk shall collect the following fees in order to defray the cost of
administering this Ordinance and carrying out any inspection required hereunder:
§ 421 SLOPE REGULATIONS AND RETAINING WALLS
A. The purpose of these regulations is: (1) to minimize potential detrimental impacts that are
associated with the disturbance of established vegetation on existing steep slopes; (2) to
avoid creating new steep slopes where the potential for detrimental impacts are
increased; and (3) to minimize potential detrimental impacts by regulating the scale,
mass and location of retaining walls. Detrimental impacts means any adverse impact to:
public safety and the general welfare; private or public property; or, any historic, cultural,
scenic or other environmental resource caused by the destabilization of a slope area or
retaining wall as a result of erosion slumping, runoff or other consequence.
B. For the purposes of these regulations, "construction" shall mean any disturbance or
improvement to land, including but not limited to buildings, structures, streets, driveways,
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
194
parking areas, swimming pools, excavations, fill, grading, tree removal, stripping of
vegetation and clearing, except that selective thinning of vegetation and site work
approved by the approving authority for sidewalks and similar pedestrian ways,
subsurface utility installations and drainage facilities shall not be considered construction.
C. Steep slopes shall not be disturbed and retaining walls shall not be installed except
where the applicant demonstrates that each disturbance and/or retaining wall is essential
to the reasonable use of the property and that no adverse impact to adjoining properties
will result from the proposed construction.
1. In the case of development applications before the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall submit a separate sheet as part of the
overall development plan, identifying the extent of the steep slope disturbance
and the use of retaining wall(s) and noting the justification(s) for the disturbance.
2. In the case of Zoning Permit Applications, the applicant shall submit a grading
plan in accordance with the zoning permit requirements contained in Article XI of
this Land Development Ordinance.
D. Within any development, construction on steep slopes, as defined herein, shall be in
accordance with the following provisions.
1. Construction on steep slopes of fifteen (15) percent or greater, but less than
twenty-five (25) percent, shall be permitted in accordance with the following
regulations:
(a) A maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot area in this slope
category may be used for construction purposes; and,
(b) Construction shall not result in the creation of critical slope areas.
2. No construction shall be permitted in critical slope areas (slopes of 25 percent or
greater) unless all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The total soil disturbance in the critical slope area of the lot is no greater
than one (1) cubic yard;
(b) The total area of removal or disturbance of vegetation in the critical slope
area of the lot is no greater than twenty-five (25) square feet;
(c) The increase in impervious ground cover in the critical slope area of the
lot is no greater than twenty-five (25) square feet;
(d) The construction does not include the removal of any tree, having a
diameter at point of measurement greater than eighteen (18) inches;
and,
(e) The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed slope disturbance is
essential to a reasonable use of property.
E. Where construction will disturb steep sloped areas and areas abutting steep slopes, the
plan shall provide the following design features, as applicable to the situation:
1. Any grading or disturbance in an area of steep slopes or in an area abutting a
steep slope shall stabilize the soil as required to avoid detrimental impacts.
2. An area abutting a steep slope may be disturbed or completely removed,
provided:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
195
(a) The final grading does not result in a net increase in the total steep slope
areas on the lot; and,
(b) The removed soil is redistributed on site and/or removed from the site in
accordance with other township requirements.
3. The area along the top of a steep slope may be filled and a retaining wall(s)
constructed, provided the retaining wall(s) and all other construction activities
conform to regulations set forth herein.
F. Landscape Retaining Wall Setback Requirement. Landscape retaining walls shall not be
located closer to a property line than one half (1/2) the height of the wall.
G. Maximum Height of Structural Retaining Walls
1. The maximum height of any structural retaining wall, section of structural
retaining wall, or tier of a structural retaining wall, shall be no greater than eight
(8) feet, unless in a front yard setback area, in which case the maximum height
shall be no greater than four (4) feet.
2. Multiple, staggered or tiered walls shall be considered single walls unless the
minimum horizontal distance between the top of any single section or tier and the
base (toe) of the next higher section or tier is not less than one and one-half (1-
1/2) times the height of the lower section or tier. If there are more than three (3)
single sections or tiers, the minimum distance between the top of any single
section or tier and the base (toe) of the next higher section or tier shall be not
less than two (2) times the height of the lower section or tier.
3. A structural retaining wall shall not extend in height for more than one (1) foot
above the natural or approved finished grade at its top, unless proper surface
drainage requires a greater height.
4. Any combination of a structural retaining wall(s) and a safety fence shall not
exceed twelve (12) feet.
H. Location of Structural Retaining Walls
1. A structural retaining wall (top or bottom) shall be located no closer to a property
line than the height of the wall or wall segment closest to the property line, and
the applicant's engineer shall certify that a failure of the structural retaining wall
will not have an adverse impact on any adjoining property or public right-of-way.
2. Structural retaining walls shall not be located in any public rights-of-way or utility
easements.
I. Safety Requirements of Structural Retaining Walls. The top of any structural retaining
wall, or tiered wall, with a height of greater than four (4) feet, shall be protected through
the use of fencing with a minimum height of three (3) feet or, in the alternative provided
safety concerns are adequately addressed, densely planted vegetation at 50% of the full
growth screening.
J. Design. A licensed structural or civil engineer shall design all structural retaining walls,
with signed and sealed plans submitted for review and approval by the Construction
Official, Borough Engineer, Planning Board Engineer or Zoning Board of Adjustment
Engineer, whatever the case may be.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
196
K. Inspection. A licensed structural or civil engineer, at the cost of the applicant, shall
inspect the construction of all structural retaining walls, and a signed and sealed
certification that the wall has been properly constructed shall be submitted to the
Construction Official upon completion of the wall.
[NOTE: The previous section, Section 421, has been added per Ordinance No. 03-035]
§ 422 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
The following provisions shall apply to valid non-conforming uses, structures and lots at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance:
A. A use, building or structure which is lawfully in existence at the effective date of this
Ordinance and shall be made non-conforming at the passage of this Ordinance or any
applicable amendment thereto, may be continued as otherwise provided in this section.
B. No existing use, structure or premises devoted to a non-conforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, unless it is changed
to a conforming use or structure as follows:
1. Any non-conforming structure or use damaged to less than fifty per cent (50%) of
its previous existing area or value by fire or other natural calamity, may be
restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided the area of such use or
structure shall not exceed the area which existed prior to such damage nor
increase the intensity of use. All repairs shall be completed within one (1) year
after damages occur, or within such time extensions granted by the Zoning
Officer, which can only be granted upon good cause being shown by the
applicant, or such use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use.
2. Normal maintenance and repair of a structure containing a non-conforming use is
permitted, provided that it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied
by the non-conforming use or structure and does not increase the intensity of
use. Nothing in this section shall prevent the restoring to a safe or lawful
condition any part of any structure declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
3. A building containing residential non-conforming uses may be altered in any way
to improve interior livability. No structural alterations shall be made which would
increase the number of bedrooms or dwelling units.
C. Non-conforming uses and structures are considered terminated and shall not be revived
in any way except as a conforming use or structure in accordance with the following:
1. A non-conforming use or structure abandoned in accordance with this Ordinance
and accompanied by an intent on the part of the owner to abandon such use as
evidenced by some act or failure to act which carries with it a sufficient
implication that the owner neither claims or retains any interest in the subject
matter of the abandonment shall be considered a termination thereof. Such
implication shall be rebuttably presumed by non-use for any period of two (2) or
more years. Non-use by successive owners shall be considered continuous nonuse.
2. The change of a non-conforming use or structure to a more or entirely
conforming use for any period of time shall be considered an abandonment of the
previous non-conforming use, and a reversion to the previous non-conforming
use shall not be permitted.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
197
3. A non-conforming structure or use which has fifty percent (50 %) or more of its
non-conforming area or value destroyed by fire or natural calamity shall be
considered an abandonment thereof.
D. A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged, extended, increased in height, width or
depth, moved or relocated, modified in such a way so as to increase habitable or useable
space, number of dwelling units or number of bedrooms; unless such structure is
changed to a structure conforming to the requirements of this Chapter except that an
existing one family structure may be rebuilt, enlarged, extended or added to provided:
1. The enlargement, extension or addition conforms to all zone requirements; or
2. The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which does not conform to
zone requirements consists entirely of the enclosure of existing side or rear
porches.
3. The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition that does not conform to
the requirements does not increase the degree of non-conformity with setback
requirements.
4. An existing one-family structure located in a residential district destroyed by fire
or other natural calamity may be rebuilt provided the new structure complies with
all zone requirements relating to setbacks and height; however, the existing lot
need not comply with minimum lot width, depth and area requirements where the
existing condition is non-conforming.
[NOTE: The previous section, §422, has been renumbered per Ordinance No. 03-035;
prior section number assignment was §421]
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
198
ARTICLE V- PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 500 PURPOSE
A. To set forth guidelines and standards that promote the creation of functional and
attractive development that shall promote and give due consideration to the health,
safety, general welfare, morals, order, efficiency, economy, maintenance of property
values and character of the Township.
B. To ensure that any development shall comply with the Master Plan, zoning plan and
other overall or district plans of the Township and this chapter
C. To provide guidelines and standards that shall be used by an applicant in preparing a
development plan, and the Board in reviewing the same. In reviewing a development
plan, the Board shall establish findings as to whether or not, and to what degree, an
application for development meets such guidelines and standards. Based upon its
review of the development plan and the degree to which such findings of compliance are
established, the Board may approve, conditionally approve, request modifications or deny
approval of the application for development
D. To minimize adverse impacts of flooding, drainage, erosion, vehicular traffic, pedestrian
movement, parking, vibration, lighting and glare, noise, odor, solid waste disposal, litter,
ventilation, vibration, crime and vandalism and inappropriate design and development
E. To ensure that any new development gives due consideration to the physical, visual and
spatial characteristics of the existing streetscape, neighborhood and district in which such
is located and the Township generally
F. To ensure that the physical, visual and spatial characteristics of any proposed
development shall not be so markedly incongruous with the same characteristics of the
existing streetscape, neighborhood and district in which such is located, and the
Township generally, so as to materially detract from the real property value of adjacent or
nearby properties
§ 501 EXCEPTIONS
The design guidelines and standards described in this Article shall be used as the Township's
presumptive minimum requirements for subdivision and site plan development and as criteria for
evaluating the plan and design of such development plans. However, the guidelines and standards are
not intended to restrict creativity, and an applicant may request that the guidelines and standards be
modified or waived. To gain approval of such modification or waiver, the applicant shall demonstrate to
the Board the criteria for exceptions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, which shall include a showing that
the resulting change will:
A. Generally satisfy the purpose of this article;
B. Be designed in accordance with the Township's normally acceptable engineering,
planning and/or architectural practices;
C. Not have an adverse impact on the physical, visual or spatial characteristics of the overall
development plan for the tract to be developed;
D. Generally enhance the overall development plan for the tract;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
199
E. Not have an adverse impact on the physical, visual or spatial characteristics of the
existing streetscape, neighborhood and district in which such development is located or
the Township, generally;
F. Generally enhance the streetscape and neighborhood in which it is located;
G. Not reduce the useful life or increase the cost of maintenance of the improvement to be
modified or otherwise have an adverse impact on the long-term function of the
development;
H. Not materially detract from the real property value of the development or adjacent or
nearby properties;
§ 502 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all site plan applications.
B. Design standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review the
architectural design of all buildings and structures in a development plan. Where a
development plan involves an existing building or a site upon which an existing building is
located, the existing building shall be repaired, renovated and restored to comply with this
Article.
1. Massing.
(a) Except for buildings in planned commercial development, no building
shall be permitted to have a total measurement greater than 150 feet in
length along any wall, roof or footprint plane. Building wall offsets,
including both projections and recesses, shall be provided along any
building wall measuring greater than fifty (50) feet in length in order to
provide architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and
relieve the negative visual effect of a single, long wall. The total
measurement of such offsets shall equal a minimum of ten (10) percent
of the building wall length. The maximum spacing between such offsets
shall be forty (40) feet. The minimum projection or depth of any
individual offset shall not be less than two feet. Roofline offsets shall be
provided along any roof measuring longer than seventy-five (75) feet in
length in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the massing
of a building and relieve the negative visual effect of a single, long roof.
(b) Planned commercial development. Buildings comprising planned
commercial development shall be permitted to have a total measurement
no greater than 650 feet in length along any wall, roof or footprint plane.
Building wall offsets, including both projections and recesses, shall be
provided along any building wall measuring greater than 100 feet in
length in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the massing
of a building and relieve the negative visual effect of a single, long wall.
The total measurement of such offsets shall equal a minimum of five (5)
percent of the building wall length. The maximum spacing between such
offsets shall be seventy five (75) feet. The minimum projection or depth
of any individual offset shall not be less than ten (10) feet. Roofline
offsets shall be provided along any roof measuring longer than seventyfive
(75) feet in length in order to provide architectural interest and
variety to the massing of a building and relieve the negative visual effect
of a single, long roof.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
200
2. Horizontal courses. All visibly exposed sides of a building shall have an
articulated base course and cornice the base course shall be traditionally
proportionate to the overall horizontal and vertical dimensions of a facade and
shall align with either the kickplate or sill level of the first story. The cornice shall
terminate the top of a building wall, may project out horizontally from the vertical
building wall plane and shall be ornamented with moldings, brackets and other
details that shall be appropriate to the architectural style of a building. The
middle section of a building may be horizontally divided at floor, lintel or sill levels
with belt courses. Building courses shall be considered an integral part of the
design of a building and shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building
3. Continuity of treatment. The architectural treatment of a facade or roof shall be
completely continued around all visibly exposed sides of a building. All sides of a
building shall be architecturally designed so as to be consistent with regard to
style, materials, colors and details.
4. Roof. The type, shape, pitch, texture and color of a roof shall be considered as
an integral part of the design of a building and shall be architecturally compatible
with the style, materials, colors and details of such building. The minimum
permitted roof pitch shall be eight on 12, and all gables on a building shall be of
the same pitch. A flat roof may be permitted on a building of a minimum of two
stories in height, provided that all visibly exposed walls shall have an articulated
cornice that projects out horizontally from the vertical building wall plane. A
mansard roof may be permitted, but only if such is located on the third story of a
building, completely and integrally enclosing such story. Flat or mansard roofs
shall be prohibited on all one-story buildings. Architectural embellishments that
add visual interest to roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys,
cupolas, clock towers and such similar elements shall be permitted, provided that
such are architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of
the building.
5. Windows. Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of a building. Windows shall be vertically
proportioned wherever possible the location of windows on the upper stories of a
building shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the
ground level of such building. Permitted retail and personal service business
uses located in business districts may have large pane display windows on the
ground level, provided that such window shall be framed by the surrounding wall
and shall not comprise greater than seventy-five (75) of the total ground level
facade area of such building. All other windows shall be double-hung or
casement types. A building designed of an architectural style that normally has
windows with muntins or divided lights shall utilize them. Such muntin or divided
light grids may be the snap-on type, if fitted on the exterior of the window or
between the glazing of the window units.
6. Entrances. All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by utilizing
such elements as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches,
overhangs, railings, balustrades and other such elements, where appropriate.
Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of such building
7. Physical plant. All air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks
and elevator housing shall be shielded from view for a minimum distance of 500
feet from the site. Such shielding shall be accomplished by utilizing the walls or
roof of the building or a penthouse-type screening device that shall be designed
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
201
to be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of
such building.
8. Materials, colors and details. All materials, colors and details used on the
exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style of such
building, as well as with each other. A building designed of an architectural style
that normally includes certain integral materials, colors and/or details shall have
such incorporated into the design of such building. The number of different
materials on exterior facades should be limited to three types.
9. Shutters. A building designed of an architectural style that normally includes
shutters shall provide such on all windows on the front facade. If such building is
located on a corner lot, shutters shall be provided on all windows of all facades
fronting on a street.
10. Lighting. Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be designed to
be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of such
building and other lighting fixtures used on the site Consideration shall also be
given to the type of light source utilized and the light quality such produces. The
type of light source used on buildings, signs, parking areas, pedestrian walkways
and other areas of a site shall be the same or compatible. The use of lowpressure
sodium or mercury vapor lighting either attached to buildings or to light
the exterior of buildings shall be prohibited
11. Signage. Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building and other
signs used on the site. All signage affixed to a building shall conform to Article
IV.
12. Awnings and canopies. The ground level of a building in a business district shall
have awnings or canopies, where appropriate, to complement the architectural
style of a building. Awnings may also be used on the upper levels of a building,
where appropriate. The design of awnings shall be architecturally compatible
with the style, materials, colors and details of such building. All signage on
awnings or canopies shall conform to Article IV of this Chapter
13. Multiple uses. A building with multiple storefronts or other multiple uses, no
matter whether such uses are the same type of use or located on the same floor
level, shall be unified through the use of architecturally compatible styles,
materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, lighting fixtures and other design
elements for all such storefronts or uses.
14. Corner buildings. A building on a corner lot shall be considered a more
significant structure from an urban design standpoint since such building has at
least two front facades visibly exposed to the street. Such building may be
designed to have additional height and architectural embellishments relating to
its location on a corner lot, if deemed appropriate by the Board.
15. Multiple buildings. A development plan that contains more than one building or
structure shall be unified through the use of architecturally compatible styles,
materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, lighting fixtures and other design
elements for all such buildings or structures.
C. Professional Office District Design Standards. The following additional architectural
design standards for professional offices shall apply:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
202
1. Dormers should be used to visually break up large roof masses.
2. Windows should be double hung sash types with the glass area divided by
horizontal and vertical muntins.
3. Exterior materials should be brick, stone, horizontal siding or wood shingle, or a
combination of such materials.
D. Retail Design Standards. The following additional architectural design standards for retail
uses shall apply:
1. Retail stores oriented towards a street or parking lot shall have a minimum of
50% of the first floor building facade that faces a street or parking lot consist of
glass display windows.
2. Primary building entrances should be oriented towards the street.
3. Common concrete block shall not be used on any elevation visible from a public
or private street. Where permitted, common concrete block shall be painted or
otherwise finished.
4. In no instance shall a building elevation have a homogeneous facade without a
variation in materials, textures or other design features.
E. Industrial and Warehousing Use Design Standards. The following additional architectural
design standards for industrial uses shall apply:
1. Variation in the apparent height of the building shall be used to articulate its mass
either through actual changes in roof height or through the use of varying parapet
walls.
2. Vertical offsets at least two feet in depth shall be introduced for each 30% of
building length.
3. The exterior facade should be designed with one dominant material. This
material should be varied through the use of vertical and horizontal elements that
create texture changes along building facades.
4. The front and two side elevations shall be constructed of brick, architectural
concrete masonry units (i.e., split face block) or architectural precast concrete a
minimum of 50% of the facade. Metal siding or panels shall be limited to no
more than 50% of the facade. Where glass is used or required, the percentage
of masonry or metal shall be correspondingly reduced. Common concrete block
shall not be used on any elevation visible from a public street. Where permitted,
common concrete block shall be painted or otherwise finished.
5. At least 20% of the front elevation of the building shall consist of glass window.
§ 503 BUFFERING AND SCREENING
The following regulations shall be used to prepare and review buffering and screening for any site plan:
A. Residential uses and districts. Any residential use shall be suitably buffered and
screened from all uses other than single-family dwellings in order to minimize the impacts
of noise, glare, vibration, vehicular traffic, pedestrian activity and other potential
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
203
nuisances. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the width of buffering and height of
screening shall be provided based on the type of use that is being buffered as follows:
TABLE 5.1: REQUIRED BUFFERS TO RESIDENTIAL USES
TYPE OF USE/SUBJECT BUFFERING
AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
WIDTH OF
BUFFERING
(feet)
HEIGHT OF
SCREENING
AT THE TIME OF
PLANTING
(feet)
Permitted residential uses other than
single-family dwellings 10 6
Non-residential uses 10 6
Light industrial and warehouse uses 20 10
B. Driveways and parking lots. All driveways and parking lots shall be suitably buffered and
screened to minimize the impacts of noise, lighting and glare, exhaust fumes, views of
parked vehicles and other nuisances. Buffering and screening shall minimize such
impacts both from within the site itself, as well as from adjacent and nearby properties
and public rights-of-way as follows:
1. Buffering shall consist of a minimum ten (10) foot wide area surrounding all sides
of a parking lot exposed to view.
2. Where such parking area is located on a tract adjacent to a residential use or
district, such screening shall consist of a minimum six (6) foot-high visually
impervious screen. The height of any required screen shall decrease to a
maximum of three (3) feet in height where driveways approach sidewalks or
walkways, in order to provide adequate visibility of pedestrians from motor
vehicles and police visibility into the lot.
C. Loading areas. All loading areas, including loading dock areas of buildings and
driveways providing access to the same, shall be suitably buffered and screened to
minimize the impacts of noise, loading and unloading activities, lighting and glare,
exhaust fumes, views of loading and unloading vehicles and other nuisances. Buffering
and screening shall minimize such impacts both from within the site itself, as well as from
adjacent and nearby properties and public rights-of-way, as follows:
1. Buffering shall consist of a minimum ten (10) foot wide area surrounding all sides
of a loading area exposed to view. Where such loading area is located on a tract
adjacent to a residential use or district, such buffering shall consist of a minimum
twenty-five (25) foot wide area surrounding all sides of a parking lot exposed to
view.
2. Screening shall consist of a minimum ten (10) foot high visually impervious
screen. If such screen consists of a wall or fence, the buffer area between the
wall or fence and the lot line shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and
shall also be extensively planted with both deciduous and evergreen trees.
D. HVAC equipment and utility service boxes. All ground level HVAC equipment and utility
service boxes shall be suitably buffered and screened to minimize views of the same
from both within the site itself, as well as from adjacent and nearby properties and public
rights-of-way, as follows.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
204
1. Buffering shall consist of a minimum three (3) foot wide area surrounding all
sides of HVAC equipment and utility storage boxes exposed to view.
2. Screening shall consist of a minimum four (4) foot high evergreen hedge along all
sides of the same.
§ 504 CURB DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all applications for development.
B. Design standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review any
development plan that involves the construction of new curbs or repair of existing curbs
1. Location. Curbs shall be designed to define the sides of streets, driveways,
parking lots and loading areas
2. Construction and repair specifications. All curbs shall meet the construction
specifications as set forth in applicable Township ordinances or as approved by
the Township Engineer. This shall also apply to recommendations by the
Township Engineer regarding the maintenance, repair or upgrading of existing
curbs located in that portion of the public right-of-way that directly abuts the tract
to be developed.
3. Drainage. Curbs shall be designed to direct surface water runoff along, on
and/or across paved surfaces to drainage facilities.
4. Handicapped ramps. Depressed curb ramps for the handicapped shall be
installed at all locations where sidewalks, pedestrian crosswalks or walkways
intersect any street, driveway or parking lot curb and shall be designed in
accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
5. Planting strips. The area located between curbs and sidewalks or walkways
shall be either planted with grass or another type of ground cover plant material.
Planting strips located in the public right-of-way may be paved with bricks or
other similar type decorative paving materials as specified by the Township
Engineer. In no instance, however, shall a planting strip be permitted to be
covered with asphalt or loose stones of any variety.
§ 505 DRIVEWAY DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all applications for development.
B. Design standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review any
development plan that involves the construction of a new driveway or the expansion or
repair of an existing driveway.
1. Lot access. Every use shall have driveway access to a street, except for historic
zone districts. Such access shall be designed for the safety, control, efficient
movement and convenience of motor vehicle traffic accessing the site, including
service and emergency vehicles, and to promote safe, efficient and convenient
traffic circulation generally within the Township.
2. Location. Driveways shall be located along the street line of a lot as follows:
(a) A driveway on a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of forty (40) feet
from the intersecting lot lines at the corner.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
205
(b) A driveway for a single-family dwelling shall be set back a minimum of
three feet (3) from a side lot line, unless such is a common driveway for
dwelling units on adjacent lots. A driveway for uses other than singlefamily
dwelling units shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from all
property lines, excepting driveway intersections with public or private
roadways.
3. Construction specifications. Driveways shall be paved with a minimum of four (4)
inches of compacted sub-base material and two (2) inches of three-eighths inch
roadway stone or comparable material or to an alternate standard as approved
by the Township Engineer.
4. Width. The width of driveways shall be based on the following
TABLE 5.2: DRIVEWAY WIDTH REQUIREMENTS
One Way Traffic Two Way Traffic
Land Use Type
Minimum
Width (FT)
Maximum
Width (FT)
Minimum Width
(FT)
Maximum
Width (FT)
Single & twofamily
dwellings
9 18 9 18
Townhouses &
apartments
15 18 18 22
All other
residential
10 15 18 20
Nonresidential
uses
15 18 20 24
Warehouse &
light industrial
uses
18 22 26 30
5. Grading. Driveway grades shall not exceed 6% at any point along the entire
length of the driveway.
6. Aprons. Driveway aprons shall be designed to permit access to any driveway
from a street. Such apron shall be constructed between the curb or edge of
street pavement and the sidewalk or, in the absence of sidewalk, for a distance
of four feet back from the curb or edge of pavement. Driveway apron width may
be enlarged to provide adequate turning radii for larger vehicles. The
construction specifications of driveway aprons shall be pursuant to applicable
Township ordinances or as approved by the Township Engineer.
7. Side slopes. Driveway side slopes shall be topsoiled, seeded, fertilized and
mulched or otherwise stabilized to prevent erosion. If banks exceed a slope of
two increments vertical to one increment horizontal (two to one) and the slope
face is not stable rock, retaining walls shall be constructed of a design approved
by the Township Engineer.
8. Clear sight triangles. At locations where driveways approach sidewalks and
streets in the public right-of-way, clear sight triangles shall be provided on both
sides of such driveways. No vision-obstructing object with a height greater than
2 1/2 feet, as measured from the elevation of the driveway, shall be located in
such areas formed by outward facing isosceles triangles, with equal sides of ten
(10) feet in length consisting of the curbline of the driveway and the property line
along the right-of-way.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
206
§ 506 ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS
Township Design Standards as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer are hereby incorporated
into this Ordinance by reference. These standards shall be held to be minimum criteria for site
improvements in the Township of Neptune and shall include all specifications, procedures, requirements,
plans and any other documentation as may be contained therein.
§ 507 HISTORIC DISTRICT STREETSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This Subsection shall apply to all development along Main Avenue and the
balance of the HD-B-1 Zone District, except for ordinary maintenance and repair.
B. Banners. Masts for up to four (4) feet overall length dual banners at corner and district
entry posts, minimum clearance to sidewalk grade to be eight (8) feet.
C. Bicycle racks. Beacon products – Santa Fe bike rack with optional end post bollards, to
match standard bollard type; single post bike rack to be as per Metropolitan Series by
Heritage Casting and Ironworks Model #9410, or functional and aesthetic equivalent.
D. Crosswalk type. Granite edged interlocking pavers with barrier-free curb cuts.
E. Curb type. Natural cut granite curb, eighteen (18) inch depth, six (6) inch width, six (6)
foot length; gray or rose blend color.
F. Lighting. Appendix F
G. Paver color. Interlocking herring bone paver color is to match dominant downtown brick
building fronts.
H. Sidewalk bench type. Beacon product Old Scroll series cast aluminum Model 05BB-A
without back with IPE seat slats; Model 05B with back in park or promenade locations;
alternate Main Avenue bench design to be Metropolitan Series Seat 5014 by Heritage
Casting and Ironworks, or functional and aesthetic equivalent.
I. Sidewalk planter type. Model 8333 planter, eighteen (18) inch high, twenty-three (23)
inch wide by Heritage Casting and Ironworks, or functional and aesthetic equivalent.
J. Sidewalk type. A four (4) foot wide “sidewalk amenity band” consisting of interlocking
paver blocks shall be placed adjacent to the curb. A replicated slate concrete walk with a
minimum forty-two (42) inch width shall be placed adjacent to the “sidewalk amenity
band.” The slate concrete walk shall be edged with an interlocking paver band of
variable width to the building or property line. Tree grate type. Cast iron square tree
grates with openings for up-lighting, 180° square, four (4) inch minimum.
K. Street furnishings. Metropolitan Series in black as manufactured by Heritage Casting
and Ironworks, or functional and aesthetic equivalent.
L. Trash can type. Model 6135 – Thirty (30) gallon litter container, thirty-eight (38) inch
high, twenty-four (24) inch wide, Model #7232; recycling container, thirty-nine (39) high,
thirty-one (31) wide by Heritage Casting and Ironworks, or functional and aesthetic
equivalent.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
207
M. Ocean Grove Historic District. All Streetscape enhancements shall be consistent with the
Ocean Grove Historic District Sidewalk Use and Various Pedestrian Enhancements
Guide.
§ 508 HISTORIC PRESERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide uniform design criteria and guidelines
for the regulation of properties situated in any historic zone district or other designated
historic site situated elsewhere in the Township for use by the Historic Preservation
Commission, the Township of Neptune and the public.
B. Applicability. These design guidelines shall be applicable to all development applications
and applications for Certificates of Appropriateness situated in:
1. Any historic zone district (as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map, Township of
Neptune, Monmouth County, New Jersey”); and,
2. Any site of historic and architectural importance in the Township which has been
designated by the Township or is listed by local, County, State or national
agencies.
C. The design criteria and guidelines, also known as the Preservation Guidelines is an
integral part of this Ordinance and is incorporated in the Ordinance as if set forth at
length in the body of this Ordinance.
D. Visual compatibility factors. The following factors, commonly known as visual
compatibility factors, shall be considered in all Historic Districts.
1. Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually compatible with
adjacent buildings.
2. Proportion of the Building's Front Facade. The relationship of the width of the
buildings to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
3. Proportions of Openings Within the Facility. The relationship of the width of
windows to the height of windows in a building shall be visually compatible with
the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
4. Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of the building to the
open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with
the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
5. Rhythm of Solids to Voids on Front Facades. The relationship of solids to voids
in the front facades of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
6. Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projections. The relationship of entrance and
porch projections to the street shall be visually compatible with the buildings and
places to which it is visually related.
7. Relationship of Materials, Texture and Color. The relationship of materials,
texture and color of the facade and roof of a building shall be visually compatible
with the predominant materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
208
8. Roof Shape. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the
buildings to which it is visually related.
9. Walls of Continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, open-type
fencing and evergreen landscape masses shall form cohesive walls of
enclosures along a street, to the extent necessary to maintain visual compatibility
of the building with the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
10. Scale of Buildings. The size of a building, the mass of a building in relationship
to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
11. Directional Expression of Front Elevation. A building shall be visually compatible
with the buildings and places to which it is visually related in its dimensional
character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
12. Exterior Features. A structure's related exterior features such as but are not
limited to lighting fixtures, fences, signs, sidewalks, windows, doors, shutters,
siding, gutters, balustrades, railings, columns, cornices, moldings, trim, stairs,
steps, porches, walks, patios, driveways and parking areas shall be compatible
with the features of those structures to which it is visually related and shall be
appropriate for the historic period for which the structure is significant.
§508.01 Historic Preservation Rehabilitation Standards
A. Applicability. These standards shall be applicable to all development applications and
applications for Certificates of Appropriateness involving any type of rehabilitation work
situated in:
1. Any historic zone district (as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map, Township of
Neptune, Monmouth County, New Jersey”); and,
2. Any site of historic and architectural importance in the Township which has been
designated by the Township or is listed by local, County, State or national
agencies.
B. In addition to the Visual Compatibility Factors listed in Subsection §508.D, the following
standards for rehabilitation shall be considered:
1. Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property
which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its
environment or to use a property for its original intended purpose.
2. The distinguishing original qualities or characteristics of a building, structure or
site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any
historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when
possible.
3. All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own
time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier
appearance shall be discouraged.
4. Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the
history and development of a building, structure or site and its environment. The
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
209
changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance
shall be recognized and respected.
5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which
characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
6. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced,
wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture
and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural
features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than conjectural designs or the
availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
7. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means
possible. Sandblasting and the other cleaning methods that will damage the
historic building materials shall not be undertaken without prior consent of the
Historic Preservation Commission.
8. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological
resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
9. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not
be discouraged when the alterations or additions do not destroy significant
historical, architectural or cultural material and such design is compatible with the
size, scale, color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
10. Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in
such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. All
illuminated signs shall be subject to inspection in accordance with the applicable
electrical codes in force in the Township.
11. The Historic Preservation Commission shall also consider the effectiveness of
the proposal:
(a) In adhering to the structure's original style; or
(b) In destroying or otherwise affecting the exterior architectural features;
and
(c) In the overall effect in general that the proposed work would have upon
the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and the use of the applicant's
property, adjoining properties and the Historic District in which it is
located.
§ 509 LANDSCAPING
The following guidelines shall be used to prepare and review a landscaping plan for any site plan. The
landscaping plan shall be prepared by a New Jersey certified landscape architect.
A. Landscaping. The entire development shall be extensively landscaped in accordance
with a plan conceived as a complete pattern and style throughout the total site. All areas
of the site not occupied by buildings and other improvements shall be intensively planted
with trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover and perennials and annuals. Landscaping shall
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
210
be provided to achieve the following:
1. Preservation and enhancement, to the greatest extent possible, of existing
natural features on the site, including vegetation, land forms and bodies of water;
2. Assistance in adapting a site to its proposed development;
3. Mitigation and control of environmental and community impacts from a
development;
4. Creation of an attractive appearance for the development, as viewed from both
within the site itself and the surrounding area;
5. Enhancement of the habitability of a development;
6. Definition of yard areas and other open space;
7. Energy conservation and micro-climatic control; and,
8. Maintenance of a desirable ecological balance on a developed site.
B. Other site design elements. The development plan shall incorporate landscaping with
other functional and ornamental site design elements, where appropriate, such as the
following:
1. Courtyards, plazas, alleys and similar public and semi-public open spaces;
2. Active recreation areas and facilities;
3. Ground paving materials
4. Paths and walkways;
5. Berms and other earth forms;
6. Ponds, fountains and other water features;
7. Trellises, pergolas, gazebos and other accessory structures;
8. Fences, walls and other screens;
9. Street or site furniture;
10. Art and sculpture;
C. Plant species. The selection of plant species to be used shall be appropriate in terms of
function and size and shall be hardy for the climatic zone in which the Township is
located. Consideration shall be given to soil conditions, availability of water, exposure to
sunlight and other existing conditions.
D. Planting sizes. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of three (3) inches at time
of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at time of
planting. Low-growing evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½)
feet in height at time of planting. Size of other plantings shall depend on setting and type
of plant material.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
211
E. Planting specifications. Only nursery-grown plant material shall be utilized. All trees,
shrubs and ground cover shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards.
All grass shall be planted in accordance with the New Jersey State Soil Conservation
Committee's Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in New Jersey,
current edition. Mulch Trees and other vegetation that have been removed may be
reduced to chips and used as mulch in landscaped areas. Maintenance Plantings shall
be watered regularly and in a manner appropriate for the specific plant material through
the first growing season. All landscaped areas shall be well maintained and kept free of
all debris, rubbish, weeds, tall grass, other overgrown conditions and the storage of any
equipment or materials.
F. Replacement of dead plantings. The developer shall be required to replace dead or
dying plant material for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance of a final
zoning permit for occupancy and shall post a maintenance guarantee for such pursuant
to Article X of this Ordinance. If plant material is dead or dying during a planting season,
it shall be replaced that same season. If plant material is dead or dying during a nonplanting
season, it shall be replaced as soon as is reasonably possible at the start of the
next planting season.
G. Fall planting hazard. Certain trees have been identified as having a high degree of
transplantation failure if planted during the Fall season. These should be noted on the
landscape plans as Spring planting only.
H. Foundation plantings. The base of all sides of a building shall be planted with foundation
plantings consisting of evergreen and/or semi-evergreen shrubs and trees. Such
plantings shall be a minimum of two (2) feet high at time of planting and spaced an
average of three feet on center. This foundation planting requirement shall not apply to
the sides of buildings that are directly abutting a public right-of-way.
I. Parking lot landscaping. The interior area of all parking lots shall be landscaped to
provide visual relief from the undesirable and monotonous appearance of extensive
parking areas, and to provide shading that will reduce solar heat gain to both the surface
of the parking lot and vehicles parked thereon. Such landscaped areas shall be provided
in protected planting islands or peninsulas within the perimeter of the parking lot and shall
be placed so as not to obstruct the vision of motorists. The area and types of plantings
shall be provided based on the number of parking spaces in the lot, as follows (see also
Appendix E):
1. The perimeter of all parking lots shall be setback from all rear and side lot lines
by a minimum of ten (10) feet. Per Section 412, no individual parking space may
be located within a required front setback area. Perimeter areas shall be
landscaped as follows:
(a) Side and rear yards shall be landscaped with a combination of evergreen
shrubs and deciduous trees to form a screen a minimum of six (6) feet
tall at the time of planting. Buffer tree spacing for foliage similar to the
White Pine shall be five feet (5’) on center and similar to the Arborvitae
shall be three feet (3’) on center.
(b) Front yards shall be landscaped with a combination of an alternating
evergreen and deciduous hedge a minimum of three (3) feet tall at the
time of planting, with deciduous shade trees located a spacing of thirty
(30) feet on-center, said spacing to supplement and alternate with
required street trees.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
212
2. For parking lots with fifteen (15) spaces or less, no such interior landscaping
shall be required if the Board determines there is adequate landscaping directly
surrounding the perimeter of the parking lot. If the Board finds that such
landscaping is inadequate, then the requirements of subsection B(2) below shall
apply.
3. For parking lots containing sixteen (16) to ninety-nine (99) spaces, a minimum of
five percent (5%) of the interior area of the parking lot shall be provided with
planting islands containing a minimum of one (1) deciduous tree planted for
every five (5) parking spaces abutting such island. Planting islands in parking
lots shall also conform to the following requirements:
(a) The minimum width of planting islands shall be four (4) feet on the side
of parking spaces six (6) feet between parking bays (head-to-head
parking). If sidewalks are incorporated through either the long sides of
the landscape islands between parking bays or through the landscape
islands on the sides of parking spaces, their width shall be added to
these requirements.
(b) No more than eight (8) parking spaces shall be placed in one row of
parking without an intervening landscape island.
(c) Where the parking lot design will result in pedestrians cutting
perpendicularly through landscape islands, sidewalks shall be installed at
regular intervals across the islands.
(d) The remainder of any such interior planting areas not containing trees
shall be planted with low-growing evergreen shrubs.
(e) Parking lot lighting may be sited within landscape islands, however,
without hindering necessary lighting coverage.
[NOTE: The previous subsection, “I.3” has been amended per Ordinance No.
03-035]
4. For parking lots with one-hundred (100) or more spaces, a minimum of five
percent (5%) of the interior area of the parking lot shall be provided with planting
islands containing a minimum of one (1) deciduous tree planted for every five (5)
parking spaces. Planting islands in such parking lots shall conform to the
following requirements:
(a) Diamond-shaped tree islands shall be utilized between parking bays
(head-to-head parking) and shall contain a minimum of thirty-six (36)
square feet.
(b) A landscaped island strip with a minimum width of four (4) feet shall be
placed at the end of each row of parking.
(c) No more than eight (8) parking spaces shall be placed in one (1)
continuous row of parking without an intervening landscaped island strip
placed on both sides of the spaces. The minimum width of an
intervening landscaped island strip shall be seven (7) feet.
(d) Sidewalks with a minimum width of four (4) feet shall be placed adjacent
to landscaped island strips.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
213
(e) When intervening planting strips are placed adjacent to one another, the
aggregate width of the island shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
order to accommodate two (2) planting strips and a sidewalk.
(f) The remainder of any such interior planting areas not containing trees
shall be planted with low-growing evergreen shrubs.
(g) Parking lot lighting may be sited within landscape islands, however,
provided adequate lighting coverage is provided per §511.
J. Slope plantings. All cut and fill areas, terraces, earth berms and roadway embankments
with slopes steeper than one increment vertical to three increments horizontal (1 to 3)
shall be sufficiently landscaped to prevent erosion.
K. Drainage facilities. Detention basins, headwalls, outlet structures, concrete flow
channels, rip-rap channels and other drainage facilities shall be suitably planted with
shrubs and trees. Detention basin embankments shall be extensively landscaped with
wet-site-tolerant plantings.
L. Energy conservation. Landscaping shall be designed to conserve energy, such as the
planting of evergreen windbreaks to provide shielding from northwesterly winds during
the winter and deciduous shade trees to reduce solar heat gain during the summer.
M. Street or site furniture. Benches, trash receptacles, kiosks, phone booths and other
street or site furniture shall be located and sized in accordance with the functional need
of such. Selection of such furniture shall take into consideration issues of durability,
maintenance and vandalism. All such furniture shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, materials, colors and details of buildings on the site.
§ 510 LAND USE RESTRICTIONS AND EASEMENTS
Land use restrictions shall be required as applicable when a proposed development includes one or more
of the restrictions contained herein. Land use restrictions shall be recorded with the Monmouth County
Recording Officer as deeds of easements or shall be placed on final plats for such recording, as
appropriate.
A. Drainage easements. Within required drainage easements, no regrading or the
installation of structures, fences, trees and shrubs shall be permitted unless otherwise
elsewhere modified by this Ordinance.
B. Conservation easements. Conservation easements for wetlands, wetlands transition
buffer, flood plain or flood plain buffer shall remain in their natural, undisturbed state
within which no regrading or clearing shall be permitted, excepting the removal of minor
underbrush or dead trees that are hazardous to people or buildings.
C. Clear sight easements. Areas designated as clear sight triangles shall remain free of
visual obstructions between 2-1/2 and 10 feet in height with the exception of street and
traffic control signs, traffic control boxes, fire hydrants, lighting poles as approved by the
Township Engineer. Field sited street trees may be located within a sight triangle in
accordance with §520 Sight Triangle.
D. Utility easements. Easements for public and local utilities shall conform to any
requirements of the appropriate company or authority. Structures within utility easements
shall be regulated by the appropriate authority.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
214
E. Cross-access easements. Cross-access easements shall permit pedestrians and
motorists to travel from adjacent lots to the lot in question without the necessity for
traveling on the public right-of-way.
F. Other land use restrictions. Restrictions or easements of other governmental agencies
with jurisdiction of the application for development shall conform to any requirements of
the appropriate agency or authority.
§ 511 LIGHTING
A. General requirements.
1. Sufficient lighting shall be provided on each site or along roadways to ensure the
security of property and to protect the safety of persons between the hours of
sunset and sunrise when the establishment or facility is in use.
2. Lighting shall be so designed to avoid the creation of hazards to motorists and
pedestrians or nuisance to adjoining property owners or residents. Lighting
directed towards the sky shall be designed to prevent interference with
commercial aviation routes.
(a) Security lighting design for commercial developments shall employ
timers on all or a portion of the site lighting that reduces the average
illumination to the minimum requirements of this Ordinance within one
hour after close of business or before midnight, whichever occurs earlier.
(b) Safety lighting design shall employ motion sensors so that illumination
occurs only when someone is in the immediate area.
(c) Display, advertising and specialty lighting, excluding interior illuminated
or backlit identification signage, shall be turned off at or before midnight.
3. Lighting levels, lamp color, and fixture type shall be consistent throughout the
parcel in question and shall complement building architecture and landscaping.
4. Lighting shall be designed to minimize energy and maintenance requirements
and shall comply with the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 1992 as it may be amended
or superseded.
5. Exterior lighting not building mounted shall be supplied by electricity from
underground cabling.
B. Street lighting. All public and private streets shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure
traffic and pedestrian safety under all weather conditions.
1. Design criteria. The design of street lighting shall take into consideration:
(a) The brightness of the abutting uses in comparison to pavement
brightness as seen by both motorists and pedestrians;
(b) The ability to discern objects on the street or its edge in comparison to
abutting uses; its brightness contrast;
(c) The time available to the motorist and pedestrian to view such objects;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
215
(d) The amount of direct glare from the luminaire or lamp and reflected glare
from the pavement.
2. Lighting standard placement. Excepting rural roads and lanes, lighting standards
shall be located at the following places:
(a) At every street intersection.
(b) At the end of each cul-de-sac.
(c) At curves with an inside radius of less than 300 feet, unless the standard
is within 300 feet of another.
(d) A maximum of every 75 feet on straight road segments for commercial
districts and 150 feet in residential districts
3. Light stanchions shall be staggered on both sides of the roadway.
4. All lighting shall provide for non-glare lights focused downward.
C. Off-premise effects. Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk
illumination, driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and ornamental
lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow a determination of
the effects upon adjacent properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objective
of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light shall
shine into building windows, nor onto streets and driveways so as to interfere with or
distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements, the intensity of such light sources,
the light shielding and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval. Wall
mounted fixtures are only permitted if directed into a site and not positioned towards
neighboring properties or public streets.
D. Building-attached fixtures. Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be
designed to be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of
such building and other lighting fixtures used on the site. Consideration shall also be
given to the type of light source utilized and the light quality such produces. The type of
light source used on buildings, signs, parking areas, pedestrian walkways and other
areas of a site shall be the same or compatible. The use of high-pressure sodium lighting
shall be prohibited for all fixtures.
E. Fixture type. The fixture type shall depend on a site’s location within a particular section
of the Township as follows (see Appendix F):
1. West Lake Avenue. Harp series luminaire with metal halide ballast per
Holophane Outdoor Architectural Lighting Catalog, or functional and aesthetic
equivalent.
2. Historic HD-B-1 Zone District.
(a) Main Avenue street light style shall be Globe G18 by Sternberg Vintage
Lighting with fitter from 508 series (508 BD/4 or 508 BD/5 as required).
(b) Street light post style shall be Georgetown 4400-D/10’ pedestrian post,
14’ corner/entry post with fluted shaft detail (typical) by Sternberg
Vintage Lighting.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
216
(c) Street light post arm shall be Victorian style twin or multi-mast. Twin
mast to be model 78WB or PM for 12” or 14” Globe fixtures with 8-1/4”
projection and 17-1/4” from center of globe to globe.
(d) Pilgrim Pathway light style shall be Elm Street style B780R as
manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting.
(e) Functional and aesthetic equivalents to the above referenced styles may
be approved at the discretion of the board of jurisdiction.
3. All other zones. Old Town A850 luminaire with metal halide ballast per Sternberg
Lighting Catalog, or functional and aesthetic equivalent.
F. Mounting height. See Article IV.
G. Illumination for Surface Parking. Parking lots shall be adequately lighted for both
motorists and pedestrians in accordance with Table 5.3
TABLE 5.3: MINIMUM ILLUMINATION FOR SURFACE PARKING
ACTIVITY TYPE
VEHICULAR
TRAFFIC
FOOTCANDLES
PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY
FOOTCANDLES
PEDESTRIAN
SECURITY
FOOTCANDLES
Low activity 0.5 0.2 0.5
Medium activity 1.0 0.5 1.5
High activity 1.5 0.9 2.5
1. Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk illumination, driveways
with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and ornamental lighting, shall be
shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow a determination of the
effects upon adjacent properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The
objectives of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects.
No light shall shine into building windows, nor onto streets and driveways so as
to interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements, the
intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and similar characteristics shall
be subject to site plan approval. Wall mounted fixtures are only permitted if
directed into a site and not positioned towards neighboring properties or public
streets.
2. Maximum Lighting Controls. The ratio of average illumination, measured in
footcandles, to minimum illumination, as required in Table 5.3 (Minimum
illumination for Surface Parking) shall not exceed 4 to 1. The maximum
illumination provided on any site shall not exceed the minimum illumination by
more than a ratio of 10 to 1.
EXAMPLE:
Minimum illumination required: 0.5 f.c.
Average to minimum ratio: (4 x 0.5) or 2.0 f.c.
Maximum to minimum ratio: (10 x 0.5) or 5.0 f.c.
F. Pedestrian Way Illumination. Minimum pedestrian way illumination shall be as required
in Table 5.4:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
217
TABLE 5.4: PEDESTRIAN WAY ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENTS
MIN. AVG.
LEVEL
AVG. LEVELS SPECIAL
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
Walkway classification Footcandles Mounting hts (9-15’) footcandles
Sidewalks (roadside) and Type A bikeways
Common areas 0.9 2.0
Intermediate areas 0.6 1.0
Residential areas 0.2 0.4
Sidewalks (distant from roadways) and Type B bikeways
Parks, walkways and bikepaths 0.5 0.6
Pedestrian tunnels 4.0 5.0
Pedestrian overpass 0.8 0.4
Pedestrian stairways 0.6 0.8
§ 512 MONUMENTATION
A. Major Subdivision. As part of a major subdivision, concrete monuments shall be installed
at all tract boundary corners and at all points of the right-of-way which establish a publicly
dedicated street. Such monuments shall be located between the sidewalk and the front
property line, where appropriate. A metal alloy pin of permanent character shall be
installed at all remaining lot corners of all approved lots.
B. Minor Subdivision. As part of a minor subdivision, metal alloy pins of a permanent
character shall be installed at all lot corners of all approved lots.
C. Performance Bonding of Monuments. All monuments and/or pins that are not installed at
the time of subdivision approval shall be bonded in accordance with Article IX of this
Ordinance.
§ 513 OPEN SPACE
A. Public Ownership. Common open space shall remain in private ownership, unless the
appropriate board of jurisdiction determines that public ownership is desirable and unless
the subdivider agrees to the necessary land donation, in which case ownership shall be
in the Township of Neptune, or in such other public body as shall be deemed appropriate,
provided that the Township or such other public body shall approve such public
ownership. Determination as to public ownership shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. The need for public open space or recreational facilities in the areas determined
by the Township Master Plan.
2. The potential for an open space connection between two (2) public open space
areas;
3. The desirability of public access due to the peculiar physical characteristics of the
area which make it suitable for public open space uses not otherwise available in
that area;
4. Soil or vegetation characteristics of the area that provide a desirable public
wildlife refuge;
B. Design standards.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
218
1. Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities
in accordance with National Recreation Association standards to serve the
residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to
preserve important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas.
2. Stormwater detention facilities are not considered as part of the required open
space, unless the approving agency finds that such a facility is designed to also
serve as an open space amenity.
3. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
4. Direct access shall be provided to open space from a residential development.
Where feasible, facilities shall be designed to facilitate access to and from other
proximate residential areas.
5. Passive recreational activities within undeveloped open space may include, but
are not limited to, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, sitting areas and naturally
preserved areas. Active recreation facilities may include, but are not limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts and ball fields.
6. Facilities to be provided within a developed open space area shall include a tot
lot. The location of said tot lot shall not be proximate to any public or private
roadway or intersection, and shall be suitably fenced.
§ 514 PARKING LOT AND LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all site plan applications.
B. Design standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review any
development plan that involves the construction of a new parking lot or loading area or
repair of an existing parking lot or loading area.
1. Layout. All parking lots and loading areas shall be designed for the safety,
control, efficient movement and convenience of motor vehicle circulation within a
site. Traffic circulation shall be designed to minimize the use of aisles serving
parking areas as access drives. For all uses except single-family dwellings,
parking lots or individual spaces shall be prohibited within front yard areas. For
nonresidential uses, parking areas with more than twenty-five (25) spaces shall
have separate entrances and exits, where possible.
2. Parking lot location. A parking lot shall be located to the rear of a building and/or
the interior of the site where its visual impact to adjacent properties and the
public right-of-way can be minimized. No parking lot shall be located in a required
front yard.
3. Building setbacks. The minimum setbacks for buildings from driveways, parking
spaces and private streets within the site shall be ten (10) feet for nonresidential
developments. Standards relative to building setbacks from parking areas and
streets in residential development are at Section 516. The provisions of this
subsection are in addition to the yard setback requirements of Article IV, which
shall additionally be complied with.
4. Construction and repair specifications. All parking lots and loading areas shall be
constructed or repaired to specifications as approved by the Township Engineer.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
219
5. Striping and signage. Surface painted aisle, stall and directional striping and
directional and traffic safety signs shall be provided throughout the parking,
loading and circulation areas, pursuant to Article IV of this Chapter and in
accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
6. Location. See Article IV.
7. Landscaping. See Section §509.
8. Parking space dimensions. The following parking space sizes shall apply to all
parking areas:
(a) Residential uses: 9’ x 18’
(b) Office and industrial uses: 9’ x 18’
(c) Government and institutional uses: 9’ x 18’
(d) Retail uses utilizing shopping carts: 9.5’ x 18’
(e) Other retail uses: 9’ x 18’
(f) Handicapped van accessible: 18’ x 18’
(Van accessible spaces shall be striped with
an 8’ wide loading area. Other handicapped
spaces with a 5’ wide loading area. Paired
handicapped spaces may share a loading area.)
(g) Other handicapped spaces: 13’ x 18’
(h) Parallel spaces: 9’ x 23’
(i) Bus spaces: 10’ x 40’
(j) Tractor trailer: 12’ x 60’
9. Aisle dimensions. Parking lot aisles shall measure as follows:
TABLE 5.5: PARKING AISLE WIDTHS
Angle of Parking
Stall (degrees)
Width of One-Way
Traffic Aisle (FT)
Width of Two-Way
Traffic Aisle (FT)
0 (parallel) 12 18
30 12 Not permitted
45 13 Not permitted
60 18 Not permitted
90 (perpendicular) 22 24
10. Handicapped parking spaces. The number, location, size and marking of
handicapped parking spaces shall be pursuant to the requirements specified in
N.J.S.A. 55 32-12. However, where handicapped accessible or adaptable
dwelling units are provided in accordance with Multifamily Development pursuant
to this Article, a minimum of one handicapped parking space shall be provided in
a location within closest proximity to such dwelling unit.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
220
§ 515 REFUSE AND RECYCLING AREAS
All uses must provide an area used for refuse and recyclable disposal collection. All containers, bins,
dumpsters and/or storage facilities shall be designed to reduce discernible odors and contain such within
the storage facility area. Refuse and recycling areas shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Non-residential uses.
1. All non-residential refuse and recyclable disposal collection areas shall be
suitably buffered and screened to minimize the impacts of noise, odors, disposal
and collection activities and views of collection bins and dumpsters. Buffering
and screening shall minimize such impacts both from within the site itself, as well
as from adjacent and nearby properties and public rights-of-way. Buffering shall
consist of a minimum four (4) foot wide area surrounding all sides of such facility
exposed to view. If such facility is located on a site adjacent to a residential use
or zone, such buffering shall consist of a minimum ten (10) foot area surrounding
all sides of such facility exposed to view. Screening shall consist of a minimum
six (6) foot-high masonry wall, solid wooden fence or accessory building with
gates or doors and ramped access to facilitate the movement of bins or
dumpsters. The base of such screen shall be planted with a minimum four (4)
foot high evergreen hedge along the sides and rear of same.
2. All storage facilities shall be located in proximity to one another or may be
combined in a single common facility. Such facilities shall be centrally located
and convenient for the users of the site. Designated recyclable storage facilities
may be located inside a building. Such facilities shall not be located as to be
visual focal points in courtyards or parking lots. Where located in a parking lot,
such facilities shall not be permitted to be placed on the paved surface of the
parking lot and shall be placed on a curbed area set back a minimum of two (2)
feet from the curb edge of such parking lot. No refuse and recycling area may be
located within a required principal building setback area.
3. Adequate pedestrian and service vehicle access shall be provided to all storage
facilities. Such vehicular access shall accommodate the type of service vehicles
used for the collection of solid waste and designated recyclable materials.
4. The size and capacity of all storage facilities shall be based on the size and
capacity of containers, bins and/or dumpsters utilized, frequency of pickup and
projected generation rates of users of the site.
5. All non-residential uses shall be designed to have a temporary designated refuse
and recyclable storage area located within the building occupied by such use.
Such storage area may be located anywhere within the interior of a building,
including basements, storage closets or attached garages, but shall not be
situated in a hallway or corridor necessary for internal circulation or emergency
access. Such area shall be designed to accommodate the average accumulated
volume of designated recyclables and refuse per occupant per period of
collection and any necessary storage equipment.
B. Residential uses.
1. All dwelling units shall be designed to have a temporary designated recyclable
and refuse storage area located either within the interior of such unit in the
kitchen, laundry room, basement or storage closet or in an attached garage or
private rear yard area.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
221
2. Such area shall be designed to accommodate the average accumulated volume
of designated recyclables and refuse per dwelling unit per period of collection
and any necessary storage equipment. The minimum size of such storage area
shall be six (6) square feet.
§ 516 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
The following regulations shall apply to residential development:
A. Elevation. No dwelling unit shall be located below grade, whether fully or partially.
B. Single-family development. The following look-a-like provisions/elevation standards shall be
used to prepare and review any new single-family residential development. The purpose of
this section is to encourage construction in character with the existing residential
neighborhood and to encourage construction that is diverse and aesthetically pleasing.
1. No dwelling unit shall hereafter be constructed in any residential zone which shall
be like or substantially like any neighboring dwelling as hereinafter defined, in
more than two of the following six respects:
(a) height of the main roof ridge above the elevation of the first floor;
(b) length of the main roof ridge;
(c) width between outside walls at the ends of the dwelling under the main
roof perpendicular to the length thereof;
(d) relative location with respect to each other of garage, if attached, porch,
if any, and the remainder of the dwelling in the front elevation;
(e) relative location of windows in the front elevation;
(f) the materials used in the front elevation.
2. For sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) above, dwellings shall be deemed to be
like each other in any dimension in which the difference between them is not
more than six (6) feet .
3. For sub-paragraph (e) above, dwellings shall be deemed to be like each other in
any dimension in which the difference between them is not more than three (3)
feet.
4. For sub-paragraph (f) above, dwellings shall be deemed to be like each other if
the difference between materials used is not more than thirty-five percent (35%)
of the facade area.
5. Dwellings between which the only difference in relative location of elements is
end to end or side-to-side reversal of elements shall be deemed to be like each
other in relative location of such elements.
6. For the purposes of this section, a neighboring dwelling, as stated above is
defined as any principal dwelling on any lot which is located as follows in relation
to the subject lot:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
222
(a) Any lot which is within one-hundred (100) feet, or three (3) lots,
whichever is greater, and along the same side of the street as the
subject lot, without regard to intervening street lines.
(b) Any lot, which is directly across said street from the subject lot or from a
lot referenced in the above paragraph.
7. The main entrance into all single-family detached residential dwellings shall be
located within the front elevation of all residential structures. Side yard main
entrances are prohibited. Main entrances of structures on corner lots may be
from either elevation facing the street. No utility meters or other utilitarian
improvements that detract from the appearance of the front elevation shall be
located on the front elevation of a residential structure.
C. Apartment and townhouse development standards. The following standards shall be
used to review apartment or townhouse development. For the purpose of this
Subsection, assisted living facilities shall not be considered residential development.
1. Dwelling unit size. Minimum dwelling unit floor areas based on multi-family
dwelling unit type shall be as follows:
TABLE 5.6: MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT SIZE
DWELLING UNIT TYPE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA (in square
feet)
Studio/Efficiency
Apartment 500 S.F.
One (1) Bedroom
Apartments 850 S.F.
Two (2) Bedroom
Apartments 1,000 S.F.
Apartments with three (3)
or more bedrooms
1,150 S.F. + 150 S.F. per
additional bedroom
2. Building type mix. In developments of twenty-five (25) or more dwelling units, the
mix of building types shall be such that not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total number of dwelling units shall be located in the same type of building. In
developments of fifty (50) or more dwelling units, the mix of building types shall
be such that not more than forty percent (40%) of the total number of dwelling
units shall be located in the same type of a building. The building type mix for
each section or phase of a development plan need not reflect the building type
mix prescribed for the entire development. In such cases, the Board shall
require, as a condition of final approval on a particular phase or section of a
development plan, the provision that future phases or sections shall bring the
building type mix into conformance with the above standards.
3. Dwelling unit mix. In developments of twenty-five (25) or more dwelling units, the
mix of dwelling units shall be such that not more than seventy-five (75) percent of
the total number of dwelling units shall have the same number of bedrooms. The
dwelling unit mix for each section or phase of a development plan need not
reflect the building type mix and dwelling unit mix prescribed for the entire
development. In such cases, the Board shall require, as a condition of final
approval on a particular phase or section of a development plan, the provision
that future phases or sections shall bring the dwelling unit mix into conformance
with the above standards.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
223
4. Number of dwelling units per building. No more than eight (8) dwelling units may
be contained in a single Townhouse structure. The number of units in a
multifamily building shall be limited by height and bulk requirements.
5. Distance between buildings. Separation of buildings within a multiple-family
residential development shall be based on spacing relationships corresponding
to a multiplier of the highest single wall height of the buildings involved, as
measured from ground level to the height of the top of the cornice or from ground
level to the height of the juncture of the wall plane and the roof eaves, as follows:
TABLE 5.7: BUILDING SPACING REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIFAMILY USES
BUILDING WALL RELATIONSHIP MULTIPLIER MIN. SPACING
Front wall to front wall 1.5 30 feet
Front wall to side wall 1.5 30 feet
Rear wall to rear wall 1.25 25 feet
Rear wall to side wall 0.75 20 feet
Side wall to side wall 0.75 20 feet
Building Spacing Formula:
Wall height x Multiplier = Distance of separation between buildings.
NOTE: The minimum spacing standards listed above are generally intended for average
two-story buildings and, therefore, may need to be adjusted for buildings of other heights.
In addition, this building spacing formula shall only determine the spacing of buildings
within the multiple-building development property.
6. Building setbacks. Buildings in a multifamily development shall be set back at least fifteen (15)
feet from all parking areas. Buildings shall be setback at least twenty-five (25) feet from
driveways, and private or public streets. No building shall be located within the principal setback
area for the applicable zone district.
7. Dwelling unit privacy. Adjacent dwelling units in the same building shall be adjoined in such a
manner as to provide maximum soundproofing and privacy between such units.
8. Site layout. The development plan shall locate buildings, parking areas and open
space in an arrangement that promotes the enjoyment of dwelling units, other onsite
facilities and the community as a whole by residents of the development.
Dwelling units and buildings shall be oriented towards the public street and
interior open spaces and away from parking lots and garages. Parking lots and
garages shall be prohibited from being located in the front yard area of any
dwelling unit. Front wall to rear wall building orientations are discouraged.
9. Individuality of dwelling units and buildings. In order to provide attractiveness,
identity and individuality to dwelling units, buildings and complexes of buildings
within the entire development and to avoid the monotonous repetition of design
elements and its undesirable visual effects, the following design standards shall
be utilized:
(a) varying dwelling unit widths, staggering dwelling unit setbacks and
altering building heights and rooflines;
(b) varying architectural embellishments to roofs between dwelling units,
buildings or complexes of buildings including roof elements such as
dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys and similar elements, provided
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
224
that such are architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors
and details of the building;
(c) varying the front entrance definition and articulation between dwelling
units, buildings or complexes of buildings, provided that such are
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of
the building.
10. The same building design for multi-family dwellings shall not be utilized on more
than two adjacent lots, nor within 200 feet of another building of the same design.
11. Entrance lighting. A minimum of one low-wattage incandescent light fixture shall
be provided outside each exterior entrance to a dwelling unit or building.
12. Fire escapes. Buildings containing dwelling units located above the second story
and requiring a second means of egress pursuant to the Uniform Construction
Code shall not utilize an attached external fire escape as one of the required
means of egress.
13. Dwelling unit storage space. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a
completely enclosed, covered storage space consisting of a minimum of 350
cubic feet. Such storage area shall be exclusive of normal interior closets and
may either be contained within the dwelling unit or building, attached thereto or
located separately.
14. Dwelling unit private open space. All dwelling units shall have a private open
space area as follows:
(a) Each dwelling unit located on a ground floor level shall be provided with
a private rear yard consisting of a minimum area of two-hundred (200)
square feet. Such private rear yard shall be enclosed by means of a six
(6) foot high wooden fence or screen, brick wall, evergreen hedge or
some combination of the same, which shall provide adequate screening
from all other neighboring dwelling units and private rear yards,
walkways, common recreational facilities, parking lots, driveways and
streets. A minimum of one low-wattage incandescent light fixture shall
be provided to light such area.
(b) Each dwelling unit located above the ground floor level shall be provided
with a private outdoor patio or balcony area consisting of a minimum of
sixty-four (64) square feet. The minimum length of any individual
dimension of such area shall not be less than six feet. This area shall be
located or recessed inside the outer wall plane of the building on which it
is located. A minimum of one (1) low wattage incandescent light fixture
shall be provided to light such area.
15. Ground floor elevations. The ground floor level of each dwelling unit shall be
elevated above grade, except for dwelling units designed for senior citizens or
the handicapped. The minimum height of such elevation shall be twenty (20)
inches at the front entrance.
16. Common open space. Active and passive recreational areas and other public
and/or semipublic open space, such as courtyards, plazas, alleys and pedestrian
walkways, shall be designed to promote use and enjoyment by residents of the
development. Such areas shall be designed to utilize natural features of the site,
including existing vegetation, where possible, and shall be extensively
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
225
landscaped with a wide variety of plant materials. Where such areas are
enclosed by buildings, such as courtyards and plazas, they shall be designed to
be architecturally formal and geometrically logical, however, this shall not
preclude the use of curvilinear designs for walkways or landscaped areas.
17. Yard area definition. The front and side yards of a dwelling unit or building
fronting on a street, driveway or parking lot shall be defined with a three (3) foot
high wooden picket type fence, wrought iron fence, brick wall, evergreen hedge
or some combination of the above.
18. Type of lighting source. Low-wattage incandescent lamps shall be used along all
sidewalks, walkways, courtyards and plazas and on any building or unit. Parking
lot lighting shall be incandescent or another light source compatible with the
same.
19. Cable television utility. All dwelling units shall be provided with such facilities for
potential linkage to the Township's cable television utility.
20. Maintenance equipment storage. An accessory building shall be provided for the
storage of maintenance equipment, if such is to be stored on-site. Such
accessory building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials,
colors and details of the principal buildings.
21. Common entrances. Apartment buildings with common entrances, lobbies,
elevators and/or stairwells shall be designed to promote safety and security of
residents and visitors using such areas.
22. Window. Windows should be provided at all building facades in order to avoid
monotonous, blank walls.
§ 517 RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
A. Applicability. The Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21 et
seq. shall govern any site improvements carried out, or intended or required to be carried
out, in connection with any application for residential subdivision, site plan approval, or
variance before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, or in connection with
any other residential development approval required or issued by the Township or any
agency thereof, except as provided for herein.
B. Special area standards.
1. Parking. Standards set forth by the RSIS at N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14 relative to the
number of required parking spaces shall not apply to the designated Ocean
Grove Historic District per N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.5(b)(3)(4). Development in the Ocean
Grove Historic District shall conform to the requirements set forth in (§412.17
Parking Requirements).
2. Sidewalk widths. Standards set forth by the RSIS at N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.5(f) relative
to sidewalk widths shall not apply to the designated Ocean Grove Historic District
per N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.5(b)(3)(4). Development in the Ocean Grove Historic District
shall conform to the requirements set forth in (§507 Historic district streetscape
design standards).
C. Compliance. Construction of all residential improvements not regulated by the RSIS and
not regulated by §412 Parking Requirements shall conform to the technical requirements
of the Township Engineer, and any technical requirements specified in this Chapter.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
226
§ 518 SECURITY GRILLES AND ROLL-UP DOORS
A. Purpose. Security grilles and doors found to be necessary in certain situations are an
important building facade element that should be given thoughtful consideration. Security
grilles and doors devoted to any retail sales or service establishment must be installed in
a manner that preserves full visual access to a building’s unique design elements.
B. Non-residential uses. Security grilles and doors designed in accordance with standards
set forth in Subsection C may be installed by non-residential uses only. No security grille
or door may be installed in a historic zone district.
C. Design standards. Security grilles and roll-up doors shall be designed according to the
following standards (see also Appendix G):
1. Solid “rolling service doors” fabricated of interlocking slats or panels with no
openings are extremely detrimental to an attractive streetscape and should be
avoided.
2. If a security grille is absolutely necessary, it should be a least 60% non-solid.
The standard curtain pattern is a straight lattice design with horizontal rods at 2
inches on center and vertical links at 9 inches on center. For added visual
interest, a staggered “brick pattern” with 4-½ inch horizontal spacing may be
preferable.
3. The security grille coil, whether side- or overhead-mounted, should never be
attached to the exterior of the building. When the security grille is in the closed
position it should be located on the interior side of the windows so as not to
degrade the architectural design features along the streetscape.
4. Where headroom is limited a folding or accordion grille may be installed in lieu of
the typical roll-up type. Any sliding type security grille must also be non-solid and
situated on the interior side of the windows.
5. An emergency egress feature should always be incorporated into the design and
installation of any security grille.
§ 519 SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
A. Applicability. This subsection shall apply to non-residential development in all portions of
the Township except for the HD-B-1 historic zone district. For sidewalk, curb and other
streetscape design standards in the HD-B-1 historic zone district, see §507 Historic
District Streetscape.
B. Sidewalks. The following section provides standards for sidewalk placement and
minimum sidewalk widths. The Board of Jurisdiction may require wider sidewalk widths
where anticipated pedestrian traffic volumes would necessitate additional capacity.
Calculations of required sidewalk widths that differ from the standards as set forth herein
shall be made using the Highway Capacity Manual, latest edition, published by the
Transportation Research Board.
1. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street for all major arterials,
minor arterial roads, collector roads and local roads in association with nonresidential
development.
2. All lots shall have private walkway access to a public sidewalk in the right-of-way.
Such access shall be designed for the safety, control, efficient movement,
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
227
convenience and encouragement of pedestrian traffic into and out of the site and
to promote pedestrian circulation generally within the Township.
3. In general, sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, parallel to the street
unless an exception has been permitted to preserve topographical or natural
features, or to provide visual interest, or unless the applicant shows that an
alternative pedestrian system provides equally safe and convenient circulation.
Sidewalks may be placed in a public access easement adjoining the right-of-way
in order to provide sufficient room for various functions within the right-of-way, as
follows:
(a) In commercial areas, the sidewalk area may abut the curb incorporating
additional width for street furniture such as bus stops and shelters,
planters, signage, benches, street tree planting holes and grates,
newspaper vending machines, traffic control devices, light poles and
similar items, provided that such items may not be set back more than
four (4) from the curbline. A continuous clear pedestrian passageway of
seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet in width is to be maintained when such
items are utilized.
(b) In addition to required sidewalks along streets, commercial
developments shall provide internal sidewalks creating convenient
linkages between the commercial development and all surrounding
streets, including residential streets. Internal sidewalks shall be provided
linking such commercial development to adjoining non-residential
developments. Cross-access easements shall be provided for such
pedestrian linkages.
4. Walkways shall be located on a site to facilitate pedestrian access between the
public sidewalk, buildings, parking lots and other facilities and to provide for
pedestrian circulation generally within a site. Where walkways abut the ends of
parking spaces and wheel stops are not provided, the minimum width of such
walkways shall be a minimum of five feet in order to provide for the front ends of
vehicles to overhang onto such walkways with appropriate space remaining for
the passage of pedestrians.
5. In commercial or industrial developments, sidewalks shall be provided to link
streets, buildings within a complex, and on-site activities such as parking and
recreational areas. Such sidewalks shall be linked to public sidewalks within the
right-of-way.
6. The location and width of sidewalks shall be consistent with the location and
width of existing sidewalks adjacent to or near the site to be developed, but in no
case shall be less than the standards set forth below. The following sidewalk
widths for office, governmental, educational and health care uses shall be
required:
(a) Along non-residential streets separated
from the curb by at least 5 feet: 4 feet
(b) Along non-residential streets adjacent to
the curb: 6 feet
(c) Between a main entrance and its closest
parking: 8 feet
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
228
(d) Where vehicles overhang the sidewalk: 6 feet
(e) Within parking areas: 4 feet
(f) Between buildings: 6 feet
7. The following sidewalk widths for retail development shall be required:
(a) Along non-residential streets separated
from the curb by at least 5 feet: 6 feet
(b) Along non-residential streets adjacent to
the curb: 8 feet
(c) Between a main building entrance and its closest
parking: 10 feet*
(d) Where vehicles overhang the sidewalk: 6 feet
(e) Within parking areas: 4 feet
(f) Between buildings: 6 feet
*This width may be reduced to six (6) feet provided an area at least four (4) feet
in width is provided at all building foundations for landscaping.
6. Handicapped passage. Sidewalks and walkways less than six (6) feet in width
shall provide widened areas at least every 200 lineal feet sufficient to permit the
passage of two wheelchairs in opposite directions. The widened area shall be at
least six (6) feet wide. In general, this requirement may be met through the
intersection of driveway's paved surfaces with sidewalks.
7. Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to the Engineering
Department Standard Details established by the municipality.
8. All sidewalk and drive apron construction shall be in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (1989) and amendments thereto.
9. The concrete to be used for sidewalks and drive aprons shall be Class 'B' 4,000
p.s.i. air entrained. The sidewalks and drive aprons may require a crushed stone
foundation for unusual loads or soil conditions if directed by the Municipal
Engineer. The following minimum thickness shall apply:
(a) Sidewalks shall be a minimum thickness of four (4) inches
(b) Drive aprons and sidewalks at drive aprons shall have a minimum
thickness of six (6) inches and they shall have welded wire fabric
reinforcement mat not less than #6 x #6 on a 6 inch by 6 inch grid
pattern.
10. Premolded bituminous expansion joint material shall be installed every 20 feet
and half depth contraction joints installed every 4 feet.
11. Monolithic curb and drive apron construction shall be prohibited.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
229
B. Bikeways.
1. Separate bicycle lanes and paths shall be required as envisioned by the
Township’s Master Plan.
2. Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside lane of a roadway,
adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle
lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles.
Lanes shall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or
curbs shall not be used. Bicycle lanes shall be considered Type A bikeways and
all other bikeways Type B.
3. Bikeways shall be constructed in accordance with the bicycle facility design
guidelines published by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
C. Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking areas shall be installed wherever significant attractors
are established, including, but not limited to food stores, educational uses, and shopping
centers. The number of spaces for bicycles shall equal at least 10% of the total required
number of parking spaces for the first 100 spaces and 2% thereafter. Bicycle parking
areas shall have a minimum capacity of six (6) bicycles and shall be designed to provide
secure anchoring for locking devices. If located in motorized vehicle parking lots, bicycle
parking shall be primarily located in the one- third of the parking area closest to the
building. If located on sidewalks, the parking should be adjacent to entrances. Bicycle
parking shall be located outside of travel ways for motorized vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 520 SIGHT TRIANGLE
A. On all corner lots in all zones except Historic Zone Districts, there shall be an
unobstructed sight triangle formed by measuring twenty-five (25) feet along each curb
line from the point of intersecting curb lines at such corner and connecting such points to
form a triangular area. Sight triangles within Ocean Grove Historic Zone Districts shall be
formed by measuring fifteen feet (15’) along each curb line from the point of intersecting
curb lines at such corner and connecting such points to form a triangular area.
B. No fences of any type may be erected within the sight triangle. A sight triangle shall
contain no structures, signs, plantings or any other vision obstructing objects which are
greater than thirty-six inches (36”) inches in height as measured from the curb level at the
point of intersecting street lines. Trees shall be permitted whose branches are trimmed
away to a height of at least eight (8) feet above the curb level as measured from the point
of intersecting street lines.
C. Nothing herein shall permit the parking or storage of any vehicle on a corner lot property,
which obstructs, impairs or obscures vision of motor vehicle traffic at an intersection, as
determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 521 SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all site plan applications.
B. Development standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review
any site plan
1. Vehicular access. No public or private roadway shall be located within twentyfive
(25) feet of an existing adjacent residential use or district, except in such
cases where the Board determines that it shall be necessary for an existing or
future roadway connection.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
230
2. Building location. A building shall be located to front towards and relate to a
public street, both functionally and visually. In a multiple-building development,
buildings located on the interior of a site shall front towards and relate to one
another, both functionally and visually. To the greatest extent possible, the
development shall divide proposed buildings into smaller, individualized
groupings, utilizing such features as courtyards, quadrangles and alleys that
encourage pedestrian activity and incidental social interaction among users.
Spatial relationships between buildings shall be geometrically logical and
architecturally formal. No building shall be oriented to front toward a parking lot.
All buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access.
3. Pedestrian circulation. A barrier-free walkway system shall be provided to allow
pedestrian access to a building or use from both a parking lot within the site and
from the Township sidewalk system. Such walkway system shall promote
pedestrian activity both within the site itself and throughout the community by its
integration with the Township sidewalk system. Walkways shall be separate
from motor vehicle circulation to the greatest extent possible and shall provide a
pleasant route for users that will promote enjoyment of the site and encourage
incidental social interaction among pedestrians
4. Decorative lampposts. The exterior of a site with greater than 100 feet of street
frontage shall provide decorative lampposts approximately 10 feet to 12 feet
high, spaced at intervals of approximately 40 feet to 60 feet along or near all
street lines and driveways. Walkways in the interior of a site shall have
decorative lampposts approximately 10 feet to 12 feet high, spaced at intervals of
approximately 30 feet to 40 feet. The style, size, color and type of light source of
such lampposts shall be determined by the Board based on existing fixtures
located in other similar type developments in the Township. Lighting levels from
such fixtures shall be provided pursuant to Section 511.
5. Building spacing. Separation of buildings in a multiple-building development
shall be based on spacing relationships corresponding to a multiplier of the
highest single wall height of the buildings involved, as measured from ground
level to the height of the top of the cornice or from ground level to the height of
the juncture of the wall plane and the roof eaves, as follows:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
231
TABLE 5.8: BUILDING SPACING REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENTS
Formula: Wall height x Multiplier = Distance of separation between buildings
Building Wall Relationship Multiplier Minimum
Spacing
Front wall to front wall 1.5 30’
Front wall to rear wall 2.0 40’
Front wall to side wall 1.5 30’
Front wall to windowless side wall 1.5 30’
Rear wall to rear wall 2.0 40’
Rear wall to side wall 2.0 40’
Rear wall to windowless side wall 1.5 30’
Side wall to side wall 1.25 25’
Side wall to windowless side wall 0.75 15’
Windowless side wall to windowless
side wall
0.75 15’
NOTES: (1) The minimum spacing standards listed above are generally intended for
average two-story buildings and, therefore, may need to be adjusted for buildings of other
heights (2) Spacing formulas for multifamily development are set forth in §Section 516.
§ 522 STREETS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all applications for development.
B. Design standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare and review any
development plan that involves the construction of a new street or repair of an existing
street:
1. Lot access. All lots shall have frontage on and driveway access to a public
street, except that lots in PUD's may have access from a private street, if
specifically approved by the Board, pursuant to §SubSection C Private Streets
below. In no instance shall access to a nonresidential use be permitted through
or across a lot located in a residential district
2. Construction and repair specifications. All streets shall meet the construction
specifications as set forth in applicable Township ordinances or as approved by
the Township Engineer. This shall also apply to recommendations by the
Township Engineer regarding the maintenance, repair or upgrading of existing
streets located in that portion of the public right-of-way that directly abuts the lot
to be developed.
3. Street layout. Streets shall be designed to provide for motor vehicle traffic
circulation that is safe, controllable, efficient and convenient. The layout of
streets shall be planned to continue the street system pattern of the surrounding
neighborhood and shall provide for the extension of existing streets, where
applicable. Streets shall be located so as to discourage through traffic within
residential neighborhoods. The location of streets shall be such as to provide for
the extension of existing streets, where applicable.
4. Culs-de-sac. Where one end of a street terminates in a dead-end, a cul-de-sac
shall be provided. The maximum length of a street ending in a cul-de-sac shall
be 600 feet from the nearest intersection. A vehicular turnaround shall be
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
232
provided at the terminus of the cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of forty (40) feet
at the curbline. For public streets, an additional ten-foot-wide utility and planting
strip shall be provided around the entire cul-de-sac for a minimum total right-ofway
radius of fifty (50) feet.
5. Street names and address numbers. A street name shall not conflict with or be
mistaken for an existing street name in the Township unless the street is a logical
extension of an existing street. All street names, whether for a public or private
street, shall be approved by resolution of the Township Committee. The street
address numbering system shall be as approved by the Township Clerk.
6. Street name signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections
within or abutting the development. Street signs shall identify all cross streets at
all intersections. The type, style and location of such signs shall be as approved
by the Township Engineer.
C. Private streets. Where approved as part of a PUD, private streets may be permitted by
the Board with the following conditions:
1. Design standards. The design of a private street shall meet all other applicable
design standards of this article for a public street.
2. Access control. A development plan involving access to a private street shall not
be approved unless the control and disposal of said land controlling access has
been placed with the Township or unless a protective deed restriction has been
approved by the Board
3. Maintenance. The applicant shall establish, prior to final approval or as a
condition thereof, an entity responsible for maintaining such private street for
which the Board shall require a developer's agreement. This agreement shall
include the Township's right to enter the premises to make repairs and/or
conduct other necessary maintenance. The cost for such repairs and/or
maintenance by the Township shall be paid by the property owner(s) and shall
include all legal, administrative, clerical, planning, engineering, repair and
maintenance costs associated with such work.
D. Public streets. All public streets shall be located in a public right-of-way dedicated to the
Township having a minimum width of fifty (50) feet, unless another width is specifically
recommended in an adopted element of the Master Plan or on the adopted Official Map
or Tax Map of the Township. Developments that adjoin or include existing public streets
that do not conform to the above required right-of-way widths shall dedicate the required
additional width along one or both sides of said street. If development is proposed along
one side of the street only, then half of the required extra width shall be dedicated. The
approval of any map or plat delineating streets by the governing body of the Township
shall in no way be construed as an acceptance of any street indicated thereon.
§ 523 STREET TREES
A. Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all public and private streets in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. Trees shall be spaced evenly along the
street in a location either between the curb and sidewalk or at a point fifteen (15) feet
behind the curbline (see Appendix H). In commercial areas with wider sidewalks that
extend to the curb, trees shall be placed in tree wells with root guard systems. Such tree
wells shall have sufficient soil volume to support tree growth as follows:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
233
Tree Size at Maturity (Height in feet)
Soil Volume (in cubic feet)
Large trees (45’+) 200
Medium-sized trees (30’-45’) 150
Areas under sidewalks may be used to meet the soil volume requirement provided no
more than 50% of the volume is located under such hard paving.
B. Spacing. Trees specified in the Table of Recommended Large Street Trees shall be
planted at a minimum interval of thirty-five (35) feet along all streets. Trees specified in
the Table of Recommended Medium Street Trees shall be planted at a minimum interval
of thirty (30) along all streets. Trees may be planted closer together in order to avoid
interference with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, and street lights.
C. Minimum planting size. All street trees shall have a minimum caliper of 3-1/2” at the time
of planting.
D. Street tree type. Tree type may vary depending on overall effect desired but as a general
rule, all trees shall be large deciduous trees except as needed to achieve special effects.
Tree selection shall be approved by the Board in accordance with the Neptune Township
Shade Tree Commission Tree Planting Guide. Alternate selections may be approved at
the discretion of the Board.
E. Planting Specifications. Street trees shall be substantially uniform in size and shape, and
have straight trunks. Trees shall be properly planted and staked in accordance with the
Neptune Township Engineering Standards. Provision shall be made by the developer for
regular watering and maintenance until they are established. Dead or dying trees shall
be replaced by the developer during the next suitable planting season.
§ 524 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all subdivision applications
B. Standards. The following standards shall be used to prepare any development plan for a
subdivision:
1. Blocks. The length, width and area of blocks created within bounding roads
creating blocks shall be such as to accommodate the lot areas and dimensions
required by Article IV of this Chapter for the specific district in which the block is
located and to provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
2. Lots. No lot shall be created on which development may be rendered
impracticable due to significant environmental or man-made constraints, such as
steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, flood hazard areas, drainage or other natural
conditions or lack of sewer capacity, utility service, vehicular access or other
man-made conditions. Where such conditions occur, the affected land shall be
incorporated into the adjoining lots or contiguous open space. Where there are
unanswered questions as to the suitability of a lot for its intended use due to any
of the above referenced factors or similar circumstances, the Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such a lot.
3. Lot orientation. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and
radial to curved street lines, wherever practical. Flag, through, and reverse
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
234
frontage lots are discouraged.
4. Frontage. To the greatest extent possible, lot frontage shall not be less than the
required lot width. For detached single-family residential development only, a
seventy-five (75) percent reduction in lot frontage may be permitted, provided the
required lot width is met at the front setback line, and provided all other bulk
requirements for the particular lot are met.
5. Existing vegetation. To the greatest extent possible, significant existing
vegetation in good health and condition shall be preserved. Subdivision designs
should preserving existing stands of trees, as well as and tall shrubs and
hedgerows along or near lot lines. Subdivisions shall be subject to the
regulations set forth in (§Section 525 on Tree Preservation).
6. Conformance. Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a
building, any subdivision shall be executed in such a manner so as to not create
or exacerbate any violation of the requirements of this Ordinance with respect to
the existing building and all yard, setback, coverage, buffers and open space in
connection therewith. All resulting lots shall have dimensions consistent with the
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
§ 525 TREE REMOVAL AND TREE CUTTING
A. Purpose. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled, and excessive destruction, as well as the removal
and cutting of trees on lots and tracts of land within the Township, may cause :
1. Increased drainage control cost;
2. Increased soil erosion and sedimentation;
3. Decreased fertility of the soil;
4. Degradation of water resources;
5. Decreased groundwater-recharge;
6. Increased buildup of atmospheric carbon;
7. The establishment of a heat island effect;
8. Increased dust and pollution;
The singular or cumulative effect of any of the foregoing could adversely impact the
character of the Township, decrease property values, render the land unfit and unsuitable
for its most appropriate use and negatively affect the health, safety and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the Township. The Township desires to regulate and control
indiscriminate and excessive cutting of trees within the Township. The Township strives
to preserve the maximum possible number of trees in the course of development of a site
as well as protect larger, older specimens of trees. Additionally, the Township seeks to
encourage innovative design and grading, promote the preservation of existing trees and
provide a plan for replacement of trees. It is recognized that there is a strong relationship
between the integrity of the Township's water resources, development on steep slopes,
tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management and the general use of the land
resources. Therefore, the Township finds that the appropriate management of these
resources is an important health, safety and general welfare concern.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
235
B. Establishment of conservation officer. There shall be appointed and designated, an
official whose formal title shall be that of Zoning Officer or Designee of the Township of
Neptune. This official shall be charged with the inspection of sites upon which there is an
application for site plan approval or for subdivision approval in regard to the provisions of
this Section, and with inspection and enforcement of the tree removal and protection
requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Cutting or removal restricted. Subject to the exemptions set forth, no person shall cut or
remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any tree with a diameter at point of measurement
(DPM) of four (4) inches or greater upon any lands within the Township, unless the
cutting or removal is accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Tree removal.
1. Permit required.
(a) No person shall remove or destroy or cause to be or allow to be re-moved or
destroyed any-tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit. Tree
removal permits shall be issued by the Zoning Officer or designee. A permit
is required for the removal of all trees of four (4) inch caliper or larger.
(b) Existing single family residential property shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Ordinance, provided that said homeowner is clearing
one acre or less of area.
2. Permit application. Applications for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer
and shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the property from which the tree(s)
are to be removed.
(c) Location on the property of the tree(s) to be removed, indicated on a plan as
follows:
(d) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to be removed, specifically by an assigned
number, and the caliper of each tree.
(e) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to remain, specifically by an assigned
number.
(f) The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line (i.e., where the four foot
high standard wood snow fence will be erected if required by the
Conservation Officer).
(g) For any clearing greater than (3) three acres, a representative five (5%)
percent of the wooded areas proposed to be cleared shall be inventoried.
The representative 5% shall be determined by agreement between the
Conservation Officer and the applicant. Where less than (3) three acres is
proposed to be cleared, all trees to be removed shall be inventoried.
(h) All trees greater than twenty (20) inches in caliper or any specimen trees (i.e.
any unique or remarkable tree or species) to be removed shall be indicated
on the plan. All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve such trees,
including but not limited to, if feasible, relocation of infrastructure, roadways,
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
236
and buildings. Removal of such trees shall require the specific written
approval of the Conservation Officer.
(i) Any other information which may reasonably be required to enable the
application to be properly evaluated.
3. Inspection required. The Conservation officer or designee shall inspect the trees
which are the subject of the application, the drainage incidental thereto, other
physical conditions existing on the property, and the impact upon adjacent
properties.
4. Zoning permit requirements. Where an application is made in connection with the
construction of a building or other land use improvement, no zoning permit shall
be issued until the tree removal permit has been granted, or an exemption
granted.
5. Replacement tree requirements.
(a) Existing residential property. If the application is on behalf of an existing
homeowners association and it is disclosed that the total number of trees to
be removed or destroyed an the property or open space area in question,
which are the subject of the application, is ten (10) or less, the permit shall be
issued without replacement trees required. Within a one year period, permits
may be used for removal of no more than ten (10) trees on the same
property without replacement trees being required. Any tree removal
occurring where a homeowners association exists must obtain formal
approval by the ruling body-of the association prior to obtaining a tree
removal permit.
(b) New residential development.
(i) If the application is for a new residential development
(subdivisions or site plans), up to fifty (50%) percent of the trees
may be removed for the sole purpose of clearing for the building
envelope, driveways and yard space for said building lots only
without replacement trees required.
(ii) For new residential development where tree removal is to occur
within public or private roadways or right-of-ways, drainage
facilities, parking areas or proposed open space, all trees are not
subject to replacement in accordance with this Ordinance.
(c) Agricultural operations. Agricultural operations are exempt from replacement
requirements providing the property in question is farmed for a minimum of
five (5) years after the date of clearing. An application must be submitted
prior to clearing. If the property is developed for any other use before the five
(5) years expire, the replacement obligation shall be enforced according to
the new use of the property.
(d) Nonresidential development. All commercial and industrial developments are
required to replace all trees removed in accordance with this Ordinance.
(e) Sparse land/major subdivisions and site plans. In regard to major
subdivisions and site plans, lots with tree cover less than thirty percent (30%)
shall be required to plant a minimum of 1.5 trees per 10,000 square feet or
less of open field. The owner/applicant shall have a qualified professional
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
237
calculate the total required trees to be distributed in accordance with a
landscape plan of the entire project, which shall be approved by the
Conservation Officer.
(f) Tree escrow fund established. Tree Escrow Fund shall be established by the
Township to promote environmental enhancement programs such as tree
planting, tree preservation, park development, landscaping and/or other
related projects on or within municipally owned properties or facilities. A
separate trust account shall be established for this purpose under the
supervision of the Township Treasurer. Appropriations from the Tree Escrow
Fund shall be authorized by the Mayor and Committee and shall be used for
a municipal purpose pursuant to the recommendations of the Zoning Officer,
the-Conservation Officer, the Township Planner and/or the Shade Tree
commission.
(g) Replacement tree value calculations.
(i) The replacement value of all trees to be removed where
replacement trees are required by this Ordinance shall be
calculated as follows:
TABLE 5.11: REPLACEMENT TREE CALCULATIONS
Replacement Trees
Trees to be
Removed: Caliper Number Caliper Dollar
Amount
Greater than 6” & up
to 12” 1 2-2-1/2” $240.00
Greater than 12” & up
to 18” 3 2-2-1/2” $660.00
Greater than 18” & up
to 24” 6 3” $ 2,440.00
Greater than 24” 8 3” $3,680.00
(ii) Dead and diseased trees are not counted as trees to be
replaced.
(iii) The applicant will receive a one and one-half for one
replacement tree credit should stands of eight (8) or more trees
greater than 4 inches in caliper be preserved within tree removal
areas.
(iv) All replacement trees shall be planted onsite unless one or more
of the following conditions exist: (A) The site in question can not
physically accommodate the total replacement amount of trees.
The applicant shall contribute an amount equal to the calculated
monetary value of the removed trees minus the value of the
proposed landscaping to the Township Tree Escrow Funds, as
required herein; (B) Due to unique site conditions, the
Conservation Officer and applicant agree in writing that the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
238
applicant shall 'make payment to the Township Tree Escrow
Fund based upon the above chart.
(h) Trees replaced according to the foregoing calculations shall not be construed
to satisfy other street tree and landscaping quantity requirements contained
elsewhere in this Chapter.
6. Fees. Upon application for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall be charged
the following fees:
(a) For new resident building lots: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree, up to a
maximum of three hundred ($300.00) dollars per lot.
(b) For all other properties: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree up to al
maximum of six hundred ($600.00) dollars for each acre.
7. Time Limit. All tree removal permits shall be limited to one (1) year from date of
issuance. If the approved tree removal has not occurred within one (1) year, a
new permit must be applied for and is subject to the payment of new fees.
E. Criteria for tree removal. The Conservation Officer may approve the removal of a tree if
any of the following criteria apply:
1. The tree is located in a parcel for which preliminary or final subdivision approval
has been obtained, and it unreasonably restricts the economic enjoyment of the
property and cannot be relocated on the site because of its age, type or size.
2. The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, interferes with existing
utility service, created an unsafe condition, or conflicts with any other ordinances
or regulations.
F. Enforcement. The requirements of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the Conservation
officer, who shall inspect or require adequate inspection of all sites upon which there is
an application for site plan or subdivision, all applicable tree removal or destruction and
soil removal incidental thereto, and for compliance with other pertinent conditions of
approval from the Planning Board/Zoning Board. Upon ascertaining a violation of this
Ordinance, the Conservation officer shall refer charges in the Municipal Court as
provided in this Article. In addition to other remedies, the Director of Code Enforcement
and Construction, Zoning Officer or other proper municipal official may institute any
appropriate legal action to prevent a continuing violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 526 UNDERGROUND WIRING
A. New electric, telephone, television and other communication facilities.
1. All electric, telephone, television and other communication facilities, both main
and service lines servicing new developments, shall be provided by underground
wiring within easements and dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in
accordance with the prevailing practices of the utility or other companies
providing such services.
2. Main electric, telephone, television and other communication facility lines
servicing new developments shall be located within a utility easement at least ten
(10) feet in width. Said easement shall be located parallel and adjacent to a
public or private right-of-way (see Appendix H). This shall facilitate the location
of street trees within a minimum five (5) foot wide tree lawn adjacent to the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
239
easement.
B. Existing supply lines and service connections. Lots that abut existing easements or
public rights-of-way, where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and
service connections have heretofore been installed, may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the
utilities’ overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the instance of an application
for development, an applicant shall demonstrate to the board of jurisdiction whether it is
possible to relocate existing overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines
underground.
§ 527 RETAINING WALLS
Design and maintenance of structural retaining walls shall be in accordance with the following standards:
A. The applicant shall submit a plan indicating how all segments of the structural retaining
wall, including any bench area located between two tiered wall sections, shall be
maintained.
B. The structural or civil engineer certifying the plans shall provide documentation as to the
feasibility for replacing the structural retaining wall at the end of its useful life, and method
of replacement by the property owner or homeowner's association.
C. The top of any structural retaining wall, or tiered wall, with a height of greater than four (4)
feet, shall be protected through the use of fencing with a minimum height of three (3) feet
or, in the alternative provided safety concerns are adequately addressed, densely planted
vegetation at 50% of the full growth screening.
D. The bench, or area between the top of one tier and the bottom (toe) of the next higher
tier, shall be properly graded to facilitate drainage.
E. A licensed landscape architect shall certify that landscaping installed in the vicinity of any
structural retaining wall is appropriate for the location and does not have a root system
that will impair the integrity of the retaining wall.
F. Structural retaining walls shall be constructed of permanent materials such as concrete,
pre-cast block, or masonry, and shall be designed to allow replacement of the wall at the
end of its useful life.
G. Landscape retaining walls shall be constructed of durable or preservative treated wood,
or other durable materials, and shall be designed to allow replacement of the wall at the
end of its useful life.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
240
ARTICLE VI - AGENCY ESTABLISHMENT AND RULES
§ 600 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLANNING BOARD
A. Classes of membership. A Planning Board is hereby established consisting of nine
regular and two alternate members of the following four classes:
1. Class I - The mayor or the mayor's designee in the absence of the mayor.
2. Class II - One of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of the
governing body, to be appointed by the mayor, provided that any member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a
member of the Board of Education among the Class IV regular or alternate
members.
3. Class III - A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
4. Class IV - Regular Members. Six other members of the municipality to be
appointed by the governing body. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, position, or employment except that one such member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission.
No member of the Board of Education may be a Class IV member of the
Planning Board, except that in the case of a nine member board, one Class IV
member may be a member of the Board of Education. If there is an
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission who
is also a member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall
be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member common to the Planning Board and
Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class 11 member of the Planning
Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
committee whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which
is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
a municipal office.
5. Class IV - Alternate Members. Two other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the governing body. Alternate members shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV regular members and shall be designated by the
governing body at the time of their appointment as 'Alternate No. I" and
"Alternate No. 2."
6. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing
member of the Planning Board.
B. Terms of membership.
1. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his or her
official tenure.
2. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one (1)
year or shall terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
241
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
3. The term of Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his or her Class IV
term, whichever comes first.
4. The term of each Class IV regular member shall be four (4) years.
5. The terms of the Class IV alternate members shall be two (2) years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than
one alternate member shall expire in any one year.
B. Role of alternate members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any Class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any Class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
D. Compensation. Members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation except
that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official duties may be
made by the municipality.
E. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member may be removed by the governing
body for cause but only after public hearing and other due process proceedings.
F. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act
on any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. No member who is so disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not
continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter, nor shall participate in any
discussion or decision.
G. Substitute members. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum of its regular or alternate
members either by reason of vacancy or conflict of interest, regular members of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Planning Board. Such temporary members shall be selected
in order of seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of Adjustment until the
required minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum has been
reached. The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall determine which
member serves in the event there are members of equal seniority.
H. Reorganization. Yearly, the Planning Board shall organize by selecting from among its
Class IV regular members a chairman and a vice chairman. The Board shall also select
a secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
I. Funding. The Township Committee shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
J. Board attorney. The position of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The
Planning Board may annually appoint to such office and fix compensation or rate of
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
242
compensation of an attorney-at-law of New Jersey other than the municipal attorney.
The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any existing appointment.
K. Staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix compensation of such
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board, however,
shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amounts
appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
§ 601 POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to other powers established by law:
A. Make, adopt, and from time to time, amend a master plan for the physical development of
the municipality, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Board's
judgment, bear essential relation to the planning of the municipality;
B. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by state or federal
law or regulation;
C. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process;
D. Annually, prepare a program of municipal capital improvements projects projected over a
term of (6) six years and amendments thereto and recommend same to the Township
Committee;
E. Consider and make report to the Township Committee within thirty-five (35) days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Township Committee;
F. Prepare, at least every six (6) years, a periodic reexamination of the Master Plan;
G. The Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by law, including, but not
limited to, the power to grant the following variances, to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, when the Planning Board is
reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plans, site plans or conditional uses:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a-c;
2. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control
basin or public area; and
3. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure on a lot not abutting a street.
§ 602 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Membership. Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby created consisting of seven (7)
regular members and two (2) alternate members, each of whom shall be appointed by
the Township Committee.
B. Terms of members.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
243
1. The term of each regular member shall be four years and the term of each
alternate member shall be two years.
2. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
3. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Role of alternate members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Additional memberships. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold an
elective office or position under the municipality.
E. Compensation. Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve without
compensation except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of
official duties may be made by the municipality.
F. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause but only after
public hearing and other due process proceedings.
G. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
H. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any
personal or financial interest. No member who is so disqualified may act on that
particular matter, shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter,
nor shall participate in any discussion or decision.
I. Substitute members. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum of its regular or
alternate members either by reason of vacancy or conflict of interest, Class IV members
of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary
members of the Zoning Board. Such temporary members shall be selected in order of
seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until the required minimum number
of members necessary to constitute a quorum has been reached. The Chairman or
Chairwoman of the Planning Board shall determine which member serves in the event
there are members of equal seniority.
J. Reorganization. Yearly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from
among its regular members a chairman and a vice-chairman. The Board shall also select
a secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
K. Funding. The Township Committee shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
L. Board attorney. The position of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office and fix
compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney-at-law of New Jersey other than the
municipal attorney. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any
existing appointment.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
244
M. Staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
§ 603 POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or refusal made by the Administrative Officer based on or
made in enforcement of the Land Use Ordinance.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or Land Development
Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Zoning Board is
authorized to pass on any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance;
C. Grant a variance from the strict application of a regulation, upon an application or an
appeal, so as to relieve difficulties or hardships:
1. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific
piece of property; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property-, or by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to,
or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property; or
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the
purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law and this Ordinance set forth in Article I
would be advanced by deviation from the Land Development Ordinance
requirements and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow the departure from zoning regulations;
provided, however, that no variance from those departures enumerated in the
following subsection shall be granted under this section; and provided, further,
that the proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board
of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use in conjunction with which the
Planning Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
§#DIVISION OF JURISDICTION IN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS (A)2
D. Grant a variance to allow a departure from the zoning regulations, in particular cases and
for special reasons to permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal
structure;
2. An expansion of a non-conforming use;
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use;
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio,
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
245
5. An increase in the permitted density except as applied to the required lot area for
a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are
either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
6. A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum
height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by the affirmative vote of at least
five (5) members.
E. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its
findings on Land Development Ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance
requests and its recommendations for Land Development Ordinance amendment or
revision, if any. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall send copies of the report and
resolution to the Township Committee and Planning Board.
§ 604 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
A. Statutory authority. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq., there is hereby established
an Historic Preservation Commission whose membership, powers and duties are
intended to be those of an historic preservation commission created by the Municipal
Land Use Law, the extent of which are hereinafter set forth.
B. Board of architectural review. By adoption of this Ordinance, the Historic Preservation
Commission replaces the existing Board of Architectural Review. Existing members of
the Board of Architectural Review will continue to serve the balance of their respective
terms as members of the Historic Preservation Commission.
C. Membership. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be made up of seven (7)
regular members and two (2) alternate members all appointed by the Mayor. All
members shall serve without compensation and shall be interested in or qualified to
contribute to the preservation of historic resources. At the time of appointment, members
shall be designated by the following classes:
1. Class A. One (1) regular member who is knowledgeable in building designs and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside the municipality.
2. Class B. Two (2) regular members who are knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
3. Class C. Four (4) regular members and two (2) alternate members who shall
hold no other municipal office, position or employment except for membership on
the Planning Board or Zoning Board. At the time of appointment, “Class C”
members shall be further designated by the following criteria:
(a) One (1) member shall be an active member of the Historical Society of
Ocean Grove (Class C1) with a demonstrated interest, competence or
knowledge in historic preservation.
(b) One (1) member shall be an active member of the Neptune Township
Historic Society (Class C2), with a demonstrated interest, competence or
knowledge in historic preservation.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
246
(c) Two (2) members, to be selected from the Township at large, one (1) of
whom may be a member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
(Class C3).
(d) Two (2) alternate members to be designated as “Alternate No. 1” and
“Alternate No. 2”. Alternate members shall be selected from the
Township at large, one (1) of whom may be a member of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Role of alternate members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any Class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
E. Terms. Regular members shall serve for a period of four (4) years and alternate
members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year. Notwithstanding any other
provision herein, the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Planning Board shall be for the term of membership on the Planning
Board; and the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation Commission
and the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
F. Vacancies. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled within
sixty (60) days and shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
G. Organization. The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice
Chairman from its members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Historic Preservation Commission or an employee of the Township.
H. Compensation. Members of the HPC shall serve without compensation except that
reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official duties may be made
by the municipality
I. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause but only after
public hearing and other due process proceedings.
J. Conflict of interest. No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which they have, either directly or indirectly, a personal
or financial interest. A member who is so disqualified shall not continue to sit with the
Historic Preservation Commission on the hearing of such matter, nor shall participate in
any discussion or decision.
K. Meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt and may amend internal
rules and procedures for the transaction of its business subject to the following:
1. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold regular meetings at least six (6)
times per year and no member shall miss four (4) consecutive meetings unless
good cause can be shown.
2. A quorum for the transaction of all business shall be four (4) members. Ex officio
members are not entitled to vote. A majority vote of those present and voting
shall prevail and shall be sufficient to grant or deny a Certificate of
Appropriateness. Any approval for a demolition permit shall require the
affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
247
3. In addition to conducting reviews at its regularly scheduled meetings, the Historic
Preservation Commission will conduct emergency review meetings when
necessary. These emergency meetings shall be held at the call of the Chair
when any action requiring immediate consideration is necessary. This action
may include a review of temporary repairs of historic properties and review of
other items pertaining to safety and the necessity for immediate and prompt
action. The Chair shall convene a meeting for these purposes by giving
appropriate notice in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law and
notifying the members of the Historic Preservation Commission of the time, date
and location of the emergency meeting and the purpose thereof.
4. The Historic Preservation Commission shall make its decisions on designation
and review in an open public meeting and applicants shall be notified of meetings
and advised of decisions. Written minutes of all meetings and proceedings shall
be kept, including voting records, attendance, resolutions and findings. All such
material shall become public record.
B. Budget/Employees.
1. The Township Committee shall budget and appropriate for the expenses of the
Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission may
employ, contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and
services as it shall deem necessary. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
obtain its legal counsel from the Municipal Attorney at the rate of compensation
determined by the Township Committee, unless the governing body, by
appropriation, provides for separate legal counsel for the Historic Preservation
Commission. Expenditures shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the Township Committee for the Historic Preservation
Commission's use.
2. The Historic Preservation Commission may appoint a consultant who is a
recognized professional in the field of architectural history, historic preservation
or similar discipline to advise the Commission on applications before it. If the
consultant has rendered an oral or written opinion, the Commission must
consider the opinion of the consultant in rendering its decision and must give a
statement of reasons in the event that the consultant's recommendations are not
followed.
3. The Township Chief Financial Officer, Township Economic Development
Director, Township Planner, Township Engineer and the Construction Official
may provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance as the Historic
Preservation Commission shall require. For budgeting and purchasing purposes,
however, the Commission shall be allocated its own budget.
§ 605 POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Historic Preservation Commission as hereinafter set forth
shall be advisory in nature to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall extend to
applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness and shall not conflict with or supersede the powers and
duties of any other Board or Agency of the Township. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have
the following powers, duties and responsibilities:
A. To identify, record and maintain a system for survey and inventory of all buildings, sites,
places, landmarks and structures of historical or architectural significance based on the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
248
Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historic
Preservation (Standards and Guidelines for Identification); and to aid the public in
understanding their worth, methods of preservation, techniques of gathering
documentation and related matters.
B. To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic preservation plan
element of the Master Plan, including the designation of historic sites or districts, and on
the implications for the preservation of historic sites and districts of other Master Plan
elements.
C. To advise the Planning Board and Township Committee on the inclusion of historic sites
in the recommended capital improvement program.
D. To advise the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-110, on applications for development in historic districts designated on the zoning
map or on historic sites identified in the Historic Element of the Township Master Plan.
Such advice shall be conveyed through the Historic Preservation Commission's
delegation of one (1) of its members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the
application and to explain any written report which may have been submitted.
E. To provide written reports and Certificates of Appropriateness, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-111, in a manner hereinafter described, on the application of the Zoning
Ordinance provisions concerning historic preservation to applications for the issuance of
permits pertaining properties in an historic district.
F. To advise the Township Committee and Planning Board on the relative merits of
proposals involving public funds to restore, preserve and protect historic buildings, places
and structures, including the preparation of long-range plans therefore, securing State,
Federal and other grants and aid to assist therein and monitoring such projects once
underway.
G. To recommend to the Planning Board and the Township Committee the designation of
additional historic districts and sites where appropriate, in accordance with the
procedures and criteria for designation thereof set forth in this Ordinance.
H. To draft and recommend to the Township Committee and the Planning Board ordinances
or amendments to existing ordinances that would resolve any conflicts which may exist
between the design standards of the Historic Preservation Ordinance and the building or
zoning regulations of the Township.
I. To purchase estates, easements, rights, restrictions and less than fee acquisitions, with
the approval of Township Committee, and to acquire grants, assistance or aid either
outright or in exchange in order to further the intent and purposes of this article and the
welfare of the Township. The Historic Preservation Commission may negotiate and
recommend such arrangements subject, however, to approval of the Township
Committee as necessary for any monetary expenditures, and, at the direction of
Township Committee. Legal counsel shall assist the Historic Preservation Commission in
such arrangements.
J. To advise and assist Township officers, employees, boards and other bodies, including
those at County, State and Federal levels, on all matters which have potential impact on
the historic buildings, places and structures in the Township or on the physical character
and ambiance of a historic district.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
249
K. To assemble and arrange for the proper care, cataloging and availability of materials
relevant to the Township's history.
L. To secure the voluntary assistance of the public, and within the limits of the budget, to
retain consultants and experts to assist the Historic Preservation Commission in its work
or to provide testimony in support of the Historic Preservation Commission's position
before other bodies, boards, commissions or courts.
M. To cooperate with local, County, State or National historical societies, governmental
bodies and organizations to maximize their contributions to the intent and purposes of
this Ordinance.
N. To recommend to applicable County, State and Federal agencies, where appropriate,
recognition and protection of historic districts and historic sites and to review National and
State Register nominations.
O. To request the Township Committee to seek, on its own motion or otherwise, injunctive
relief of violations of this article or other actions contrary to the intent and purposes of this
article.
P. To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions as will promote
historic preservation in the municipality.
Q. Promote historic preservation in the Township by carrying out other advisory, educational
and informational functions.
R. Take such action consistent with law to further the intent and purpose of this chapter and
to perform any other actions which effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
250
ARTICLE VII - DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 700 DIVISION OF JURISDICTION IN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A. Planning Board. The following provisions set forth the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
in the review of development applications:
1. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or conditional use
approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
2. Review by Planning Board in lieu of Zoning Board of Adjustment. Whenever the
proposed development requires approval of a subdivision, site plan, or
conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the
Planning Board, in lieu of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions, shall receive, review, and act upon
applications for variances and the issuance of permits pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32, -34, -36 and -70c.
3. Bifurcation of application. A developer may elect to submit a separate
application requesting approval of variances and the issuance of permits
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, -34, -36 and -70c and a subsequent application
for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The
separate approval of any variance or issuance of permit shall be conditioned
upon the grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Planning Board. No
such subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance, or
where a deviation would advance the purposes of the Master Plan and the Land
Use Ordinance and the benefits of the deviation would outweigh the detriments.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, the public notice shall
include a reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
4. Grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
5. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
6. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street
pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-36.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment action in lieu of Planning Board. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval
when reviewing an application for approval of a 'use variance" pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d.
§ 701 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT
A. Meetings.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
251
1. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
scheduled at least once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
2. Special meetings may be scheduled for at the call of the chairman or on the
request of any two board members, which shall be held on notice to its members
and the public in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975.
3. Actions at meetings; quorum. All agenda items requiring action by the Board,
except adjournments, shall be taken with a quorum present.
4. No action shall be taken on an application unless it has been declared complete
pursuant to the requirements contained in Article VIII. The Board may delegate
the determination of completeness to a subcommittee or its designee.
5. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at such
meeting, except as otherwise provided in this Article. Failure of a motion to
receive the number of votes required to approve an application for development
shall be deemed an action denying the application. A member of the Board who
was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the meetings; provided,
however, that such a Board member has available to him or her the transcript or
recording of all the hearings from which he or she was absent, and certifies in
writing to the Board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
6. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be
given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public Meeting Law, C.
231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975. An executive session for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters to come before the agency shall not be
deemed a regular meeting within the meaning of this Ordinance.
B. Records of the Board.
1. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the
names of the persons appearing and addressing the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during the normal business hours at the office of
the Administrative Officer. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party shall be
charged a reasonable fee for the reproduction of the minutes, as indicated in
Article X of this Ordinance.
2. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The recording of the
proceedings shall be made by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic
means. The municipality shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his or her expense, provided that the
charge for a transcript shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted in
N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 as indicated in §900.A of this Ordinance. Each transcript shall
be certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate.
§ 702 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
252
A. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a
hearing on each application for development. Each Board shall make the rules governing
such hearings.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file in the
office of the Administrative Officer and available for public inspection during normal
business hours at least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. If maps or
related material are to be revised as a result of any Planning Board meeting, the
applicant shall file the appropriate number of copies in accordance with Article VIII of all
revised maps and related material, with revision date noted on same, at least twenty (20)
days prior to the meeting of the Planning Board at which discussion and/or hearing is
scheduled to take place.
C. In the case of an application before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall
file the appropriate number of copies in accordance with Article VIII of all revised maps
and related material, with revision date noted on same, at least twenty (20) days prior to
the meeting of the Zoning Board of Adjustment at which discussion and/or hearing is
scheduled to take place.
D. The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
E. The officer presiding at the hearing, or his or her designee, shall have power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, and the provisions of the “County and Municipal Investigations Law," N.J.S.A
2A:67A-1 et seq. shall apply.
F. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development shall be taken
under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall
be permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable
limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
G. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the Board may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
§ 703 DECISIONS
A. Findings and conclusions. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide the findings and
conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period provided in this
section for action by the municipal agency on the application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than forty-five (45)
days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency voted to grant
or deny approval.
B. Only the members of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment who voted for
the action taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of
such members present at the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption
shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action resulting from the failure of a motion
to approve an application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above, with
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
253
those members voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote
on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be
a memorialization of the action of the municipal agency; however, the date of the
adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for the purposes of the
mailings, filings, and publications required by §709 Notice of Decisions.
C. Failure to adopt resolution. If the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested person may appeal to
the Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the cost of the
application, including attorneys' fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
D. Findings for planned developments. Prior to approval of a planned development the
Planning Board shall make the following findings and conclusions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45:
1. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations otherwise
applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning ordinance standards
pursuant to this Article;
2. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open space
are reliable, and the amount, location, and purpose of the common open space
are adequate;
3. That provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of
light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.
4. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
5. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction over a
period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of
the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are adequate.
§ 704 PUBLIC NOTICE OF A HEARING
The following public notice requirements shall apply to all hearings of the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
A. Notice required. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following applications for
development:
1. Any request for a variance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or d);
2. Any request for conditional use approval;
3. Any request for a certificate of non-conforming use (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68).
4. Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a mapped
street or public drainage way or on a lot not abutting a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
and -35);
5. Any request for general development plan approval;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
254
6. Any request for preliminary subdivision approval;
7. Any request for interpretation of the Land Use Ordinance or Zoning Map
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b;
8. Any request for preliminary site plan;
9. Any request for site plan approval involving subsections -1 through 3; and
10. Any request for a zoning change not part of a general reexamination of the
Master Plan or Master Plan adoption.
11. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-70a
B. No notice required. Public notice shall not be required for the following applications.
1. Final subdivision plan.
2. Final site plan.
3. A request for informal concept review.
4. Any other type of application or action by the Board not specifically listed in the
previous subsection.
C. Public notice for variances. Public notice shall be given for applications otherwise
excepted from the requirements of public notice whenever variance relief is requested.
D. Classes of notice. The secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least two weeks prior to the public
hearing for the subject application. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be
given by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing in the
following manner:
1. By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
2. To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate located in
the State and within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject
of the hearing; provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice
to a condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a
unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner
whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by
serving a copy on the property owner, as shown on the current tax duplicate, or
his or her agent in charge of the property; or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown on the current
tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be obtained. Notice shall be
deemed complete upon mailing. Within the HD-O District, notice shall be given
within 200’ in all directions from the property which is subject of the hearing.
Said notice is sufficient and additional notice shall not be required from the
boundary of the tax block and lot under ownership of the OGCMA known as the
historic flared avenue open space.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner; notice
to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
255
on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowner's association, because of its
ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
4. To the clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities when the property
involved is located within 200 feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities,
which notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
5. To the Monmouth County Planning Board by personal service or certified mail
when the application for development involves property adjacent to an existing
county road or proposed road shown on the county official map or the county
master plan or adjoins other county land, or is situated within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
6. To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey by personal
service or certified mail when the property abuts a State highway.
7. To the State Planning Commission, by personal service or certified mail when the
hearing involves an application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of any
maps or documents required to be on file with the Administrative Officer.
8. To public utilities, local utilities, and cable television companies when such entity
possesses a right-of-way or easement within the municipality and has registered
with the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1 by personal service or
certified mail when the hearing involves a major subdivision or major site plan
application.
9. To the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association for all applications within
Historic Zone Districts.
10. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice to all
property owners who do not reside within the municipality.
E. Property list. Under the written request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor shall, within ten
(10) days, make and certify a list from current tax duplicates of names and addresses of
owners within the municipality to whom the applicant shall be charged in accordance with
Article X of this Ordinance and shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
F. Proof of service. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
G. Contents of notice. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current tax duplicate in the municipal tax assessor's office, and the location and
times at which any maps or documents for which approval is sought are available for
inspection.
§ 705 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
256
Development plans shall be so designed as to enhance the general appearance of the Township and to
promote the harmonious use of land; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic,
or other dangers; to promote the general health, safety, and welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land, buildings and roadways by an undue concentration of population; to
encourage development which would facilitate pedestrian access and the use of mass transit; to
encourage creative development and design consistent with the policies of the Master Plan of the
Township of Neptune, and the regulations promulgated herein. Applications for development shall be
reviewed for meeting the standards for development contained within this Ordinance and more
particularly the following specific objectives:
A. Development compatibility. All development shall permit and encourage only those uses
of the land which, through the standards adopted in this Ordinance, provide for flexibility
in planning and development and that respect the natural character of the land, the
drainage system, soil capabilities, groundwater and aquifer recharge quality, and to
include only those uses that are compatible with allowed uses in the zoning district and
existing uses on adjacent lands. Such compatibility shall be determined on the basis of
inventories of the natural features of the site, plans indicating the physical relationship
among types of uses and any natural or man-made barriers, existing or planned, between
different uses both within and adjacent to the proposed development, and sufficient
information to determine the effect of such development upon the quality of life of the
Township of Neptune.
B. Relationship to Neptune Master Plan. All developments shall be planned and designed
to achieve the goals and objectives for land development as are or may be set forth in the
Neptune Township Master Plan duly adopted by the Planning Board with regard to
conservation, historic preservation, community facilities, parks/recreation/open space,
affordable housing, circulation, land use, economic development, and the goals for
development of adjacent municipalities, Monmouth County and the State.
C. Relationship to Township development patterns. All development shall be planned and
designed to achieve the Township goals of permitting and encouraging a population
density and a development pattern in the municipality that facilitates the provision of
public utilities and services, including public water and public sewerage, storm drainage
systems, recreation areas, public schools, state, county, and local roads, in an orderly,
functional and economical manner.
D. Conservation of Open Space. Common open space and adequate recreation areas shall
be set aside in suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of the residents and
the owners of the development and those portions of the project that, because of their
natural features, constitute important visual amenities and environmental resources.
Development is intended to create after completion a continuity of open space resulting
from the integration of upland, wetland, floodplain and surface water areas in accordance
with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan.
E. Appearance and aesthetic control. All development shall be planned and designed to
promote and achieve aesthetically pleasing views from and to various land uses. The
creation and promotion of such aesthetic conditions shall strengthen and preserve the
Township's unique environmental heritage and promote the civic pride, prosperity, and
general welfare of the residents of the development, the municipality, and visitors thereto.
F. Review guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used in the review of any
application for development or conditional use:
1. Regard for natural features. All residential and non-residential uses shall be
designed with regard to the topography and natural features of the site. The
effects of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
257
physical layout and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account.
Special consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural features,
including large trees, stands of specimen vegetation, groves, waterways, aquifer
recharge areas, scenic, paleontological, archaeological, cultural, and historic
sites and other community assets within the site area, and the reduction of
impacts on wildlife. The development shall be designed and programmed so as
to minimize tree clearance and the destruction of natural amenities associated
with the same.
2. Sitting of buildings. All housing and supporting uses shall be sited so as to
enhance privacy for residential uses, ensure natural light for all principal
residential rooms, and to the greatest extent possible be designed to promote
passive solar energy technology. Building layouts shall be reviewed for
arrangement, efficiency and aesthetic quality.
3. Fiscal impact. The fiscal costs to the Township and Board of Education from
providing services to the development shall be considered in relation to the gain
of revenue and its impact upon the municipal and school board tax rates.
4. Relationship to community facilities. Housing shall be conveniently served by
community facilities and open space.
5. Circulation. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent
to the site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas,
off-street loading and unloading, the movement of people, goods and vehicles
from access roads within the site, between buildings and between buildings and
vehicles. In particular, the Board shall ensure compliance in site design with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as it may be amended or superseded. The
Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and are safely and
conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and to permit
vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the site. The circulation shall be
consistent with Township, county, and state requirements.
6. Open space. Open space within all planned unit developments shall be planned
and designed to achieve the Township goal of insuring that adequate recreation
areas are set aside in suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of the
residents and owners of the planned unit development; and that those portions of
the Township that, because of their natural features, constitute important visual
amenities and environmental resources are maintained in accordance with sound
conservation practice.
7. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be reviewed for the ability to integrate the site
elements of topography, water, buildings, parking and loading areas, and the
buffering of incompatible uses. Landscaping shall be reviewed for diversity,
including species, function, sculpture, fencing, walls, and other landscaping
elements.
8. Lighting. Adequate lighting for the function of the site shall be reviewed for the
safe movement and security of persons and vehicles. Particular attention shall
be made to the minimization of glare and impact upon adjacent property.
9. Signs. Signs shall be evaluated for the aesthetics of their design and their
harmony with other signs on- and off-site, the architectural design of the building
or buildings to which they relate and the type of development or pattern of the
built environment surrounding the location of the sign or signs. The location of
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
258
signs shall be reviewed for the purpose of removing any hazard to pedestrians or
motorists.
10. Utilities, solid waste management and recycling. Storm drainage, sanitary and
solid waste disposal including recycling, water supply, electricity supply,
telephone and cable television service shall be reviewed and considered.
Emphasis shall be given on the adequacy of existing systems and the need for
improvements, both on- and off-site to adequately provide for the development's
needs.
11. Compatibility of residential and non-residential development. Applications for
development and conditional uses shall be designed to assure the compatibility
of residential and non-residential uses by:
(a) Providing commercial uses with appropriate space and, in particular,
sufficient depth from a street to satisfy the needs of contemporary uses
including the provision of adequately landscaped off-street parking,
buffer areas between commercial and residential use areas, pedestrian
and bicycle circulation systems connecting the commercial uses to office,
residential and open space uses;
(b) Protecting non-residential development and nearby residences against
fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards,
and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate
matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable
influences;
(c) Protect residential and non-residential development from the noise,
exhaust emissions, and other negative aspects of congestion of
vehicular traffic.
§ 706 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party affected
by any decision of the Administrative Officer of the municipality based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning provisions of this Ordinance or a duly adopted official map.
Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days by filing a notice of appeal with the
official from whom the appeal was taken, specifying the grounds of such appeal. The
official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning Board of Adjustment
for action under any of its powers without prior application to the Administrative Officer.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
70d, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the application within
120 days after submission by an applicant of a complete application to the Administrative
Officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the event
that the applicant elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid
provision shall apply to the application for approval of the variance. The period for
granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance. Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application and a certificate of the Administrative Officer
as to the failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of
the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
259
evidence of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording
officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 707 TIME LIMITS FOR DECISIONS
A. Effect of Variance Request. Whenever an application to the Planning Board for approval
of a subdivision plat, site plan, or conditional use includes a request for a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.C or special permit, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after the date of submission by a
developer of the complete application to the Administrative Officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Variance Bifurcation. In the event that an applicant elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the 120 day limitation shall apply to the application for approval of the
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.C or special permit, and the period for granting
or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
260
§ 708 NOTICE OF DECISIONS
Any decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment when acting upon an application for
development and any decisions of the Township Committee when acting upon an appeal shall be given
notice in the following manner:
A. Mailing of Decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to the
appellant, if the appellant is a differing interested party, or, if either or both is represented,
then to the respective attorney(s) without charge, and for a reasonable charge to any
other interested person who has requested it, not later than ten (10) days after the date of
the decision.
B. Newspaper Notice of Decision. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in
the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publications shall be arranged by the
Township Clerk without separate charge to the applicant or to the appellant, if the
appellant is a differing interested party. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper
for publication within ten (10) days of the date of any such decision.
C. Filing of Decision. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall be
filed with the Administrative Officer.
§ 709 EFFECT OF APPROVAL
A. Effect of preliminary subdivision approval. Preliminary subdivision approval shall expire
(3) three years from the date of memorilization of the approving resolution. Any
variances granted in conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration
date.
B. Effect of preliminary site plan approval. Preliminary site plan approval shall expire three
(3) years from the date of memorialization of the approving resolution. Any variances
granted in conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
C. Effect of variance approval. Any variance granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c shall
expire two (2) years from the date of memorilization. Any variances granted in
conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
D. Effect of variance approval. Any variance granted pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-70d shall
expire one (1) year from the date of memorilization. Any variances granted in conjunction
with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
E. Effect of final subdivision approval. Final subdivision approval shall expire two (2) years
from the date of memorialization of the approving resolution. Any variances granted in
conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
F. Effect of final site plan approval. Final site plan approval shall expire two (2) years from
the date of memorialization of the approving resolution. Any variances granted in
conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
G. Effect of minor site plan approval. Minor site plan approval shall expire two (2) years
from the date of memorialization of the approving resolution. Any variances granted in
conjunction with said approval shall govern the respective expiration date.
H. Effect of Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall expire two
(2) years from the date of memorialization of the approving resolution.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
261
I. Where preliminary and final approval are granted simultaneously, the effect of final
approval shall govern.
J. Extensions. An applicant may apply the appropriate Board of Jurisdiction for up to three
(3) one (1) year extensions for cause shown.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
262
ARTICLE VIII - APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
§ 800 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
Whenever an application for development to the Board is permitted or required by this Article, it shall be
in such form, and accompanied by such maps, documents, and materials as are prescribed by this
Article, and shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer in such numbers as required herein. No
development application shall be accepted for submittal unless it conforms to the form, content, and data
requirements of this Article. The standards for submission contained in this Article shall be considered
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 801 SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION REQUIRED
A. Subdivision and Site Plan approval required. Except as otherwise permitted, no zoning
permit shall be issued for any building or use or enlargement of any building or use
unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the Neptune Township Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as the law directs. No subdivision of land shall be
valid unless a plat is first submitted and approved by the Neptune Township Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Exemptions from Site Plan review. Site plan review and approval shall not be required
for:
1. Zoning permits for individual lot applications involving only a detached one-or
two-dwelling unit building.
2. Accessory buildings as otherwise permitted for detached one- or two-dwelling
unit or uses.
3. Accessory buildings for non-residential uses, with a maximum 500 square foot
size limitation, provided:
(a) In the opinion of the Zoning Officer, the proposed building and use will
not impair the public good;
(b) Adequate information is provided to the Zoning Officer or designee in
order to make an informed decision;
(c) Said building conforms to all of the requirements contained in this
Chapter, and a zoning permit is granted;
4. Other buildings or structures incidental to residential uses.
5. The alteration or repair of an existing building which is not either a detached oneor
two-dwelling unit building upon determination by the Administrative Officer that
the alterations or repair:
(a) Will not result in additional lot coverage whether by buildings or site
improvements.
(b) Will not increase the number of required off-street parking or loading
spaces.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
263
(c) Will conform to the maximum and minimum standards as set forth in
Article IV.
(d) Is not proposed in conjunction with a use requiring a conditional use
permit.
6. No exemption from site plan review shall be permitted for any use, building,
structure, or landscape either currently listed on the local, State or National
Register of Historic Places, or proposed for inclusion on such register or registers
in the Historic Preservation Element of the Master Plan.
7. Expansion of an existing conforming non-residential structure, provided:
(a) The expansion will result in less than ten percent (10%) of additional
building coverage or 500 square feet, whichever is less;
(b) In the opinion of the Zoning Officer, this addition will not create a
nuisance to adjoining land uses.
(c) Said building conforms to all of the requirements contained in this
Chapter, and a zoning permit is granted;
This exemption shall be limited to one expansion every three (3) years, up to a
maximum aggregate of 2,500 square feet.
C. Site Plan Review Waiver. The Board of Jurisdiction may waive the requirement of site
plan approval whenever it determines that the proposed development, alteration, repair,
or change of use or occupancy does not affect the existing conditions of the lot or
premises, including: topography; vegetation; drainage; floodplains; marshes and
waterways; open space; walkways, means of ingress and egress; utility services;
landscaping; structures; signs; lighting and screening devices; and other considerations
of site plan review. Any applicant desiring a waiver under this section shall present
sufficient credible evidence to allow the Board to reach such conclusions as would permit
a. waiver. Such evidence may consist of sketches, property descriptions, methods of
operation, photographs, testimony, or other documentation or information as the Board
may require. The reviewing Board shall render a decision based on such evidence and
may attach conditions to any waiver so granted.
§ 802 SUBMISSIONS REQUIRED FOR ALL APPLICATIONS
All applications for development shall contain the following information in addition to the submission
checklist information contained herein (located at the end of this Article) specific to the type of
submission:
A. A completed and signed application form, containing the following information:
1. Applicant's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail
address (if applicable);
2. Owner's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail
address (if applicable);
3. Interest of applicant in property;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
264
4. Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail address (if
applicable) of applicant's attorney (if represented) and professional
representatives;
5. Street address of property;
6. Tax lot and block number(s) of property;
7. Zoning district in which the property is situated;
8. Description of property;
9. Description of proposed development;
10. Type of application and submission level.
B. The application fee and applicable escrow fee in accordance with Article IX.
C. A list of all variances or waivers requested, citing the applicable section of this Ordinance,
excepting concept and general development plans.
D. A certification from the Tax Collector's office that no taxes or assessments are due or
delinquent on the subject property.
E. Affidavit of ownership and the consent of the owner for the filing of an application for
development, excepting concept plans.
F. A certification of corporation or partnership interest pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et
seq., if applicable, excepting concept plans.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying or to be applied to the
subject land, excepting concept plans.
H. Any existing or proposed easement or land dedicated or reserved for public use.
I. A list of all required regulatory approvals at the municipal, county, state, and federal level
of government and their status, excepting concept plans. Applicant is responsible to
make submission to all other reviewing agencies and submit proof of same.
J. Plans shall be legibly drawn at a scale appropriate for the proposed development. All
sheets in the submission shall be the same size.
K. Details to be placed on all plans.
1. The names and addresses of the owner(s) and applicant(s).
2. The name, signature, license or certification number, seal, and address of
architect, engineer, planner, land surveyor or landscape architect, as applicable,
involved in the preparation of the plat or plan.
3. Title block denoting the type and level of submission, name of applicant(s), tax
map sheet, block and lot number(s), name of county and municipality, and street
location.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
265
4. A key map drawn at a scale no less than 1"=2,000' showing the location of the
tract with reference to the surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries,
and water courses within 500 feet of the subject parcel.
5. A schedule of the required and proposed zoning district regulations including, but
not limited to the lot size, lot width, street frontage, yard setbacks, open space
requirements, parking requirements, and lot coverages.
6. A north arrow, scale and graphic scale.
7. A copy of the current zoning map depicting the subject tract and the surrounding
properties within 500 feet of said parcel.
8. Date of plan and/or survey and any revision date.
L. Subdivision plans shall be required to list those lots whose buildable areas do not meet
the lot arrangements set for of §524.B.
M. For an application for development which requests a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.C or 40:55D-70.D, a conditional use, a special permit, or a decision on a
special question, and which is not accompanied by a site plan or subdivision, the required
information shall be in a checklist form as specified in §812 included with the application
form.
§ 803 PERMISSIBLE DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLAN PREPARATION
All plans and documents submitted shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate licensed or certified
professional, as follows:
A. Depiction of Existing Conditions on a Site Plan.
1. Survey of property and exact location of existing conditions: Land Surveyor.
2. The existing location of vegetation, general flood plain determination, or general
location of buildings, utilities, or structures: Architect, Engineer, Land Surveyor,
Landscape Architect, or Planner.
B. Preparation of a Site Plan.
1. The location of proposed buildings and their relationship to the site and the
immediate environs: Architect or Engineer.
2. The location of drives, parking layout, pedestrian circulation and the means of
ingress and egress: Architect, Engineer, Planner or Landscape Architect.
3. Drainage facilities for site plans of ten (10) acres or more; or, involving
stormwater detention facilities; or, traversed by a water, course: Engineer.
4. Other drainage facilities: Architect or Engineer.
5. Connections with utilities and their on tract extension: Engineer.
6. Off tract utility extensions: Engineer.
7. On site sanitary sewage disposal or flow equalization facilities: Engineer.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
266
8. Preliminary floor plans and elevation views of buildings illustrating the
architectural design of a project: Architect, except where the building is part of an
engineering or industrial project, in which case an Engineer.
9. Landscaping, signs, lighting, screening material or other information not specified
above: Architect, Planner, Engineer, or Landscape Architect.
10. The general layout of a preliminary site plan or general development plan for a
multiple building project, showing the development elements including their
relationship to the site and the immediate environs: Architect, Engineer, Planner,
or Landscape Architect.
C. Preparation of a Major Subdivision Plat.
1. The general location of facilities, site improvements, and lot layouts: Architect,
Engineer, Land Surveyor, Planner, or Landscape Architect.
2. The design and construction details of all public improvements, including street
pavements, sidewalks, curbs, sanitary sewage, and storm drainage facilities:
Engineer.
3. Final subdivision plat with metes and bounds: Land Surveyor.
D. Circulation Impact Study Transportation Engineer or Planner.
E. Other Submissions: As qualified by the Board.
§ 804 COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATIONS
A. Initial Submission Requirements. The applicant, at their option, may chose to may an
initial submission for completeness review only, in accordance with the checklist
requirements of this Section. Said submission may be modified to include a total of four
(4) sets of required submission materials pursuant to this Article. The submission will be
distributed to the Board Engineer and Board Planner for completeness review. Upon the
issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the applicant shall make all required
submissions as specified in Section 812, fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public
hearing.
B. Certification of completeness. An application for development shall be complete for the
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action by the Board when so
certified by the Board or its authorized committee or designee, the Administrative Officer.
In the event that the Board, committee, or designee does not certify the application to be
complete within forty-five (45) days of the date of its submission, the application shall be
deemed complete upon expiration of the forty-five (45) day period for the purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless:
1. The application lacks information required in the applicable checklist; and
2. The Board or its authorized committee or designee has notified the applicant, in
writing of the deficiencies in the application within forty-five (45) days of
submission of the application.
C. Submission requirement waivers. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the Board or its designee shall grant
or deny the request within forty-five (45) days. Nothing herein shall be construed as
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
267
diminishing the applicant's obligation to offer sufficient proof during the application
process that he or she is entitled to approval of the application.
D. Correction of erroneous information. The Board may subsequently require correction of
any information found to be in error, and the submission of additional information not
specified in this Ordinance, or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements
necessary for approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revision in the accompanying documents so required by the Board.
§ 805 APPLICATION FOR INFORMAL (CONCEPT) REVIEW
A. An applicant may request and the Planning Board shall grant, an informal review of a
concept design plan for which an applicant intends to prepare and submit an application
for development.
B. A concept design plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer at least 10 days
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting in form, content, and number as required in the
applicable checklist. All persons having an interest in the proposed development shall be
given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The concept design plan and its
documentation shall show a general design of the development and its public
improvements sufficient- for the Board to consider the concept. Acceptance of the
concept design plan does not constitute an approval, nor shall it be considered a valid
basis for the construction of improvements or other commitments which depend upon the
concept plants design characteristics. Neither the applicant nor the Board shall be bound
by the plan or its review.
C. In no event shall the concept design review be considered a preliminary plat submission
or preliminary site plan submission for the purpose of deeming an application complete
nor shall it constitute a general development plan, preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
approval by the Board.
§ 806 APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION AND MINOR SITE PLAN
A. Submission required. When an applicant proposes development that meets the definition
and criteria for a minor subdivision or minor site plan, an application in form, content, and
number as required herein shall be submitted.
B. Criteria for minor classification. Applications shall be classed either as minor
subdivisions or minor site plans only upon meeting the definitional requirements in Article
II and the following criteria:
1. Minor Subdivision.
(a) The subdivision shall consist of no more than three (3) lots in total
including the remainder lot; and
(b) The tract was not the subject of a minor subdivision approval within two
(2) years of the date of the resolution of memorialization.
2. Minor Site Plan.
(a) The proposed development contains less than 1,000 square feet of floor
area; and
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
268
(b) The proposed development contains less than 4,000 square feet of
impervious surface; and
(c) The tract was not the subject of a minor subdivision or minor site plan
approval within two (2) years of the date of the resolution of
memorialization.
C. Minimum review time period. The applicant shall submit an application and associated
documentation to the Administrative Officer at least twenty (20) days prior to a regularly
scheduled hearing.
D. Review by professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional
shall review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to
the Board.
E. Determination of completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the
completeness of the application in accordance with the standards contained in this
Article. No application shall be scheduled for a public hearing unless it is determined to
be complete.
F. Time period for consideration. Once the application is deemed complete the Board shall
have forty-five (45) days to grant or deny the application, with or without conditions.
G. Remainder of tract. Where the remaining portion of the original tract that is to be
subdivided is of sufficient size to be developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a concept plan of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible
plan whereby the site plan applied for, together with subsequent site plan(s) that may be
submitted, shall not create, impose, aggravate, or lead to any adverse condition.
H. Board action on applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the
application, that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request
for development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested
persons have been considered. In any event, the Board shall grant or deny the
application for a minor site plan within forty-five (45) days of the date of
determination that a complete application has been submitted to the Board or
within such time as may be consented to by the applicant. The decision and
resolution of the Board shall be in writing in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
10g through -10i.
2. Minor subdivision and site plan approval shall be deemed final approval by the
Board.
3. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the completion of
improvements and performance in accordance with this Ordinance and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, -39, -40, and -53.
4. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the
Monmouth County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on
the application by the Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the
Monmouth County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
269
5. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
I. Effect of approval: Minor Subdivision. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional of otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of approval;
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47.
Extensions may be requested and may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47f and -
g.
J. Effect of approval: Minor Site plans. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of approval.
Extensions may be requested and may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1c.
K. Expiration of approval. In the granting of an application for minor site plan, the applicant
shall secure a zoning permit and a construction permit. When no construction permit is
required, a certificate of occupancy shall be secured within three (3) years of the date of
approval, otherwise the approval shall be considered null and void.
L. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board and the fulfillment of
any conditions, the approved plan, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant;
2. Planning Board file;
3. Municipal Engineer;
4. Municipal Planner;
5. Construction Code Official;
6. Code Enforcement;
7. Tax Assessor;
8. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the
Board or in the resolution of approval.
§ 807 APPLICATION FOR GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
A. Submission required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the
definition and criteria for planned development, a general development plan application in
form, content, and number as required herein may be submitted.
B. Minimum tract area. The minimum land area for the submittal of a general development
plan application shall be greater than twenty (20) acres.
C. Minimum review time period. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an
application and associated documentation at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
270
D. Review by professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional
shall review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to
the Board.
E. Determination of completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the
completeness of the application in accordance with this Chapter. No application shall be
scheduled for a public hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
F. Public notice and hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition of a
general development plan and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a
complete application has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice
and hearing and shall so advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the
time and date for public notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer. Public notice
shall be given in accordance with this Chapter. All persons having an interest in the
proposed development shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
G. Substantial amendment. If during the hearing on the submission, the Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of the tract or its improvements, as proposed by the
applicant, that has been the subject of said hearing, an amended application shall be
submitted and acted upon as an original submission.
H. Remainder of tract. Any lands contemplated for development under the provisions of the
general development plan shall be included in the application.
I. Board action on applications.
1. Review of plan. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently
reviewed the application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed
the application, that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its
request for development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other
interested persons have been considered.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a general
development plan within ninety-five (95) days of the date of determination that a
complete application has been submitted to the Board or within such time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Upon failure of the Board to act within the
aforementioned time periods, the Board shall be deemed to have granted
general development approval to the site plan.
3. Findings for planned unit developments. Prior to the approval by written
resolution of a general development plan for the initial approval of a planned unit
development, the Planning Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to zoning ordinance
standards adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c of the Municipal
Land Use Law;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate;
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed planned unit
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment
are adequate;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
271
(d) That the proposed planned unit development shall not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established;
(e) In the case of a proposed planned unit development that contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and the residents,
occupants, and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
4. Contents of written hearing resolution. The decision and resolution of the Board
shall be in writing in accordance with N.J.S.A 40:55D-10g through -10i and shall
include not only conclusions, but also findings of fact related to the specific
proposal; shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or
for the denial; and shall set particularly in what respects the plan would or would
not be in the public interest, including but not limited to findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
(a) Whether the plan is in general conformity with the provisions of the
Master Plan of the Township of Neptune.
(b) In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of
objectives for planned unit development as set forth in Article I.
(c) The extent to which the plan departs from zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not
limited to density, bulk and use, and the reason why such departures are
or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
(d) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space, the
reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount
and purpose of the common open space as related to the proposed
density and type of development.
(e) The physical design of the plan and the manner in which said design
does or does not make adequate provisions for public services, provide
adequate control over vehicular traffic and further the amenities of light
and air, recreation, landscaping, and visual enjoyment.
(f) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned unit
development to the neighboring area in which it is proposed to be
established.
(g) In the case of a plan that proposes development over a period of five (5)
or more years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents and owners of the
planned unit development in the integrity of the plan, including the
performance guarantees.
5. Conditions of general development plan approval. The Board may condition
approval on terms ensuring the applicant's conformance to this Ordinance
6. Failure of the Board to so act within the required period(s) of time shall be
deemed to be a grant of the general development plan approval of the plan as
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
272
submitted. In the event that the general development plan approval is granted,
other than by lapse of time, either of the plan as submitted or of the plan with
conditions, the Township Planning Board, as part of its resolution, shall specify
the drawings, specifications, and form of performance guarantee as provided by
statute that shall accompany subsequent applications for site plan or subdivision
approval. In the event that the general development plan approval is granted
subject to conditions, the applicant shall within forty-five (45) days after receiving
a copy of the written approval of the Township Planning Board, notify the
Township Planning Board of the acceptance or refusal of all conditions.
(a) In the event the applicant agrees to all modifications and conditions
made a part of the approval of a general development plan, the applicant
and the Township shall enter into a Municipal Development Agreement
pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-45.2.1. which shall specify the terms and
conditions to be honored by both parties to assure the implementation of
the approved planned development.
(b) If the applicant refuses to accept all conditions, the Board shall be
deemed to have denied general development plan approval.
(c) In the event the applicant does not within the required time period notify
the Board of the acceptance or refusal to of the conditions of the general
development plan approval, and in the event such lack of notice shall
prevent the Board and the applicant from mutually agreeing to a change
in such conditions, the Board, at the request of the applicant, may extend
the time during which the applicant shall notify the Board.
(d) The Board may set forth those condition which it deems necessary to
protect the interests of the general public, and the residents and
occupants of the planned unit development. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the sequence and distribution of uses and
densities, limitations of land areas to be developed within a given period,
or provision of physical means to address critical or unique
environmental conditions. Such conditions shall be predicated on the
following criteria:
(i) That each stage of a planned unit development shall contain,
within reasonable limits, a balance of commercial and residential
uses, open space, and community facilities to assure that the
planned unit development is a viable self-sustaining community
unit at any given stage in its growth.
(ii) That each stage of development shall include required open
space in proportion to that part of the total commercial and
residential development units in the planned unit development
that are to be developed in that stage. Such open space shall
include both recreation and conservation uses accessible to the
general public and open space which shall be physically
proximate and accessible to the resident population within the
planned unit development.
(iii) That the size and timing of successive stages of a planned unit
development shall be conditioned upon the availability and
provision of suitable capacity of facilities such as arterial
highways, primary roadways of Monmouth County, primary
roadways of Neptune Township, sewer, water, storm water
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
273
drainage, and other services whose capacities must be
expanded as a result of the development of the planned
development.
7. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the
Monmouth County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on
the application by the Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the
Monmouth County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
8. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant. Such certificate shall
be sufficient in lieu of a resolution of approval and written endorsements and
shall be accepted by the county recording officer for the purpose of filing.
J. Effect of approval.
1. A plan that has been given general development plan approval with conditions
accepted by the applicant (and provided that the applicant has not defaulted
under nor violated any of the conditions of the general development plan
approval) shall not be modified, revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the
Township or any of its present or future agencies or officers pending an
application or applications for subdivision or site plan approvals for each section
without the consent of the applicant provided that an application for subdivision
or site plan approval is filed within five (5) years of the date upon which the
general development plan has been approved.
2. In the event the developer has not applied for preliminary approval of a section or
sections of an approved general development plan within five (5) years of the
date upon which the general development plan was approved such approval may
be terminated by the Planning Board upon written notice to the applicant.
3. The Planning Board may grant these rights for a period of time longer than five
(5) years but not longer than twenty (20) years as shall be reasonable taking into
consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the general development plan approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
4. The applicant may petition the Planning Board thereafter and the Planning Board
may grant an extension of general development plan approval for such additional
time period as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
274
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that, if the design
standards have been revised, such standards may govern
K. Distribution. Upon the granting of general development plan approval by the Board,
copies of the approved documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant;
2. Planning Board file;
3. Municipal Engineer;
4. Township Planner;
5. Construction Code Official;
6. Code Enforcement;
7. Tax Assessor;
8. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the
Board or in the resolution of approval.
§ 808 APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION AND PRELIMINARY MAJOR SITE
PLAN
A. Submission required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the
definition of a preliminary major subdivision or site plan, an application in form, content,
and number as required by this Chapter shall be submitted.
B. Review by professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional
shall review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to
the Board.
C. Determination of completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the
completeness of the application in accordance with this Chapter. No application shall be
scheduled for a public hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
D. Public notice and hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition. of a
general development plan and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a
complete application has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice
and hearing and shall so advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the
time and date for public notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer. Public notice
shall be given in accordance with this Chapter. All persons having an interest in the
proposed development shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
E. Substantial amendment . If during the hearing on the submission, the Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of the site or its improvements, as proposed by the
applicant, that has been the subject of said hearing, an amended application shall be
submitted and acted upon as an original submission.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
275
F. Remainder of tract. Where the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size
to be developed further, the applicant may be required to submit a conceptual plan of the
entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan whereby the site plan
applied for, together with subsequent site plan(s) that may be submitted, shall not create,
impose, aggravate, or lead to any adverse condition.
G. Board action on applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the
application, that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request
for development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested
persons have been considered.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a
preliminary site plan in accordance with:
(a) A site plan of ten (10) acres or less or ten (10) dwelling units or less
within forty-five (45) days of the date of determination that a complete
application has been submitted to the Board or within such time as may
be consented to by the applicant, or
(b) A site plan of more than ten (10) acres or more than ten (10) dwelling
units within ninety-five (95) days of the date of determination that a
complete application has been submitted to the Board or within such
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(c) Upon failure of the Board to act within the aforementioned time periods,
the Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the
site plan.
3. The decision and resolution of the Board shall be in writing in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i.
4. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the applicant's
conformance to this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinance.
5. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the
Monmouth County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on
the application by the Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the
Monmouth County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
6. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant. Such certificate shall
be sufficient in lieu of a resolution of approval.
H. Effect of approval. The approval of a preliminary major site plan shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three (3) year period from the date of a preliminary
approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval have been
granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to, use requirements;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
276
layout and design standards for streets, curbs, and sidewalks, lot sizes,
dimensions, yards, and improvements, whether on-tract or off.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date
of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary site
plan.
3. That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extensions on such
preliminary approval for additional periods of time of at least one year and not to
exceed two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern at the discretion of the Board.
4. In the case of a site plan of fifty (50) acres or larger, the Board may grant these
rights for a period of time longer than three (3) years as shall be reasonable
taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
5. The applicant may petition the Board thereafter and the Board may grant an
extension of preliminary approval for such additional time period as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that, if the design
standards have been revised, such standards may govern.
6. Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary approval pursuant to this
subsection and preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The applicant may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
7. The Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise
be the expiration date, if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the applicant applied
promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. An applicant shall
apply for the extension before, 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of
preliminary approval, or 2), the ninety-first (91st) day after the applicant receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever
occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude
the Board from granting an extension otherwise permitted by this section.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
277
I. Expiration of Approval. After the granting of an application for preliminary subdivision or
preliminary site plan, the applicant shall file an application for final approval within five
years of the date of approval, otherwise the approval shall be considered null and void.
J. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board, copies of the
approved documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant;
2. Board file;
3. Municipal Engineer;
4. Municipal Planner;
5. Code Enforcement;
6. Construction Officer;
7. Tax Assessor;
8. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the
Board or in the resolution of approval.
§ 809 APPLICATION FOR FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION AND FINAL MAJOR SITE PLAN.
A. Submission required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the
definitional requirement for a major site plan and prior to the expiration of preliminary
approval for the subject tract, final plans, application forms and other required
documentation shall be submitted. The applicant may submit for final approval of the
whole, or a section, or sections of the preliminary development plan. Final plans shall
conform substantially to preliminary plans.
B. Minimum review time period. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an
application and associated documentation at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting.
C. Review by professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional
shall review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to
the Board.
D. Determination of completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the
completeness of the application in accordance with this Article. No application shall be
scheduled for a public hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
E. Hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition of a final site plan or
subdivision and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a complete
application has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice and
hearing and shall so advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the
time and date for public notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer.
F. Developer’s Agreement
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
278
1. The terms and conditions of the Developer’s Agreement shall be applicable to an
identified property, described by block and lots located within the Neptune
Township Tax Map.
2. The Developer, in accordance with the approved map and requirements
established by the Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment of the Township
of Neptune, shall install site work improvements in accordance with the
specifications and ordinances of the Township of Neptune, as amended to date.
All work shall be approved by the Township engineer as complying with the
ordinances and other regulations and the requirements of the Township.
3. The Developer shall post with the Township performance guarantees and fees.
The guarantees and fees include: Surety Guarantee, Cash Guarantee, Estimated
Engineering Fees and any other fees. The cash guarantee shall represent ten
percent (10%) of the total performance guarantee. The cash guarantee shall be
the last amount of performance guarantee released by the Township in order that
the surety guarantee might be reduced and released prior to the release of any
cash guarantee required. The performance guarantees and fees shall be posted
and/or paid as provided by the land use ordinance of the Township.
4. The improvements contemplated in the Developer’s Agreement shall be
performed within a period of two (2) years from the date of the Agreement, or
such additional periods of time as may be granted by the Township Planning
Board and/or Board of Adjustment in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52. In the
event of an extension, the Township may periodically review the amount of the
performance guarantees with regard to their sufficiency to insure faithful
completion of remaining required improvements, and if found insufficient, require
the developer to increase the amount of performance guarantees. The issuance
of a certificate of occupancy by the Township within the stated period shall not be
deemed waiver for defects in site work improvements ascertained during said
period or subsequent thereto. In the event the subdivision or any party thereof if
sold or otherwise conveyed by this developer prior to installation of all
improvements, this developer shall have the right to assign both the performance
guarantees and Developer’s Agreement to a subsequent developer who is
determined by the Township in its sole discretion to be qualified, with the
requirement that the subsequent developer assume the same, in writing, and in a
form that is acceptable to the Township Attorney. In the event the subsequent
developer renders new guarantees to the Township, they shall be reviewed by
the Township Attorney as to form and content prior to acceptance and release of
the developer’s performance guarantees.
5. The Developer agrees that prior to the release of the signed final subdivision
map or maps, it shall tender to the Township, by payment to the Township Clerk,
the required engineering inspection fees, if not previously posted. The Township
engineer shall keep records of inspections and related reviews, and the costs
thereof, and upon the Developer’s written request, said records shall be made
available for inspection by the Developer or its representative, not more than
quarterly, during the regular business hours of the Township Engineer.
6. The developer shall also comply with the following terms and conditions in
connection with the final approval of the said plat or map:
(a) All requirements of the ordinances of the Township;
(b) All conditions and requirements of the approvals of the Township
Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment and the Monmouth County
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
279
Planning Board, and the Developer shall pay all costs of improvements,
if any, as may be required by the said Monmouth County Planning
Board, including the posting of any bonds required by the said County of
Monmouth Planning Board.
7. During the coarse of construction and until the time of final acceptance, the
developer shall have full responsibility for all roads and all other improvements
within the subdivision. The developer shall provide and pay for all street lighting
and water hydrant service which any applicable authority requires to be installed
and maintained in the subdivision, requires to be installed and maintained in the
subdivision, and provide and pay for all snowing and plowing, and salt until the
time of final acceptance. Final acceptance for purposes of this provision is
deemed to be the date upon which the sidewalks, curbing, streets and street
lighting are accepted by the Township and the maintenance guarantees for the
same are posted with the Township. Acceptance shall not occur until all
performance bonds are released and all conditions of the final released,
including, but not limited to the posting and acceptance of maintenance
guarantees, are satisfied. Said maintenance guarantees shall be posted with the
Township in accordance with State and Township requirements. It is further
agreed that in the event the developer fails to pay for fees for street lighting,
water hydrant service, or like terms or fails to provide required snow plowing,
sanding and salting or other repairs and/or maintenance, then, upon ten (10)
days written notice by the Township to the Developer, the Township may
withdraw from the cash portion of the performance guarantee such funds as are
necessary to reimburse the agency supplying such service, and to continue to
make such payments as necessary from said funds in order to ensure continued
water, utility and snow plowing services. In addition, any amounts so expended
from the cash portion of the performance guarantee shall be replaced by the
Developer, and until such a time as the funds are replaced, the Township shall
not be obligated to perform any inspections or issue building permits or
certificates of occupancy for the property affected by the cash portion of the
performance guarantee.
8. Model Homes: The Developer may construct a sales area, limited to one (1)
model home of each style and a parking area, with a portion of a model home to
be utilized as ended, it shall be converted to a dwelling and conform to all
governmental regulations. All required improvements for that portion of the
subdivision utilized as a sales area must be completed by the Developer prior to
or contemporaneously with completion of the model area. Nothing within the
Agreement shall be deemed to waive or reduce the Developer’s obligation to
construct all improvements in the location of the said sales area as well as in the
entire subdivision in accordance with the approved subdivision map prior to final
acceptance of said work and the release of the Developer’s performance
guarantees. The sales office shall be permitted, if otherwise qualified, the
issuance of a temporary building permit and thereafter a temporary certificate of
occupancy, if necessary, for which the Developer shall request extensions
pursuant to the applicable Township ordinances.
9. Model Plans: In order to preserve the architectural and aesthetic quality of the
proposed subdivision, the Developer agrees that at the time it submits an
application for an initial building permit, it will at the same time, submit detailed
architectural plans for all models (whether to be actually constructed as onsite
model homes or not) for homes which it intends to construct in the subdivision.
Thereafter, if the Developer, its representatives, successors, or assigns, desires
to revise its plans for models or provide additional models or plans for models for
homes which it intends to construct in the subdivision, it shall first submit revised
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
280
or new detailed architectural plans for review and approval by the Construction
Code Official. No revised or new plans shall be approved by the Construction
Code Official if the home or homes to be constructed under such a plan would
reduce by ten percent (10%) or more, the square footage of the average of
model homes shown on any previously submitted and approved plan or plans, or
if the new plans would in any manner contravene the Zoning Ordinance
concerning uniformity of exterior design and appearance. The Developer further
agrees on behalf of itself, its representatives, successors or assigns, that if any
individual lot or lots are sold as vacant land, such sale shall be subject to the
requirements of this provision and will be set forth as a restriction or condition in
the deed of conveyance.
10. Sales and Leasing Signs: The size, number and location of sales and leasing
signs shall be addressed in the developer’s agreement and approved by the
Township Committee.
11. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued to one or more housing units, in
accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the Township upon the
completion and acceptance by the Township of all required improvements that
serve the specific housing unit group of housing units for which a certificate of
occupancy is sought.
12. The Developer agrees to record the Developer’s Agreement document and to
provide the Township with a duly recorded copy of it.
13. If any terms or conditions of the within Agreement are deemed invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
14. Within the Developer’s Agreement, the Developer will attach a list setting forth
the names and addresses of the individuals and/or entities each having an
interest of ten percent (10%) or more in this development and certify the
correctness of that list. The Developer will provide the Township with notice of
any changes in this list, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of such
occurrence. Such changes shall be separately certified, and the Township
reserves the right to revise or rescind any or all terms of the within Agreement as
the result of any such changes.
15. All notices required or permitted under the Developer’s Agreement shall be in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the addresses set forth or as
otherwise designated by the parties in writing.
G. Board action on applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the
application, that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request
for development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested
persons have been considered. Final approval shall be granted if the detailed
drawings, specifications, plans, estimates, and other documentation of the
application conform to the standards established by this Ordinance and any other
applicable ordinance for final approval and the conditions of preliminary approval.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a final
major subdivision or site plan within forty-five (45) days of the determination of
completeness or within such time as may be consented to by the applicant.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
281
3. The Board shall not act upon an application until it has determined that it is
complete.
4. The decision and resolution of the Board shall be in writing in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i.
5. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the applicant's
conformance to this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinance and shall
condition approval on the approval of other agencies with development review
powers over the subdivision or site plan application.
6. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the
Monmouth County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40.27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on
the application by the Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the
Monmouth County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
7. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
H. Effect of approval.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and
all other rights conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or not, shall
not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of final approval.
2. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the
Board may extend such period of protection of rights for extensions of one year
but not to exceed three such extensions. The granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval for the section granted final
approval.
3. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development of fifty
(50) acres or more; or, a conventional subdivision or site plan of 150 acres or
more; or, of a nonresidential development of 200,000 square feet or more, the
Board may grant these rights for a period of time longer than two years as shall
be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the final approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
4. The applicant may petition the Board thereafter and the Board may grant an
extension of final approval for such additional time period as shall be determined
by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the final approval;
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
282
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development.
5. Whenever the Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant to this
subsection and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension
is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The applicant may apply for the extension either before or after what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
6. The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by
the Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding
with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental entities and that the applicant applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. An applicant shall apply for the
extension before, 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
approval, or 2), the ninety-first (91st) day after the applicant receives the last
legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude the
Board from otherwise granting an extension pursuant to this section.
I. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board, copies of the
approved documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant;
2. Board file;
3. Municipal Engineer;
4. Municipal Planner;
5. Code Enforcement;
6. Construction Officer;
7. Tax Assessor;
8. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the
Board or in the resolution of approval.
§ 810 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT AFTER APPROVAL
A. Within the time period established by statute or by condition of the resolution of approval,
the developer shall submit three prints for review for compliance with the conditions of
approval to the Planning and Zoning Department. Once it has been determined that the
plat meets the conditions of approval, the developer shall submit two mylars and one plat
in digital form for the permanent records of the municipality and any other instruments to
be recorded with the Monmouth County Clerk’s Office. The format of the digitized plat
shall be as directed by the Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer may waive the
requirement for the submission of the digitized plat under special circumstances. No plat
shall be signed by the Township Clerk, Board Chair, Board Secretary or Municipal
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
283
Engineer without first complying with required guarantees for on- and off-tract
improvements as set forth in Article X of this Chapter.
B. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95) days from the date of
signing the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the
developer with the county recording officer. The Board of Jurisdiction may for good
cause shown extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of the signing of the plat. The Board of Jurisdiction may extend the
ninety-five (95)-day or 190-day period if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board of Jurisdiction that:
1. The developer was barred or prevented, either directly or indirectly, from filing
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other government
or quasi-governmental entities; and
2. The developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals.
The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the
wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Board of Jurisdiction. The
developer may then apply for an extension either before or after the original
expiration date.
C. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer until it has
been approved by the Board of Jurisdiction as indicated on the instrument by the
signature of the Chairman or Chairwoman and Secretary of the Board of Jurisdiction or a
certificate issued in lieu of action by the Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, -
50, -56, -61, -67 or -76. If the County Recording Officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the
municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the official records.
D. It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the Planning Board in writing
within seven (7) days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date
of filing, and official number.
§ 811 CIRCULATION IMPACT STUDY
Circulation Impact Studies, when required, shall conform to the following provisions:
A. When required. A circulation impact study shall be submitted for all general development
plans, preliminary major subdivisions and preliminary major site plans.
B. Submission format. Circulation impact studies shall consist of two components, a
planning report and a traffic impact report.
1. Planning report. The planning report component of the circulation impact study
shall include the following:
(a) An introduction indicating the applicant, the location of the site in
question, and a description of the site from a land use and transportation
perspective.
(b) The extent to which any proposed street system meets requirements for
street hierarchy, right-of-way and cartway width, and sidewalks.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
284
(c) The extent to which the proposed circulation system conforms to the
Circulation Element of the Master Plan.
(d) The extent to which internal circulation for vehicles, people and the
movement of goods is adequate.
(e) The extent to which the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and the traveling
public is protected.
(f) The provisions made to provide connectivity to the street system,
pedestrian generators, and the local and regional greenway network.
2. Traffic impact report. The traffic impact report component of the circulation
impact study shall include the following.
(a) A description of the project phasing, access points, and connection to
other existing or proposed developments.
(b) An analysis of existing conditions, including:
(i) A description of the study area and the rationale behind choosing
this area;
(ii) A description of the study area's roadway facilities, including
number of lanes, functional classification, condition, location and
type of traffic signals, and location of other traffic control devices
or signs;
(iii) The location of transit routes and stops and any transit facilities,
including on-street, off-street, and private facilities, and service
frequency;
(iv) The location of school bus routes and stops;
(v) The location of pedestrian crosswalks, sidewalks, and bicycle
pathways;
(vi) Traffic volume data including turning movement counts at key
intersections during the peak periods of the day, truck
movements, pedestrian counts, and transit use;
(vii) Volume/capacity analysis and an assessment of existing
conditions.
(c) Traffic characteristics of the site.
(i) Traffic generation of the Proposed uses in the development;
(ii) Traffic distribution.
(d) Future demands on the transportation system.
(i) Projection of non-site related traffic to the build-out year or years
of the site (base conditions);
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
285
(ii) Projection of all traffic, including site traffic, to the build-out year
or years of the site.
(e) Impact analysis and recommendations.
(i) Levels of service shall be computed for each analysis year both
with and without the inclusion of site traffic;
(ii) Comparison of levels of service conditions with site traffic, and,
with site traffic after recommended improvements are
constructed;
(iii) Recommendations for automobile reduction techniques;
(iv) Schematic plan of any recommended improvements.
(f) Site plan analysis, if applicable.
(i) Location of access points;
(ii) Demand for parking and loading;
(iii) Sight distance analysis.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
286
§ 812 SUBMISSION CHECKLISTS
§ 812.01 Zoning Data Table
The following table shall be included on the first sheet of all plans submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment for Site Plan, Minor Site Plan, Subdivision, Minor Subdivision or Variance
approval:
ZONE DISTRICT:
REQUIRED EXISTING PROPOSED
Minimum lot area
Maximum density
Maximum FAR
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot frontage
Minimum lot depth
Minimum front yard setback
Minimum side yard setback
Minimum Combined side yard
setback
Minimum rear yard setback
Maximum percent building
cover
Maximum percent lot cover
Maximum number of stories
Maximum building height
Minimum improvable lot area
Minimum improvable area-
Diameter of circle (feet)
Off-street parking spaces
Loading spaces
Signs
Existing use or uses:
Proposed use or uses:
Existing floor area:
Proposed floor area:
NOTE: Any items that are not applicable to a particular application shall be marked with an “N/A.”
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
287
§ 812.02 Site Plan Checklist
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been submitted
(only folded plans will be accepted):
1. Eighteen (18) copies of the application form;
2. Eighteen (18) copies of the site plan (half-size prints for the Board plus 8 full size
prints);
3. Three (3) prints of the Soil Erosion and Sediment and Sediment Control Plans;
4. Eighteen (18) prints of the Tree Preservation Plan;
5. Storm Drainage and Detention Basin calculations;
6. Certification of payment of property taxes;
7. Proof of submission to the Monmouth County Planning Board;
8. Notice and proofs of service;
9. Certificate of Appropriateness, if applicable;
10. Application fee;
11. Zoning Determination from the Zoning Officer;
12. A signed and sealed copy of the survey, prepared by a land surveyor;
B. Plan Requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been shown on, or
included with, a site plan:
1. General Requirements. The site plan shall be signed and sealed by an architect,
professional engineer, land surveyor and/or professional planner licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey, provided however, that the sanitary sewer,
water distribution and storm drainage plans and water and sewage treatment
facility plans may only be signed and sealed by a professional engineer. In
addition, the following must be submitted:
(a) Site plan shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one (1”) inch equals
fifty (50’) feet nor larger than one (1”) inch equals ten (10’) feet.
(b) The site plan shall be based on a monumented, current certified
boundary survey, prepared in accordance with New Jersey
Administrative Code 13:40-5.1, “Preparation of Land Surveys” dated
September 1984 and as amended. The date of the survey and the name
of the person who made the survey, shall be shown on the site plan.
2. Title Block. The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8-27 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Site Plan”
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
288
(b) Name of the development, if any;
(c) Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers (s) of the site, as shown on the
latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be shown;
(d) Date of original and all revisions;
(e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated;
(f) Name, signature, address and license number of the engineer, architect,
land surveyor or planner who prepared the plan, and their embossed
seal;
3. Zoning data table formatted in accordance with §812.01
4. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas of
all existing water courses, where such have been delineated or the limits of
alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have not
been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in the determination of floodway and flood
hazard area limits.
5. North arrow and written and graphic scale;
6. Paving and right of way widths of existing streets within two hundred (200’) feet
of the site;
7. The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof and delineation of all
wetlands areas soils as required by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
8. Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants, water lines, utility
poles and all other topographic features of a physical or engineering nature with
the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof.
9. All existing structures on the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof,
including their use, indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those to
remain.
10. Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor and basement
elevations, front, rear, and side setbacks of all buildings and other pertinent
improvements.
11. Existing and proposed public and private easements or rights-of-way and the
purposes thereof, including conservation easements.
12. A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at one (1’) foot
intervals throughout the tract, except if slopes exceed five (5%) percent a two (2’)
foot interval may be used, and if they exceed ten (10%) percent a five (5’) foot
interval is permissible. datum shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
Datum (MSL=O) and source of datum and bench marks shall be noted. In
addition to proposed grading contours, sufficient additional spot elevations shall
be drawn to clearly delineate proposed grading.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
289
13. On site drainage plan.
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which shall clearly
show the street and site layout and those terms which are pertinent to
drainage including existing and proposed contours as previously
required.
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes, invert
and grade or rim elevations, grades and all direction of flow. The
direction of flow of all surface waters and of all streams shall be shown.
(d) The drainage shall be accompanied by complete drainage calculations
made in accordance with the Soil Conservation Service method.
14. Off site drainage plan. The plan shall also be accompanied by an off site
drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin in which
the site is located. The terminus of the basin and existing ground
contours or other basis for determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off site existing drainage shall be shown with elevations of
inverts and grates to the nearest one tenth of a foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and maybe obtained from the
County or Township Engineer, any existing plans for drainage
improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event a temporary drainage system is proposed, full plans of that
system shall be shown.
(e) The off site drainage plans shall be accompanied by profiles of all
proposed drainage, showing existing details, pipe sizes, type inverts,
crowns, slopes, all proposed structures and connections and design
hydraulic grade lines for all conduits designed to carry forty (40) or more
cubic feet per second. Cross sections at intervals not exceeding one
hundred (100’) feet shall be shown for all open channels.
15. If required by the Township Engineer, center line profiles of streets bordering the
site, internals roadways, and major circulation aisles showing existing and final
grades and slopes, and pipe sizes, type, inverts and grate or rim elevations of
drainage and sanitary sewage facilities.
16. Soil Boring Logs. Unless the Township shall determine that a lesser number of
boring logs are required or that some or all the boring logs may be deferred to
the final plan stage, the site plan shall be accompanied by a set of boring logs
and soil analyses for borings made in accordance with the following.
(a) One boring not less than fifteen (15) feet below grade or twenty (20) feet
minimum depth shall be made for every five (5) acres (or portion thereof)
of land where the water table is found to be ten (10) feet or more below
proposed or existing grade at all boring locations.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
290
(b) One additional boring shall be made per acre (or portion thereof) in those
areas where the water table is found to be less than ten (10) feet below
proposed or existing grade.
(c) In addition to the above, in those areas where the water table is found to
be five (5) feet or less below existing or proposed grade, two additional
borings per acres (or portion thereof) will be required if construction of
basement is contemplated. Borings shall be located where such
basements are proposed.
(d) Boring logs shall show soil types and characteristics encountered,
ground water depths, the methods and equipment used, the name of the
firm, if any, making the borings and the name of the person in charge of
the boring operation. The boring logs shall also show surface elevations
to the nearest one tenth of a foot.
(e) Based on the borings, the site plan shall clearly indicate all areas having
a water table within two (2) feet of the existing surface of the land, or
within two (2’) feet of proposed grade, of all areas within which two (2’)
feet or more of fill is contemplated or has previously been placed.
(f) Certified soil tests as a basis for design standards for pavement, pipe,
bedding, etc.
17. Zone boundaries and the tax map sheet, lot and block numbers and the names
of owners of all properties within two hundred (200’) of the site.
18. A key map, at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 1,000 feet, showing
the location of the site with reference to surrounding areas, existing streets, the
names of all such streets and any zone boundary or municipal boundary which is
within 200 feet of the site.
19. The location, area, dimensions and proposed disposition of any area or areas of
the site proposed to be retained as common open space, indicating the facilities
to be provided in such areas.
20. The capacity of off street parking areas, and the location and dimensions of all
access drives, aisles and parking stalls. The location and treatment of existing
and proposed entrances and exits to public rights of way, including the possible
utilization of traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes,
additional width and any other device necessary for traffic safety and/or
convenience, and the estimated average number of passenger vehicles, single
unit trucks or buses and semi-trailers that will enter the site each day.
21. Graphic depiction of the anticipated routes and details of the system of on site
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
22. The location and size of proposed loading docks.
23. The location of curbs and sidewalks.
24. Cross sections showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs and
sidewalks.
25. Sign plan indicating measurements, content, dimensions and design.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
291
26. Exterior lighting plan, including the location, direction of illumination, amount of
illumination expressed in horizontal foot candles, wattage and drawn details of all
outdoor lighting standards and features.
27. Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type, spacing and number
of each type of tree or shrub and the location, type and size, spacing and number
of each type of ground cover to be utilized and planting details for trees, shrubs
and/or ground cover.
28. Tree Removal Plan in accordance with §525.
29. Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage areas,
outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
30. Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure or
structures or existing structures to be renovated.
31. Location of facilities for the handicapped, including parking spaces and ramps
(where applicable), and including construction details for ramps for the
handicapped.
32. Sectionalization and staging plan. Developers of large uses such as shopping
centers, multifamily dwellings, industrial parks or other such uses proposed to be
developed in stages shall submit a sectionalization and staging plan showing the
following:
(a) The anticipated date of commencing construction of each section or
stage;
(b) Plans for separate construction emergency access for the project in
order to avoid occupancy conflict;
33. Written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to indicate the
effects of the use in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, fire
hazards or safety hazards. The written description shall also include the hours of
operation of the use, the number of shifts to be worked, the number of
employees in each shift, the number of vehicles to be stored or parking on the
site and provisions to be made for site maintenance.
34. Traffic analysis report and recommendations from a qualified traffic engineer.
35. Such other information as the Municipal Agency and/or Township Engineer may
require during site plan review.
36. Use Group Classification of the building or structure.
37. Type of construction classification of building or structure to be erected, altered
or extended, as defined by the B.O.C.A. Code.
§ 812.03 Minor Site Plan Checklist
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been submitted
(only folded plans will be accepted):
1. Eighteen (18) copies of the application form;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
292
2. Eighteen (18) sets of the minor site plan (half-size prints for the Board plus 8 full
size prints);
3. Three (3) prints of the Soil Erosion and Sediment and Sediment Control Plans;
4. Eighteen (18) prints of the Tree Preservation Plan;
5. Storm Drainage and Detention Basin calculations;
6. Certification of payment of property taxes;
7. Proof of submission to the Monmouth County Planning Board;
8. Notice and proofs of service;
9. Certificate of Appropriateness, if applicable;
10. Application fee;
11. Zoning Determination from the Zoning Officer;
12. A signed and sealed copy of the survey, prepared by a land surveyor;
B. Plan Requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been shown on, or
included with, a minor site plan:
1. General Requirements. The minor site plan shall be signed and sealed by an
architect, professional engineer, land surveyor and/or professional planner
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, provided however, that the
sanitary sewer, water distribution and storm drainage plans and water and
sewage treatment facility plans may only be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer. In addition, the following must be submitted:
(a) Minor site plan shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one (1”) inch
equals fifty (50’) feet nor larger than one (1”) inch equals ten (10’) feet.
(b) The minor site plan shall be based on a monumented, current certified
boundary survey, prepared in accordance with New Jersey
Administrative Code 13:40-5.1, “Preparation of Land Surveys” dated
September 1984 and as amended. The date of the survey and the name
of the person who made the survey, shall be shown on the site plan.
2. Title Block. The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8-27 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Minor Site Plan”
(b) Name of the development, if any;
(c) Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers (s) of the site, as shown on the
latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be shown;
(d) Date of original and all revisions;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
293
(e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated;
(f) Name, signature, address and license number of the engineer, architect,
land surveyor or planner who prepared the plan, and their embossed
seal;
(g) If the minor site plan contains more than one (1) sheet, each sheet shall
be numbered and titled.
3. Zoning data table formatted in accordance with §812.01.
4. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas of
all existing water courses, where such have been delineated or the limits of
alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have not
been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in the determination of floodway and flood
hazard area limits.
5. Paving and right of way widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the site;
6. The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within 200 feet thereof and delineation of all wetland soils as
defined by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
7. Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants, water lines, utility
poles and all other topographic features of a physical or engineering nature with
the site and within 200 feet thereof.
8. All existing structures on the site and within 200 feet thereof, including their use,
indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those to remain.
9. Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor and basement
elevations, front, rear and side setbacks of all buildings and other pertinent
improvements.
10. A signage plan indicating type, size, location, and method of illumination of all
signs proposed.
11. Existing and proposed public and private easements or rights-of-way and the
purposes thereof, including conservation easements.
12. Sufficient grading information for the Planning Board Engineer to review the
proposed changes and impact of the project.
13. If required by the Township Engineer, center line profiles of streets bordering the
site, internal roadways and major circulation aisles showing existing and final
grades and slopes and pipe sizes, slope type inverts, and grate or rim elevations
or drainage and sanitary sewerage facilities.
14. Zone boundaries and the tax map sheet, lot and block numbers and the names
of owners of all properties within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.
15. A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals on thousand (1,000’) feet,
showing the location of the site with reference to surrounding areas, existing
streets, the names of all such streets and any zone boundary or municipal
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
294
boundary which is within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.
16. The location, area, dimensions and proposed disposition of any area or areas of
the site proposed to be retained as common open space, indicating the facilities
to be provided in such areas.
17. Graphic depiction of the anticipated routes and details of the system of on site
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
18. The location and size of proposed loading docks.
19. The location of curbs and sidewalks.
20. The location of any proposed exterior lighting.
21. The location of any proposed landscaping and screening.
22. Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage areas,
outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
23. Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure of
structures, or existing structures to be renovated.
24. Location of facilities for the handicapped, including parking spaces and ramps
(where applicable).
25. Use group classification of the building or structure.
26. Type of construction classification of building or structure to be erected, altered
or extended, as defined by the B.O.C.A. Code.
§ 812.04 Preliminary Major Subdivision Checklist
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been submitted
(only folded plans will be accepted):
1. Eighteen (18) copies of the application form;
2. Eighteen (18) black on white prints of the preliminary plan (10 half-size prints for
the Board plus 8 full size prints) {Only folded plans will be accepted};
3. Three (3) prints of the Soil Erosion and Sediment and Sediment Control Plans;
4. Certification of taxes paid;
5. Certification of owner authorizing submission of the application;
6. Proof of submission to the Monmouth County Planning Board;
7. Three (3) copies of a letter, in a form prescribed by the Township Attorney,
saving the Township, its engineer, and Officers harmless from any loss due to
damage resulting from the grading, drainage or development of the property.
8. Notice and proofs of service;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
295
9. Certificate of Appropriateness, if applicable;
10. Application fee;
11. Deed for property;
B. Plan Requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been shown on, or
included with, a site plan:
1. General Requirements. The plan for a major subdivision shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than one hundred feet (100’) to the inch, shall conform to the
provisions of the New Jersey Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 16”23-0.9 et seq. and
shall include, or be accompanied by, the information specified below:
(a) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, all lots and lands reserved or dedicated for public use shall
balance and their descriptions shall close within a limit of error of not
more than one (1) par in ten thousand (10,000).
(b) The major subdivision shall be abased on a current boundary survey
prepared in accordance with New Jersey Administrative Code 13”40-5.1
et seq., “Preparation of Land Surveys”, dated September 1984 and as
may be amended, certified to the sub-divider.
2. Title Block. The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8-27 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Major Subdivision”
(b) Name of the subdivision, if any;
(c) Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers (s) of the tract to be subdivided as
shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown;
(d) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated.
(f) Date of original and all revisions;
(g) Name, signature, address and license number of the land surveyor who
prepared the map and made the survey and their embossed seal.
3. Zoning data table formatted in accordance with Section 812.01.
4. Minimum improvable lot area in tabular and graphic form.
5. A key map at a scale of not less then one (1”) inch equals one thousand
(1,000.’) feet showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with reference to
surrounding areas, existing street which border the tract, the names of al such
streets and any zone boundaries which are within five hundred (500’) feet of the
subdivision.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
296
6. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land the high and low points and tentative cross sections and
center line profiles for all proposed new streets.
7. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings water
courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes and any natural features such as
wooded areas and rock formations.
8. Preliminary plans of proposed utility layouts for sewers, storm drains, water, gas
and electricity showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility
systems. If no permanent water supply or sewage disposal system is available,
the developer shall be required to provide permanent installation for future
connections to a proposed system: the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, county, or State health agency. When a public sewage
disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation tests made
as required by the State Board of Health and submit the results with the
preliminary plat. Any sub-division or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements of this ordinance or other applicable regulations shall
not be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall first
be approved by the appropriate local, county or State health agency.
9. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided.
10. North arrow.
11. Written graphic scales.
12. Proposed lot and block numbers as assigned by the Neptune Township Tax
Assessor.
§ 812.05 Final Major Subdivision Checklist
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been submitted
(only folded plans will be accepted):
1. Eighteen (18) copies of the application form;
2. The original tracing of the plat. Two (2) translucent tracings or mylars, and
eighteen (18) black and white paper prints (10 half-size prints for the Board plus
8 full size prints);
3. Three (3) prints of the Soil Erosion and Sediment and Sediment Control Plans;
4. Tree Removal Plan
5. Certification of taxes paid;
6. Proof of submission to the Monmouth County Planning Board;
7. Proof of ability to guarantee by bonding, cash deposits or other means, the
maximum amount of performance and maintenance guarantees as they relate to
the improvements shown on the final plan.
8. Notice and proofs of service;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
297
9. Certificate of Appropriateness, if applicable;
10. Application fee;
11. Deed for property;
B. Plan Requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been shown on, or
included with, a site plan:
1. General Requirements. The plan for a major subdivision shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than fifty feet (50’) to the inch, shall conform to the provisions of
the New Jersey Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 16”23-0.9 et seq. and shall include, or
be accompanied by, the information specified below:
(a) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, all lots and lands reserved or dedicated for public use shall
balance and their descriptions shall close within a limit of error of not
more than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000).
(b) The major subdivision shall be based on a current boundary survey
prepared in accordance with New Jersey Administrative Code 13”40-5.1
et seq., “Preparation of Land Surveys”, dated September 1984 and as
may be amended, certified to the sub-divider.
2. Title Block. The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8-2 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Major Subdivision”
(b) Name of the subdivision, if any;
(c) Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers (s) of the tract to be subdivided as
shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown;
(d) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated.
(f) Date of original and all revisions;
(g) Name, signature, address and license number of the land surveyor who
prepared the map and made the survey and their embossed seal.
3. Zoning data table formatted in accordance with §812.01
4. A key map at a scale of not less then one (1”) inch equals one thousand (1,000.’)
feet showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with reference to
surrounding areas, existing street which border the tract, the names of al such
streets and any zone boundaries which are within five hundred (500’) feet of the
subdivision.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
298
5. Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, street names, easements and
other rights of way, land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines
and other site lines, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and
radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.
6. The purpose of any easement or land, reserved or dedicated to public use shall
be noted.
7. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be numbered
consecutively beginning with number one. No more than one number may be
assigned to each lot, as approved by the Neptune Tax Assessor.
8. Minimum building setback lines.
9. North arrow.
10. Written and graphic scales.
11. Location and description of all monuments.
12. Names of owners of adjoining un-subdivided land.
13. Certification of engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of the plan.
14. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the owner
has given consent under the option agreement.
15. When approval of a plan is required by an officer or body of the Township
County, or State, approval shall be certified on the plan.
16. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the municipal engineer.
17. Contours at five (5’) feet intervals for slopes averaging ten (10%) percent or
greater and at two (2’) feet intervals for land of less slope.
18. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
§ 812.06 Minor Subdivision Checklist
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been submitted
(only folded plans will be accepted):
1. Eighteen (18) copies of Application form;
2. Eighteen (18) copies of the sketch plan (10 half-size prints for the Board plus 8
full size prints) [only folded plans will be accepted];
3. Certification of owner authorizing submission of the application;
4. Certification of payment of property taxes;
5. Proof of application to the Monmouth County Planning Board;
6. Certificate of Appropriateness, if applicable;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
299
7. Application fee;
8. Deed of property.
B. General Requirements: The plat for a minor subdivision shall be drawn at a scale of not
less than one hundred feet (100’) to the inch, shall conform to the provisions of the New
Jersey Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 16:23-9.9 et seq. and shall include, or be accompanied
by, the information specified below:
1. All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, all lots and lands reserved or dedicated for public use shall balance
and their descriptions shall close within a limit of error of not more than one (1)
part in ten thousand (10,000).
2. The minor subdivision shall be based on a current boundary survey prepared in
accordance with New Jersey Administrative Code, 13:40-5.1 et, seq.,
“Preparation of Land Surveys,” dated September 1984 and as may be amended,
certified to the sub-divider.
3. Title Block. The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8-27 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Minor Subdivision”
(b) Name of Subdivision, (if any)
(c) Tax map sheet, block and lot number (s) of the tract to be subdivided as
shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown.
(d) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(e) Names and addresses of owners and sub-divider, so designated.
(f) Date of original and all revisions.
(g) Name, signature, address and license number of the land surveyor who
prepared the map and made the survey; the plat shall bear the
embossed seal of said land surveyor.
C. Plat Detail Information:
1. A key map at a scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals one thousand (1,000’)
feet showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with reference to
surrounding areas, existing street which border the tract, the names of all such
streets and any zone boundaries which are within five hundred (500’) feet of the
subdivision.
2. Zoning data table formatted in accordance with §812.01
3. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the entire tract.
4. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be subdivided and
within the portion to be and within twenty five (25) feet thereof.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
300
5. The names of the owners and of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by
the most recent municipal tax records.
6. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
7. All street or roads and streams within one hundred (100) feet of the tract.
8. North arrows.
9. Written and graphic scale.
10. A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided.
11. Proposed lot and block numbers as assigned by the Neptune Township Tax
Assessor.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
301
ARTICLE IX- HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES
§ 900 APPLICATION PROCEDURE IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND FOR DESIGNATED
HISTORIC SITES
A. This Section establishes the circumstances, conditions and procedures to obtain a
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission as it pertains to
exterior architectural features, applications for a permit from the Zoning Officer and/or
Construction Official or for applications for development for properties in any Historic
District Zone District or for designated historic sites situated elsewhere in the Township.
No zoning permit where such is required shall be issued unless a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been issued previously by the Historic Preservation Commission
and when additionally required an approval has been granted by the appropriate Neptune
Township Planning Board or Zoning Board.
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his designee of the Township to review and
submit to the Historic Preservation Commission all plans for the construction, alteration,
repair, restoration or demolition of structures located in any Historic District Zone
including any changes in the existing exterior elements of the building and other
improvements on the site that can be seen from the outside, except for landscaping
outside of the Historic Flared Avenue Open Space and walls less than eighteen (18”)
inches in height. All applications for site plan, subdivision, variance, conditional use,
appeal or interpretation as is specified herein shall additionally be reviewed in
accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. [NOTE: This Section 900.B has
been amended per Ordinance No. 02-41]
C. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, restored or demolished
until the Historic Preservation Commission shall approve an application for a building or
demolition permit in relation to those exterior architectural features which are subject to
public view from a public street or place.
§ 901 ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS REQUIRED FOR APPLICATIONS IN HISTORIC ZONE
DISTRICTS OR OTHER DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES
In addition to the prevailing applicable submission requirements of the Township for zoning permits,
development applications, demolition or relocation permits and any other actions that would affect the
exterior appearance of a structure or of its site, the following requirements also pertain to properties
located in an Historic District or other formally designated sites elsewhere in the Township. The following
(in two (2) copies each) shall be submitted with the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness to the
Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission.
A. RESERVED. [Deleted per Ordinance No. 02-41]
B. Drawings at a scale of not less than one-fourth inch equals one (1/4 = 1') foot showing
the proposed improvements in the plan and changes of all affected elevations; drawings
shall be prepared by either a licensed architect or by the property owner, accompanied
by an affidavit of ownership and shall contain the name of the person who prepared the
plan and the date of preparation, as required by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
This requirement shall not apply to applications relating to single-family dwellings where
construction permits are not required.
C. Drawings shall be in sufficient detail to show the conformity of the proposal with the
particular architectural style of the structure as documented by prototype drawings
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
302
contained in Design Guidelines or other accepted sources and the general compatibility
and appropriateness of the applicant's proposal and show dimensional relationship to
adjoining structures.
D. As-built drawings at a scale of one-fourth inch equals one (1/4=1') foot or photographs of
all sides of the structure in its present design and condition to enable the Historic
Preservation Commission to determine the compatibility of the applicant's proposal with
the design type and existing characteristics of the structure.
E. Detailed information shall be provided on the construction materials, color, design and
any of the following or other elements of the proposal to provide a clear and
comprehensive understanding for the Historic Preservation Commission in its
determination of the compatibility of the proposal:
1. Roof design materials and surfacing;
2. Walls, siding, pattern of shingles and painting;
3. Windows: style, relationship to each other, awnings, shutters;
4. Doors;
5. Ornaments or trim, awnings, screening or privacy screening;
6. Colors/materials (see color chips available in the Office of the Secretary of the
Historic Preservation Commission);
7. Railings, porches, fences, gutters and leaders;
8. Chimneys;
9. Fences; Walls greater than eighteen (18”) inches in height. [NOTE: This section
901.E.9 has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-41];
10. Garbage can enclosures, trash receptacles, dumpsters, accessory structures and
pool; [NOTE: This section 901.E.10 has been amended per Ordinance No. 02-
41]
11. Garages, carports, driveways, sidewalks, patios and curbs/curb cuts;
12. Signs, vending machines, lighting and telephones;
13. TV antennas, communication antennas and other exterior communication
devices;
14. Solar energy installations;
15. Outdoor furniture for accessory use of a principal (nonresidential) use such as a
restaurant's outdoor eating section;
16. Street furniture generally relative to a public use or a semi-public (e.g., Camp
Meeting Association) user;
17. For new construction, except single-family dwellings , utilities shall be placed
underground and site plans shall show the placement of same; statements from
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
303
the relevant public utility company may be requested by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
§ 902 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
The following types of applications shall be subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission for
a Certificate of Appropriateness (other than those aspects of an application for development which has
been approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be):
A. Any exterior alteration on existing structures or buildings or other improvements on their
sites, including, but not limited to: windows, doors, shutters, balustrades, railings,
columns, cornices, moldings, trim, stairs, steps, porches, walks, patios, siding, gutters,
signs, solar panels, fences, walls greater than eighteen (18”) in height, and roofs, etc. in
any historic zone district or other designated sites in the Township. The repainting of any
exterior existing structure, building or improvement in the same color shall be specifically
excluded from the requirements of this subsection. In addition to the above-mentioned
exclusions, any painting of any part of the exterior, existing structure, building or
improvement in any of the historic colors approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission by resolution and on display in the office of the Secretary of the Historic
Preservation Commission shall be specifically excluded from the requirement of this
section of the application. [NOTE: This section 902.A has been amended per Ordinance
No. 02-41]
B. Applications for construction permits for new construction or alteration in any historic
zone district.
C. Applications for construction permits to demolish a structure in any historic zone district
or any other designated site in the Township.
D. Applications to relocate a structure in a historic zone district or any other designated site
in the Township.
E. The construction of new sidewalks or changes to existing sidewalks within the public
right-of-way.
§ 903 REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS APPLICATIONS
A. Persons interested in obtaining Historic Preservation Commission approval for proposed
work are encouraged to apply directly to the Historic Preservation Commission for review
and approval. At their option, they may apply to the Administrative Officer.
B. A presentation for review before the Historic Preservation Commission shall be set for no
later than forty-five (45) days from receipt by the Historic Preservation Commission of the
complete application.
C. Notice of such a review shall be sent by regular mail or personal delivery to the applicant
with a copy to the Construction Official and if the application was referred to the Historic
Preservation Commission by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, a copy
shall be sent to the Planning Board or Zoning Board.
D. The Historic Preservation Commission may take testimony from the applicant or any
other interested party which is necessary and relevant for its architectural review.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
304
§ 904 TIME FOR DECISIONS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Within forty-five (45) days from the receipt by the Historic Preservation Commission of a
complete application or such additional period of time as extended by mutual consent by
the applicant and the Historic Preservation Commission, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall make a determination and report as to whether the proposal is
consistent with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
B. For an application for the issuance of a permit from the Zoning Officer and/or
Construction Official, if within the forty-five (45) days of referral of a permit application to
the Historic Preservation Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission
recommends against the issuance of the permit and does not grant a Certificate of
Appropriateness or recommends conditions to the permit in the form of a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official shall deny the issuance
of the permit or include the conditions in the permit as the case may be.
C. Failure to make a determination within the forty-five (45) day period, unless extended as
set forth in paragraph A above, shall be deemed to constitute the issuance of the
Certificate of Appropriateness without the recommendations of conditions to the
Certificate of Appropriateness.
D. For applications before the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, advice shall be
conveyed through the delegation of one (1) of Historic Preservation Commission's
members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any
written report which may have been submitted.
§ 905 EFFECT OF DECISIONS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to be final approval
pursuant to this Article. Such approval shall neither cause nor prevent the filing of any
collateral application or other proceeding required by any other municipal ordinance to be
made prior to undertaking the action requested vis-a-vis the site or structure in the
historic district.
B. A denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to preclude the applicant
from undertaking the activity applied for.
§ 906 APPEALS OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION DECISION
Any decision by the Historic Preservation Commission to deny a Certificate of Appropriateness or a
demolition permit may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in the manner set forth in Section
706 (Appeals and applications to the ZBOA) of the Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall also be
required to provide the Historic Preservation Commission with written notice of such an appeal
simultaneously with the filing of the appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 907 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES ON PROPERTIES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS OR ON
DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES; NON-PUBLIC USES
A. Applicability. This Section applies where the proposed demolition (in whole or in part) of
a structure in any historic zone district or other designated historic site situated elsewhere
in the Township is for a purpose other than providing a site for a public building or land
for public use such as a road widening.
B. Application for permit. An application for a permit to demolish a structure in whole or in
part, which is in any historic zone district or other designated site situated elsewhere in
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
305
the Township, shall be forwarded by the Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official to the
Historic Preservation Commission.
C. Written findings by Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall make written findings on the following matters:
1. The existing ownership, use and applicant's reason for requesting demolition.
2. The structure’s historical ownership and use.
3. The structure's architectural/historic importance and its status in the Township of
Neptune, County, State, or national listings of such properties after notification by
the Historic Preservation Commission to the appropriate agencies.
4. Any unique, unusual or rare qualities of design, materials or craftsmanship found
in the subject property that could not be reproduced easily.
5. The structural soundness and integrity of the structure and the economic
feasibility of restoring or rehabilitating the structure so as to comply with the
requirements of any applicable building code. At the Historic Preservation
Commission's request, an inspection by the Township's Construction Official
shall be conducted to determine the number and extent of code violations and an
estimate of the cost of needed improvements to bring the structure up to
compliance with all applicable building codes.
6. The impact of the structure’s demolition on the Historic District in which it is
located or on neighborhoods surrounding an identified historic site, also taking
into consideration undue hardship, reasonable beneficial use and the condition of
the premises. The economic base of the community shall be considered as well
as the public's interest in architectural, historic and aesthetic matters generally.
7. The structure’s importance to the Township and the extent to which its historical
or architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental to the public
interest.
8. The extent to which the structure is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty.
D. Public Hearings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall conduct a public hearing in
order to determine whether to grant or deny the demolition permit.
1. Notice. The hearing shall be advertised, arranged and conducted by the Historic
Preservation Commission as hearings are conducted by the Township for
development applications. The applicant shall be responsible for sending out the
appropriate notices and shall be responsible for paying the cost of the
proceedings. On the date of the hearing, the applicant shall be required to
provide the Historic Preservation Commission with proof of fulfilling the
notification requirements specified hereinafter. The applicant shall notify in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, the following County, State and
Federal agencies at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(a) Township of Neptune Historical Society;
(b) Historical Society of Ocean Grove;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
306
(c) State Office of Historic Preservation;
(d) State Historic Sites Council;
(e) Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, Department of the
Interior; and
(f) National Trust for Historic Preservation.
2. Stenographer required. There shall be a stenographer present to record the
proceedings, the cost of which shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
E. Issuance or Denial of Demolition Permit. Based on the Historic Preservation
Commission's findings (as required in Paragraph B above) and the testimony at the
public hearing and following the waiting period as specified in Paragraph E below, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall act on the request for demolition by either
granting or denying the demolition permit.
F. Waiting Period. Following the date of the initial public hearing, there shall be established
a waiting time period of at least ninety (90) days and no more than one hundred twenty
(120) days to enable any interested parties to acquire or to establish a procedure for the
preservation of the subject property.
G. Demolition Notice Posted. During the entirety of the waiting period, as specified in
Subsection F above, a notice of the proposed demolition activity shall be posted on the
premises of the building, place or structure in a location such that it is clearly readable
from each street frontage. In addition, the applicant shall publish notices in the official
newspaper of the Township as follows:
1. Within the first ten (10) days of the waiting period; and
2. Within not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
expiration of the waiting period.
H. Procedure Where Demolition Application is Denied. In the event that the Historic
Preservation Commission denies an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness to
demolish a historic building, place or structure, the owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter
of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such building, place or structure provided that all
of the following requirements have been fully met:
1. The owner has applied for the necessary demolition permit and has received
notice of denial of same from the Historic Preservation Commission and has
appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, which has affirmed such denial.
2. The owner has met the notice requirements set forth in Subsection G above for
the full waiting period as defined in Subsection F above.
3. The owner has, during the waiting period and at a price reasonably related to its
fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell such building, place or structure
and the land pertaining thereto to any person, organization, government or
agency thereof or political subdivision which gives reasonable assurance that it is
willing to preserve the building, place or structure and the land pertaining thereto.
4. The owner shall not have been a party to any bona fide contract, binding upon all
parties thereto, for the sale of any such building, place or structure and the land
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
307
pertaining thereto executed prior to the expiration of the notice period, except a
contract made in accordance with Paragraph (3) above.
§ 908 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES ON PROPERTIES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND ON
DESIGNATED HISTORIC SITES; PUBLIC USES
A. Applicability. This Section applies where the proposed demolition (in whole or in part) of
a structure in any historic zone district or other designated historic site situated elsewhere
in the Township is for the purpose of providing a site for a public building or land for
public use such as a road widening.
B. Notice Required. The applicant for the demolition permit shall notify the following
agencies as well as the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee:
1. Township of Neptune Historical Society;
2. Historical Society of Ocean Grove;
3. State Office of Historic Preservation;
4. State Historic Sites Council;
5. Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, Department of the Interior; and
6. National Trust for Historic Preservation.
§ 909 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN ANY HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICT AND OTHER
STRUCTURES OF ARCHITECTURAL AND HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE
A. Application for Permit; Statement of Construction Official. An application for a permit to
relocate a structure shall be forwarded by the Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official
to the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee, accompanied by a statement from the
Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official that the property has no Code violations and
that the subject property conforms to all requirements of the Township of Neptune Zoning
Ordinance for the new zoning district to which the property will be relocated.
B. Nonconformance to Zoning Ordinance. Where the relocated structure will not conform to
all of the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, the applicant shall accompany
the relocation application with evidence of the needed approval(s) by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, Planning Board, Township Committee or any other Township Board having
jurisdiction.
C. Correction of Building Code Violations Required. When the subject structure contains
building code violations that will be corrected after the structure has been relocated to the
new site, the Construction Official shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy until those
violations have been corrected and approved by the Code Enforcement Department.
D. Exterior Changes. When the relocation of a structure will cause needed improvements
that will include the exterior of the structure, the applicant for a relocation permit shall
also submit the drawings, photographs and other material describing the contemplated
changes in the exterior appearance.
E. Field Inspection; Findings. Prior to acting on an application for the relocation of a
structure that is subject to this Subsection, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
make a field inspection of the proposed site to determine that the site and its
surroundings are appropriate for that specific structure in terms of land use, design of
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
308
buildings, traffic topography, landscaping, etc. The Historic Preservation Commission's
findings on which their decision will be based upon findings made during the field
inspection and shall include the field inspection date and the names of the Historic
Preservation Commission members who make the inspection.
§ 910 EMERGENCY REPAIRS IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND ON DESIGNATED HISTORIC
SITES
Performance and Review of Repairs. When an historic landscape requires immediate emergency repair
to preserve the continued habitability of the landmark and/or the health and safety of its occupants or
others, such repairs may be performed in accordance with Township Codes, without the necessity of first
obtaining the Historic Preservation Commission's review.
Under such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are necessary to protect the
health and safety of the occupants of the historic landmark or others and/or to maintain the habitability of
the structure. A request for the Historic Preservation Commission's review shall be made as soon as
possible and no further work shall be performed upon the structure until an appropriate request for
approval is made and obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. All work done
under this section shall conform to the criteria set forth in Subsection 508(Design Guidelines/Visual
Compatibility factors) and the procedures for review of applications as adopted by the Historic
Preservation Commission in accordance with requirements for Applications for Certificate of
Appropriateness.
§ 911 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS
A. Designation. Any person may request the designation of an historic site or Historic
District by submitting to the Historic Preservation Commission a completed application for
such designation on a form furnished by the Historic Preservation Commission. The
Historic Preservation Commission, in addition may, on its own motion, initiate
proceedings for the designation of any historic site or Historic District.
B. Criteria for Designation. In considering an individual site, building or a structure or a
district that is of particular historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural
significance to the Township of Neptune, the County of Monmouth, the State of New
Jersey or to the nation and reflects or exemplifies the broad cultural, political, scenic,
economic or social history of the nation, State or locality, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall give consideration to the following criteria:
1. That it is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; and/or
2. That it is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; and/or
3. That it embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or that it represents the work of a master or that it possesses high
artistic values or that it represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; and/or
4. That is has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in pre-history
or history.
5. Ordinarily, cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures, properties
owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that
have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings,
properties primarily commemorative in nature and properties that have achieved
significance within the past fifty (50) years shall not be considered eligible for
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
309
designation as an historic site. However, such properties will qualify if they are
integral parts of historic sites that do meet the criteria or if they fall within the
following categories:
(a) A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or
artistic distinction or historical importance; or
(b) A building or structure removed from its original location but which is
significant primarily for architectural value or which is the surviving
structure most importantly associated with an historic person or event; or
(c) A birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding importance if
there is no other appropriate site or building associated with his/her
productive life; or
(d) A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons
of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features or
from association with historic events; or
(e) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration
master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same
association has survived; or
(f) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition or
symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or
(g) A property achieving significance within the past fifty (50) years if it is of
exceptional importance.
C. Notice of Consideration. When the Historic Preservation Commission decides to
consider an application for designation, notice that such application is being considered
shall be given by ordinary mail and certified first class mail to each owner of record of the
proposed historic site or of the tax lots located in the proposed Historic District. In
addition, each owner of record shall be given notice of any public hearing on a proposed
designation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing by certified mail and ordinary
mail.
D. Hearing and Record. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing
on each proposed designation. Interested persons shall be entitled to present their
opinions, suggestions and objections at this public hearing. A list shall be prepared for
each structure and district proposed for designation, specifying the locations, any popular
names and a description of the boundaries of any proposed Historic District or historic
site. This list shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township not
more than thirty (30) nor less than ten (10) days before such hearing is to be held.
Completed applications for designations scheduled for consideration at a hearing shall be
on file with the Township Clerk and available for inspection by interested persons during
the regular business hours at least ten (10) days before such hearing.
E. Decision of the Historic Preservation Commission. After consideration of all information
in the application and presented at the hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall have the authority to recommend to the Planning Board, within forty-five (45) days
of the hearing, that all or part of any proposed structure or district qualifies for (a)
inclusion in the Historic Preservation Element and other appropriate elements of the
Master Plan; or (b) designation in the Zoning Ordinance. This determination of the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
310
Historic Preservation Commission shall constitute a recommendation to the Township
Committee and Planning Historic Preservation Commission.
F. Township Committee Determination. Upon the Historic Preservation Commission's
approval of any designation of the landmark or Historic District, such an ordinance shall
immediately become effective upon approval of the Township Committee and Planning
Board, and in accordance with applicable law. At once upon approving a designation, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall forward its recommendation for approval of the
designation to the Township Committee. The Township Committee shall act to approve
or disapprove the designation within sixty-five (65) days of receipt of the Board's
recommendations. If the Township Committee disapproves a designation, this chapter
will no longer apply to the subject structure or district. The Township Committee may, at
its discretion, call a further public hearing on any recommendation for designation. Such
hearings, if called, shall occur within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the decision of
Historic Preservation Commission, and the Township Committee decision shall be
rendered within sixty-five (65) days of the close of such further public hearing.
G. Notice of Determination. If the Historic Preservation Commission disapproves any
application for designation, the proceedings with regard to the proposed Historic District
or landmark shall terminate. If the Historic Preservation Commission approves an
application for designation, the notice of such approval and of its transmittal to the
Township Committee shall be given to the Township Construction Official, the Planning
Board, the Board of Adjustment and sent by ordinary mail and first class certified mail to
any owner of record of the subject property. When the Township Committee approves or
disapproves a designation or if a designation becomes final because the Township
Committee did not act upon it within sixty-five (65) days, notice of the landmark or
Historic District decision shall be given to the Zoning Officer, Township Construction
Official, Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment and sent by ordinary mail and first
class certified mail to any owner of the subject property.
§ 912 PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS AND FOR DESIGNATED
HISTORIC SITES
A. Code Enforcement. Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to insure the
continued useful life of historic sites and structures in Historic Districts and other
designated sites in the Township of Neptune, the Township Committee hereby declares
that code enforcement for such sites and structures is a high municipal priority.
B. Notice of Violations. In the event that any historic site or improvement in an historic zone
district or any other designated site in the Township deteriorates to the point that, in the
best estimate of the Construction Official, the cost of correcting the outstanding code
violations equals more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the cost of replacing the entire
improvement on which the violation occurs, the Construction Official shall serve
personally, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice on the owner of the
property listing the violations, the estimate for their abatement and the replacement cost
of the improvements and stating that if the owner does not take all necessary remedial
action within sixty (60) days or such extensions as the Construction Official shall for good
cause grant, the Township's designated official may, at the expiration of the sixty (60)
days, enter upon the property and abate such violations and cause the cost thereof to
become a lien on the property.
C. Deterioration of Buildings and Structures Prohibited. All buildings and structures in an
Historic District or any other designated site in the Township shall be maintained so that
all exterior walls, roofs, stairs, porches, windows and door frames are in waterproof
condition. Cornices, entablatures, wall facings, trim and similar decorative features shall
be maintained so as to prevent deterioration. All structural and architectural features
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
311
shall be maintained so as to prevent deterioration and any deterioration which adversely
affects the overall character of the building or the district in which the building is located is
prohibited. The Construction Official shall serve personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice on the owner of any property requiring preventive
maintenance as set forth herein, listing the violations and following the procedures as set
forth in Subsection B above.
D. Request for Hearing. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner may, within ten (10) days
after such receipt, notify the Construction Official of his or her intention to have a hearing
as to the allegations and estimates set forth in the notice. The hearing shall be
conducted by Historic Preservation Commission and shall, so far as possible, be a formal
adversary proceeding in which the Construction Official shall establish the matters
alleged in the notice by a preponderance of the evidence.
E. Service of Opinion of Construction Official. If the owner does not request a hearing, the
procedure set forth in Subsection D above shall be binding. If a hearing is requested, the
Construction Official will within ten (10) days following the hearing, serve on the owner an
opinion in writing setting forth his conclusions and the reasons therefor. Such opinion
shall be deemed to be a first notice pursuant to this section.
F. Abatement by Township. Thereafter, if the owner does not comply, the Construction
Official may enter onto the premises and, by use of municipal labor or outside contractors
or both, perform such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
G. Certification of Costs. The Construction Official shall then certify to the Township
Committee the cost of such work plus all administrative, clerical and legal costs and
overhead attributable thereto and shall present the same to the Township Committee.
H. Costs a Lien on Property. The Township Committee may, by resolution, vote to cause
the sum so certified to become a lien upon the property, payable with the next quarter's
property taxes and if not then paid, bearing interest at the same rate as delinquent taxes.
§ 913 PENALTIES; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Failure to Obtain Approval. Any person who shall undertake any activity in violation of
any provisions relating to historic zone districts and designated historic sites without first
having obtained a Certificate of Appropriateness or any other required approval, shall be
deemed to be in violation of those provisions.
B. Service of Notice of Violation. Upon learning of the violation, the Administrative Officer
shall personally serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a
notice describing the violation in detail. The violator shall be required to file an
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness to Historic Preservation Commission
within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of violation. If the owner cannot be personally
served within the municipality with the notice, a copy of the same shall be posted on the
site in question and a copy shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner at his or her last known address, as it appears on the Township tax rolls.
C. Issuance of Summons and Complaint. In the event that the violator fails to file an
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness within the specified ten (10) day period
following service and/or posting on the site in question, whichever is earlier, the
Administrative Officer shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable in
the Municipal Court, charging violation of this Chapter. Each separate day the violation
exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation of this Chapter.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
312
D. Penalties Designated. Any person or persons who violate or who permit, take part or
assist in any violation of this chapter shall for each and every violation thereof, and for
each and every day that such violation thereof continues to be subject to a fine of not
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or be subject to imprisonment in the municipal
or County Jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or both and/or be required to
correct, abate and/or restore premises in the discretion of the magistrate before whom
such conviction shall be had.
E. Injunctive Relief. In the event that any action which would permanently and/or adversely
change the Historic District or the historic site or any other property of
architectural/historic significance, such as demolition or removal is about to occur without
a Certificate of Appropriateness having been issued, the Administrative Officer is hereby
authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is
necessary to prevent the destruction of such property.
§ 914 EXPIRATION OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Effective Approval. An approval of Historic Preservation Commission shall be valid for a
period of two (2) years from the date of approval unless reasonable extensions are
granted by Historic Preservation Commission.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
313
ARTICLE X- FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS & OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
§ 1000 APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES
A. Fee schedule. Every application for development shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the municipality in accordance with the following schedule:
TABLE 10.1: APPLICATION FEES
Type of Application Administrative Fee
Appeals and Interpretations $100.00
Appeal to Governing Body $250.00
Conceptual/Informal Reviews $50.00
Bulk Residential $75.00
Variances Nonresidential $200.00 per variance
Use Variances $750.00
Conditional Use $250.00
Minor $500.00
Subdivision Major Preliminary $500.00 plus $50.00 per lot Final $250.00 plus $25.00 per lot
Minor Site Plan $250.00
Residential Prelim $500.00 plus $50.00 per dwelling unit Final 50% of Preliminary
Prelim
$1,000.00 plus $50.00 per acre, plus
$0.05 per square foot of proposed
building area.
Site Plan Major
Site
Plan Non-residential
Final 50% of preliminary
General Development Plan $1,500.00
Certified List per MLUL $10.00 or $0.25/name
Special Meeting $1,500.00
Resubmission or Revision Fee $50.00 or 40% of original fee, whichever
is greater
Appeal to the Township Committee $250.00
Issuance of a Permit in Certain Areas $150.00
Tree Removal Permit
For new residential building lots, $15.00
dollars per tree, up to a maximum of
$300.00 per lot;
For all other properties, $15.00 per tree
up to a maximum of $600.00 for each
acre.
Zoning Permit/Certificate of Appropriateness $10.00
Certification of Pre-existing Nonconforming Use
(from Administrative Officer or Zoning Board of
Adjustment)
$50.00
Extension of Approvals $250.00
Soil Removal $25.00 per permit
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
314
TABLE 10.2: ESCROW FEES
Type of Application Escrow
Appeals and Interpretations $500.00
Conceptual/Informal Reviews $500.00
Bulk Residential $125.00
Variances Nonresidential $1,000.00
Use Variances $1,500.00
Conditional Use $2,000.00
Minor $2,000.00
Preliminary
0-5 lots - $2,000
6-24 lots - $3,500
25-100 lots - $5,000
101+ - $7,500
Subdivision Major
Final 50% of Preliminary
Minor Site Plan $1,000.00
Residential Prelim $2,000.00 plus $25.00 per dwelling unit Final 50% of preliminary
Prelim
$1,000.00 plus
0-5,000 sf -$1,500.00
5,001-10,000 sf - $2,500.00
10,001 - 25,000 sf -$5,000.00
25,001-75,000 sf -$7,500.00
75,000 sf + - $10,000.00
Site Plan Major
Site
Plan Non-residential
Final 50% of preliminary
General Development Plan Same as Preliminary Site Plan
Certified List None
Special Meeting $500.00
Resubmission or Revision Fee $50.00 or 40% of original fee, whichever
is greater
Appeal to the Township Committee None
Issuance of a Permit in Certain Areas $200.00
Tree Removal Permit See §525 for Escrow Schedule
Zoning Permit/Certificate of Appropriateness None
Certification of Pre-existing Nonconforming Use
(from Administrative Officer or Zoning Board of
Adjustment)
None
Extension of Approvals $1,000.00
Soil Removal
$100.00 for review of an application by
the Township Engineer and inspection of
the site, plus $0.05 per sq. foot of area
disturbed due to the removal of soil
B. Purpose of fees. The application charge is a flat fee to cover direct administrative
expenses and is non-refundable. The escrow account is established to cover the costs of
professional services including engineering, legal, planning and other expenses
connected with the review of the submitted materials. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, sums not utilized in the review process shall be
returned to the applicant upon written request. If additional sums are deemed necessary,
the applicant shall be notified by certified mail or personal service of the required
additional amount and shall add such sum to the escrow. Payment shall be due from the
applicant within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice. If payment is not received within
fifteen (15) days, the applicant shall be considered to be in default, and such default may
be grounds for denial of the application.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
315
C. More than one request. Where one application for development includes several
approval requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
D. Costs of review and inspection. Each applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall
agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for professional review of the application,
including costs incurred with any informal review of a concept plan which may have
preceded the submission of a preliminary application. Additionally, each applicant shall
agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for the municipal inspection of the constructed
improvements. All such costs for review and inspection must be paid before any
construction permit is issued and all remaining costs must be paid in full before any
occupancy issued or bonding is released.
E. Court reporter. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost of taking testimony and
transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the municipality shall be at the
expense of the applicant who shall arrange for the reporter's attendance. The
municipality provides for the tape recording of the proceedings before the Board.
F. Waiver of fees for affordable housing. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, a waiver of municipal subdivision and site plan application fees, and zoning
permit fees may be granted by the approving municipal agency for all housing units being
provided by the applicant for low and moderate income families.
§ 1001 AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTRIBUTION
A. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to establish standards for the collection,
maintenance and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH’s rules. Fees
collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
monies for the rehabilitation of low and moderate-income housing. This Ordinance shall
be interpreted within the framework of COAH’s rules on development fees.
B. Residential development fees. Developers of new residential uses shall pay a
development fee of one-third of one percent (0.33%) of the equalized assessed value of
newly constructed residential development, provided no increased density is permitted.
C. Nonresidential development fees. All developers of non-residential uses, other than
public agencies, shall pay a development fee of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the
equalized assessed value for non-residential development.
D. Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.
1. Developers of low and moderate-income units shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
2. Substantial change. The payment of a fee for affordable housing shall be
required for any substantial change, including but not limited to, expansion or
intensification in use of an existing structure, any increase in an approved
project's building bulk or floor area which exceeds any of the requirements of the
zoning district where the project is located and exceeds the limitations necessary
to qualify as an “insubstantial change". “Insubstantial change” is a revision to an
approved preliminary or final site plan or subdivision which meets all the
requirements of this Ordinance or does not exceed any of the following
limitations:
(a) Five (5) feet in any yard setback;
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
316
(b) Seven (7) feet in building height;
(c) One (1) percent in floor area ratio;
(d) One (1) percent in impervious coverage;
(e) Five (5) feet in building spacing;
(f) Three (3) parking spaces;
(g) Five (5) feet in driveway locations;
(h) One (1) percent in site disturbances.
(i) Any such change enumerated above shall not alter the percentage of
low/moderate income housing in an approved project.
A substitution of similar landscaping material, lighting fixtures and signage is not
a substantial change as long as there is no change in approved quantities or
dimensions.
E. Collection of fees. Developers shall pay up to fifty (50) percent of the calculated
development fee to Neptune Township at the issuance of construction permits. At the
issuance of certificates of occupancy, the appropriate development fee shall be based on
one of the options in Subsections B & C above. The developer shall be responsible for
paying the difference between the fee calculated at construction permit and paid at
issuance of certificate of occupancy. The entire fee may also be paid at the issuance of
the certificate(s) of occupancy.
F. Housing trust fund. There is hereby created an interest bearing housing trust fund for the
purpose of receiving development fees from residential and nonresidential developers.
All development fees paid by developers pursuant to this Ordinance shall be deposited in
this fund. No money shall be expended from the housing trust fund unless the
expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH.
G. Use of funds.
1. Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved
by COAH for addressing Neptune Township’s low and moderate income-housing
obligation. Such activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to,
housing rehabilitation and administrative costs necessary to implement Neptune
Township Master Plan Housing Element. The expenditure of all money shall
conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
2. No more than twenty (20) percent of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the housing
element. Examples of eligible administrative activities include personnel,
consultant services, space costs, consumable supplies and rental or purchase of
equipment directly associated with plan development or plan implementation.
3. Development fee revenues shall not be expended to reimburse Neptune
Township for housing activities that preceded a first or second round substantive
certification.
H. Expiration of ordinance. This subsection of the Land Development Ordinance shall
expire if:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
317
1. COAH revokes this subsection; or
2. COAH’s approval for urban aid municipalities to collect development fees
expires.
§ 1002 GUARANTEES REQUIRED FOR ON-AND-OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
A. Guarantee required. Before recording final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site
plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65d, the approving Board, for the purpose of assuring the installation an
maintenance of on- and off-tract (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42) improvements, shall
require and accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this Ordinance, the
following:
1. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Township of Neptune
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation, which cost shall be
determined by the Municipal Engineer according to the method of calculation set
forth in (§1003B - Determination of Performance Guarantee Estimate) for
improvements which the Board may deem necessary or appropriate, including;
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final subdivision plat and required by the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), culverts, storm sewers, drainage
structures, public improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans
only, other on-site improvements and landscaping. A separate estimate shall be
prepared for soil erosion and sedimentation control devices.
2. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the Township
Committee for a period not to exceed two (2) years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in an amount not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the cost of the
improvement, which cost shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer
according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 1003-B Determination
of Performance Guarantee Estimate. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to
another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as
the case may be, shall be required by the municipality for such utilities or
improvements.
3. The Municipal Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost
estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the
developer.
B. Time period for installation. All public improvements shall be completed within six (6)
months of issuance of the last Certificate of Occupancy or five (5) years of issuance of a
Soil Disturbance Permit, whichever comes first. The time allowed for installation of the
improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended
by the Township Committee by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as
the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, which
cost shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in §1003-B Determination of Performance Guarantee Estimate as of
the time of the passage of the resolution.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
318
C. Developer liability. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the developer and surety, if any, shall be
liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
completed or corrected and the Township may either prior to or after the receipt of the
proceeds thereof complete such improvements. Such completion or correction of
improvements shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A: 11-1 et seq.).
§ 1003 CERTIFICATION OR GUARANTEE REQUIRED; ESTIMATE OF GUARANTEE
A. Improvements to be installed. No final plan shall be approved unconditionally by the
Board until the satisfactory completion and performance of all such required
improvements have been certified to the Board by the Municipal Engineer, unless the
owner shall have filed with the municipality a performance guarantee sufficient in amount
to cover the cost of all such improvements in uncompleted portions thereof as estimated
by the Municipal Engineer, and assuring the installation of such uncompleted
improvements on or before an agreed upon date.
B. Determination of performance guarantee estimate. A performance guarantee estimate
shall be prepared by the Municipal Engineer or the developer's engineer and approved
by the Municipal Engineer, setting forth all requirements for improvements as fixed by the
Board and their estimated cost. The estimated cost of the installation of improvements
determined by the Municipal Engineer shall be based on documented construction costs
for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the Township. The developer
may appeal the Municipal Engineer's estimate to the Township Committee. The
Township Committee shall decide the appeal within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
appeal in writing by the Township Clerk. After the developer posts a guarantee with the
Township based on the cost of the installation of improvements as determined by the
Township Committee, he may institute legal action within one (1) year of the posting in
order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of the amount of the guarantee.
C. Determination of maintenance guarantee estimate. The approved performance guarantee
estimate shall fix the requirements of maintenance of the utilities and improvements to be
installed and completed by the developer. A surety company or cash bond meeting the
requirements herein above set forth may be furnished to secure the maintenance
guarantee, or the performance bond may be styled or amended to provide such security
in reduced amount in keeping with the requirements.
§ 1004 APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY
A. The applicant shall present two (2) copies of the performance guarantee in an amount
equal to the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimate for approval as to
form and execution by the Department of Finance with assistance by the Township
Attorney, if necessary.
B. The Department of Finance shall forward its approval of the form of the performance
guarantee for consideration for adoption by the governing body.
§ 1005 BONDING AND CASH REQUIREMENTS
A. The performance guarantee shall be the approved performance guarantee estimate and
as surety a performance bond in which the applicant shall be principal, the bond to be
provided by an acceptable surety company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey, an irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a banking or savings and loan institution
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
319
located in and licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey or such other form of
security as may be approved by the Township Attorney, or cash, or a certified check shall
be deposited with the Township of Neptune by payment to the Township Treasurer. The
performance guarantee in favor of the Township shall be in an amount not to exceed
120% of the cost of the installation and improvements. The Township Treasurer shall
issue its receipt for such cash deposits and shall cause the same to be deposited in a
bank named by the Township for this purpose to be retained as security for completion of
all requirements and to be returned to the developer on completion of all required work
and expiration of the period of maintenance guarantee or, in the event of default on the
part of the subdivider, to be used by the Township of Neptune to pay the cost and
expense of obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond, whether cash or
surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that the obligation shall remain in fun force and
effect until such time as certification is received from the Municipal Engineer that the
principal has met and complied with all specifications and requirements for which said
cash or surety bond has been posted.
B. Ten (10) percent of the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimates shall
be deposited with the Township by the applicant in cash. The remaining ninety (90)
percent may be in cash, surety bond or other securities or guaranties approved by the
Township Attorney. In the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein mentioned shall
be first applied to the completion of the requirements and the cash or the surety shall
thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the completion of the requirements. The cash
or surety may recite the foregoing provisions. The Municipal Engineer's determination
that the principal has defaulted in Ms obligation shall be binding and conclusive upon the
principal.
C. Irrevocable letters of credit shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions:
1. An unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the Township
for an express initial period of time in the amount determined pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and Section 1003-BDetermination of Performance
Guarantee Estimate.
2. Is for a period of time of at least two (2) years; and
3. Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the developer fails to
furnish another letter of credit which complies with the provisions of this
subsection thirty (30) days or more in advance of the expiration date of the letter
of credit or such longer period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of
credit.
§ 1006 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
A. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the time of their
installation under the supervision of the Municipal Engineer to ensure satisfactory
completion. The cost of said inspection shall be the responsibility of the applicant, and
he shall deposit with the Township Treasurer for placement in a trust fund account a sum
equal to five (5%) percent of the amount of the cost of installation improvements
estimate of the cost of public improvements to be built in the subdivision or site
development to be applied to the payment of inspection costs. If inspection costs exceed
such fund, the developer shall deposit with the Township Treasurer additional sums upon
notice from the Municipal Engineer. The inspection fee shall in no case be less than
$500.00. The Township Treasurer shall return any balance of the inspection deposit to
the developer upon expiration of the maintenance bond, together with the paid invoices
for all expenses charged.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
320
B. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission from the Municipal
Engineer's office. At least two (2) days notice shall be given to the Municipal Engineer's
office prior to any such construction so that he or a qualified representative may be
present at the time the work is to be done.
C. The Municipal Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the following phases of the
work has been completed so that he or a qualified representative may inspect the:
1. Soil disturbance activities;
2. Road subgrade;
3. Curb and gutter forms;
4. Curbs and gutters;
5. Road paving;
6. Sidewalk forms;
7. Sidewalks;
8. Drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling;
9. Street name signs;
10. Survey monuments; and
11. Street trees;
and in the case of site plan inspection-
12. Parking lots;
13. Lighting;
14. Landscaping; and
15. Signage.
D. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be done by the Municipal Engineer
within ten (10) days of notification by the developer to determine whether the work is
satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final plat drawings and the Township
specifications. The general condition of the site shall also be considered. Upon a
satisfactory final inspection report, action will be taken to release or declare in default the
performance guarantee covering such improvements and utilities.
E. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and utilities by the
applicant shall not subject the Township to liability for claims, suits or any other liability of
any kind that may at any time arise because of defects or negligence during construction
or at any time thereafter; it is recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe
conditions at all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and
improvements is upon the applicant and his contractors, if any.
F. Improvements installed without notice for inspection shall constitute a valid cause for any
of the following actions:
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
321
1. The issuance of a stop work order;
2. The removal of any improvements not so inspected;
3. The payment by the developer of any costs of materials testing by the municipal
for the improvements not so inspected;
4. The restoration of the site from disturbance caused by the materials testing
process.
G. Improvements installed contrary to the approved plat shall be a rebuttable presumptive
that such approval is null and void.
§ 1007 REDUCTION OF GUARANTEE.
A. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements (except for the top
course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public
system, the developer may request of the Township Committee in writing, by certified
mail addressed in care of the Township Clerk, that the Municipal Engineer prepare, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to §#1002 Guarantee Required, a list
of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed improvements. If such a request is made,
the developer shall send a copy of the request to the Municipal Engineer. As-built plans,
pursuant to §1010-B As Built Required, shall be submitted prior to the request for a
reduction in the guarantee. The request shall indicate which improvements have been
completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the
developer. Thereupon the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by
the developer's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Township Committee, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the developer not
later than 45 days after receipt of the developer's request.
B. The list prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect to each
improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy
for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall identify each
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a
recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee
relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to §1002 Guarantee Required.
C. The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements
determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Municipal Engineer, or reject any or all
of these improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection,
and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to §1002 Guarantee Required. This resolution shall be adopted not
later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Municipal
Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Committee, the developer
shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to
those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
322
amount of the performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
D. If the Municipal Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by the
developer pursuant to §1007 A Reduction of Guarantee within forty-five (45) days from
receipt of the request, the developer may apply to the court in a summary manner for an
order compelling the Municipal Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time
and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
E. If the Township Committee fails to approve or reject the improvements determined by the
Municipal Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee
for the complete and satisfactory improvements within forty-five (45) days from the
receipt of the Municipal Engineer's list and report, the developer may apply to the court in
a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the
complete and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance
guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to (§1002 Guarantee Required Section A); and the cost
of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the
prevailing party.
F. In the event that the developer has made a cash deposit with the Township or approving
authority as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in
the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the
performance guarantee.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving authority may
require the developer to complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or
correction, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be
followed.
H. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the developer to contest
by legal proceedings any determination of the Township Committee or the Municipal
Engineer.
I. The developer shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection fees paid to
the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements; provided that the
Township of Neptune may require of the developer a deposit for a portion of the
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid for such inspection. The initial deposit made by a
developer shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees unless the developer offers to pay an additional deposit amount. The
developer shall be required to maintain the deposit at not less than ten (10) percent of the
balance of the anticipated inspection fees as that balance is adjusted from time to time by
the amount paid to the Township Engineer for inspection. For those developments for
which the reasonably anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer
shall be fifty (50) percent of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to ten (10) percent of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Township
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining fifty (50) percent of the
anticipated inspection fees. For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be twenty-five (25)
percent of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops ten (10)
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
323
percent of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Township Engineer for inspection,
the developer shall make additional deposits of twenty-five (25) percent of the reasonably
anticipated fees. The Township Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient
funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
J. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to
N.J.S.A 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
§ 1008 CONDITIONS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
The approval of any plat under this Article by the approving Board or Township Committee, or both, shall
in no way be construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or any other improvement
required by this Ordinance, nor shall such plat approval obligate the Township in any way to maintain or
exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or other improvement. No improvement shall be
accepted by the Township Committee unless and until all of the following conditions have been met.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall have certified in writing that the improvements are complete
and that they comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The final plat shall have been approved by the Board.
C. Maintenance guarantee.
1. After final acceptance of all improvements, the developer shall have filed with the
Township Committee a maintenance guarantee in an amount equal to not more
than fifteen (15) percent of the original estimate of the cost of installing the
improvements and shall run for a period not exceeding two years. The
procedures and requirements governing such maintenance guarantee shall be
identical with the procedures and requirements for a performance guarantee set
forth in this Article. The requirements for a maintenance guarantee may be
waived by the Township Committee only if the Township Engineer has certified
that the improvements have been in continuous use for not less than two years
from the date the Township Engineer certified completion of such improvements
and that during this period the developer has maintained the improvements in a
satisfactory manner.
2. In the event that any other Township or governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically win own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements are
covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another municipal or
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case
may be, shall be required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
D. Acceptance of publicly dedicated streets. A publicly dedicated street shall be deemed
accepted by the municipality when the governing body grants full release of the
performance guarantee and acceptance of the maintenance guarantee.
E. Acceptance of street lighting on publicly dedicated streets. The Township shall accept
responsibility for the costs of street lighting on publicly dedicated streets within thirty (30)
days upon written notice when the following conditions have been fulfilled by the
developer:
1. The street lights have been connected to a public utility;
2. The street lights have been installed and accepted for service by the public utility;
and
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
324
3. Certificates of occupancy have been issued for at least fifty (50) percent of the
dwelling units and fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the non-residential uses
by section or phase of development.
Compliance by the municipality with the provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed
to constitute acceptance of the street by the Township.
§ 1009 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. Occupancy permits for any buildings will be issued only when the installation of any
curbs, all utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities, all
necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot and surrounding land,
rough grading of lots, final course for the driveway and base course for the streets,
unless formally waived by the Municipal Engineer, are installed to serve the lot and
structure for which the permit is requested.
B. Streets, if installed prior to final approval, shall not be paved until all heavy construction is
complete; shade trees shall not be planted until all grading and earthmoving is
completed; and seeding of grass areas shall be the last operation.
§ 1010 AS-BUILT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
A. As-built plans shall be presented to the Municipal Engineer before improvements may be
inspected. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless an as-built plan is
submitted and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
B. An as-built plan shall be submitted which indicates the constructed conditions and/or
location of:
1. Final grading;
2. Roads including curbing and sidewalks;
3. Utilities;
4. Building location;
5. Driveways and parking lots;
6. Stormwater management facilities, including as-built topographic contours and
volume calculations;
7. Walls and fences, and
8. Other structures deemed pertinent by the Municipal Engineer.
C. As-built plans shall be submitted by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor in the form of
three (3) prints.
§ 1011 OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
A. Payment of pro rata share. The Board of Jurisdiction shall require as a condition of final
subdivision or final site plan approval that the applicant pay for his or her pro rata share
of providing off-tract improvements, including the acquisition of land and easements,
necessitated or required by the approved development. The applicant shall either install
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
325
the necessary off-tract improvements or pay the pro rata share to the municipality at the
option of Neptune Township. Such off-tract improvements shall be clearly, directly and
substantially related to the approved development.
B. Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the applicant. In cases where the
need for an off-tract improvement is created by the proposed subdivision or site plan and
where no other property owners receive a special benefit thereby or where no planned
capital improvement by a governmental entity is contemplated, the applicant shall be
solely responsible for the cost and installation of the required improvements.
C. Other improvements.
1. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by the
proposed subdivision or site plan and where the Board of Jurisdiction determines
that properties outside the subdivision or tract will also be benefited by the
improvement, the Board shall forward to the Township Committee a list and
description of all such improvements together with its request that the Township
Committee determine and advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in its
construction or installation. The Board shall defer final action upon the
subdivision or site plan until receipt of the Township Committee's determination
or until the expiration of thirty (30) days after the forwarding of such list and
description to the Township Committee without such determination having been
made, whichever occurs sooner.
2. The Township Committee, within thirty (30) days after receipt of said list and
description, shall determine and advise the Board whether:
(a) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by
the municipality:
(i) As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne at
general capital improvement (except as otherwise provided as a
contribution by the applicant); or
(ii) As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which is to be
specially assessed against properties benefited thereby in
proportion to benefits conferred by the improvements in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56 (except as otherwise provided
as a contribution by the applicant); or
(b) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by
the applicant under a formula for partial reimbursement as hereinafter set
forth.
3. If the Township Committee determines that the improvement or improvements
shall be constructed or installed as a general capital improvement, the Municipal
Engineer shall estimate the amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof will
exceed the total amount by which all properties, including the subject tract, will
be specially benefited thereby, and the applicant shall be liable to the
municipality for such excess. The Township Committee shall adopt an
Ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the capital improvement
or improvements in a manner consistent with the obligation of the applicant for
any difference in the total cost over total benefits conferred.
4. If the Township Committee determines that the improvement or improvements
shall be constructed or installed as a benefit assessment, the Municipal Engineer
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
326
shall estimate the difference between the total costs to be incurred and the total
amount by which all properties, including the subject tract, will be specifically
benefited by the improvement. The applicant shall be liable to the municipality
for the difference in total cost over total benefits occurred as well as for the
amount of any special assessments against the subdivision property or tract for
benefits conferred by the improvement or improvements. The Township
Committee shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of
the improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits arising in a
manner consistent with the obligation of the applicant. The Township Committee
shall proceed in accordance with N.J.S.A 40:56, except to the extent modified by
the obligation of the applicant for any excess of total costs over total benefits
conferred.
D. Cost allocation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the municipality and
applicant from agreeing to use a different method of allocating cost.
E. Costs included. The cost of an improvement shall be construed to encompass all costs
related to such improvement, including, but not limited to, planning, feasibility studies,
surveying, permit acquisition, property and easement acquisition, design, construction,
and inspection of a project.
F. Performance guarantee. The applicant shall be required to provide, as a condition for
final approval a performance guarantee for the off-tract improvements in accordance with
§1002 Guarantee Required.
G. Refund of deposit. In any case in which an applicant shall deposit money with the
municipality for the completion of an improvement that is to be constructed pursuant to
this Ordinance by the municipality, the applicant shall be entitled to full refund of such
deposit if the Township Committee of the municipality shall not have enacted an
ordinance authorizing the improvement within ten (10) years after the date of all other
improvements are completed.
H. Deposit of funds. All monies paid an applicant pursuant to this section shall be deposited
with the municipality in a trust fund account. Such funds shall be used only for the
improvements for which they are deposited or improvements serving the same purpose.
I. Redetermination of assessment. Upon completion of off-tract improvements required
pursuant to this section, the applicant's liability, shall be recalculated in accordance with
the actual, as compared with the estimated, cost of the improvements. To the extent that
it shall decrease the amount of the cost estimate, the Township shall refund the amount
of such difference to the applicant. In cases where improvements are specially assessed
against all benefited properties, recalculation shall be made by the municipal assessing
authority in the course of the special assessment proceedings. In other cases, it shall be
made by the Municipal Engineer.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
327
ARTICLE XI - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS & PENALTIES
§ 1100 ADMINISTRATION
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection
of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. Any action taken by the
municipality under the terms of this Ordinance shall give primary consideration to the above mentioned
matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
§ 1101 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official and Zoning Officer of the municipality to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. No structure or building improvement shall be erected until a
zoning permit is obtained by the Zoning Officer and a construction permit is obtained from the
Construction Official and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of this Ordinance. It shall be the
duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications and all zoning permits which are either
issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which data shall form a part of the
municipality's public records. A quarterly report of zoning permits issued shall be filed with the municipal
tax assessor. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to inspect the structures and land in the
municipality and order the owner in writing to remedy any condition found to exist in violation of any
provision(s) of this Ordinance.
§ 1102 ZONING PERMITS
A. When required. A zoning permit shall be issued prior to:
1. The commencement or change of use of a property, building or structure;
2. The occupancy of any building or structure;
3. The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, or installation of
any building or structure;
4. Issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, where applicable.
B. Submission requirements. Every application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by
three (3) sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of all existing
and proposed structures and substructures, all existing easements, the existing or
intended use of each structure, the number of dwelling units the structure is designed to
accommodate, the number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading
areas and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be
necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. A zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing within ten (10) business days from
the date of a complete application unless additional time is agreed upon in writing by the
applicant. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall
have been approved or denied by the zoning official together with such permit as may be
granted. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot
to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey of the lot by a land surveyor licensed
in the State of New Jersey. No zoning permit shall be issued for any structure until prior
site plan, subdivision and variance approvals as may be necessary, have been granted
by the appropriate board in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and until all
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
328
review and inspection fees and all local taxes and assessments on the property have
been paid.
D. Lot grading and elevation plan. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a new zoning
permit, a proposed grading plan for each individual lot shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for review and approval. Details of the individual grading plan shall conform to
the submission requirements for plot plans in Neptune Township's Engineering
Standards. Additionally, a proposed grading plan shall be required for any construction in
a steep slope area or area abutting a steep slope area, any building addition or swimming
pool that would change existing grades or drainage patterns, or if requested by the
Municipal Engineer. Grading activities and retaining walls shall be in accordance with
regulations governing slopes and retaining walls as set forth in Article IV and Article V.
[NOTE: The previous subsection has been amended per Ordinance No. 03-035]
E. Location plans. Prior to issuance of a zoning permit for any development, a location plan
showing property line offsets shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for review. The
Zoning Officer and the Municipal Engineer shall determine if a grading plan is required. If
required, this grading plan shall include the proposed improvement footprint, proposed
ground elevations and contours, sufficient to indicate no adverse impact to adjoining
neighboring properties.
§ 1103 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. Certificate of occupancy required. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any
structure or part(s) thereof, either occupied by a new use or occupant or hereafter
erected, altered, converted or enlarged wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Construction Official. It shall be the duty of the
construction official to issue a certificate of occupancy only when:
1. The structure or part(s) thereof and the proposed use conform to this Ordinance
and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the municipality;
2. Prior site plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary, have
been granted by the appropriate board in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance;
3. All local taxes and assessments on the property have been paid; and
4. A letter from each utility company has been received by the municipality stating
that the utility has been inspected, has been installed in accordance with the
approved plan and is ready for use.
5. Soil certification:
(a) A soil certification must be obtained from the Municipal Engineer prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. An as-built plan of site
improvements shall be submitted for review when the soil certification is
requested. The as-built grading plan shall be prepared by a land
surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey in accordance with the
Engineering Departments Standards.
(b) If site conditions do not warrant issuance of a permanent soil
certification, a temporary soil certification may be issued at the discretion
of the Municipal Engineer. If a temporary soil certification is issued, a
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
329
bond for permanent stabilization shall be submitted in accordance with
the fee schedule established by the Municipal Engineer.
(c) If stabilization of the soil is not completed in accordance with a schedule
as approved by the Municipal Engineer, the performance guarantee held
to ensure such stabilization shall be forfeited upon 30 days written notice
from the Municipal Engineer and the funds used to complete the required
work.
6. Zoning permit. A valid zoning permit must be issued by the Zoning Officer prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The applicant may submit the asbuilt
grading plan mandated in -A.5 above or a location plan indicating the
required and constructed yard areas and other pertinent zoning information as
deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer.
7. Health Department approval. Approval of the Health Department shall be
obtained prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in circumstances
where the Department has jurisdiction.
B. Time for decision. A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing within
ten (10) business days from the date that a written notification is filed with the
construction official that the erection of the structure is completed, unless additional time
is agreed upon by the applicant in writing.
C. Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
for any structure or use for which site plan or subdivision approval has been granted,
although not all conditions for such approval have been complied with. Such temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be issued only in extenuating circumstances and only with
the approval of the construction official who shall establish specific terms and conditions
including, but not limited to, a timetable for the installation of the uncompleted
improvements and the receipt of a performance guarantee assuring the installation if
improvements as indicated on the approved plat or plan, and further that no zoning or
construction permit will be issued for any accessory use or structure when a temporary
occupancy permit has not been finalized by said occupant or builder except in
excessively due hardship cases which involve the welfare, sanitary or structural
requirements of said property or occupants.
D. Denial record. Should the construction official decline to issue a certificate of occupancy,
the reason for doing so shall be so stated on two copies of the application and one copy
shall be returned to the application and one retained in the file.
E. Invalidation. Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in violation of any
provision(s) of this Ordinance with respect to any land use, the certificate of occupancy
for such use shall thereupon, without further notice, be null and void and a new certificate
of occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or land. In the event
of any unlawful encroachment or reduction of open space or yard area, the building or
structure, as the case may be, shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance and the certificate of occupancy for such building or structure shall be null and
void.
F. Monthly report. A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be filed
with the municipal tax assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in
the office of the construction official and copies shall be furnished upon request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure or land affected. The
charge for each copy shall be established by resolution of the governing body except that
there shall be no charge to a municipal agency.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
330
§ 1104 VIOLATIONS
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or converted; or
any building, structure or land is used in violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of this Ordinance, the
municipality may institute an action to enjoin or take any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use. However, nothing is this
Ordinance shall be construed to restrict the right of any party to obtain a review by any court of competent
jurisdiction according to law.
§ 1105 PENALTIES
A. Fines.
1. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to hear and
determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $1,250, as such court in
its discretion may impose; or, if the party so convicted be a natural person, such
person may be imprisoned for such term not exceeding ninety (90) days, as such
court in its discretion may impose; or be fined a sum not exceeding $1,250, as
such court in its discretion may impose; or such natural person may be both
imprisoned and fined not exceeding the maximum limits set forth herein, as such
court in its discretion may impose. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
2. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, and/or the
tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this Ordinance shall be placed or shall exist or be
suffered, allowed or permitted to exist; and any architect, builder, developer,
contractor, agent, person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and
who assists in the commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty of a
separate violation, and upon conviction thereof shall each be liable to the fine or
imprisonment, or both, specified above.
B. Selling Land Before Final Subdivision Approval.
1. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person as owner or
agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell any land which forms a part
of a subdivision for which municipal approval is required in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000.00, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
2. In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and maintain a civil
action:
(a) For injunctive relief; and
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
3. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien
upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in
the possession of the subdivider or his or her assigns or successors, to secure
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
331
the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable
search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action
must be brought within two (2) years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale conveyance of said land, or within six (6) years if
unrecorded.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
332
ARTICLE XII- AMENDMENT, SEVERABILITY, INTERPRETATION, REPEALER &
ENACTMENT
§ 1200 AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the governing body after the appropriate referrals,
notices, hearings and other requirements of law.
§ 1201 SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE
If any portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Chapter as a whole, or any other
part thereof
§ 1202 INTERPRETATION
If the terms of this Ordinance shall be in conflict with those of another Ordinance of the Code of the
Township of Neptune, then the restriction which imposes the greater limitation shall be enforced.
§ 1203 REPEALER
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Township of Neptune which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 1204 COPY TO BE FILED WITH COUNTY PLANNING BOARD
Immediately upon adoption of this Ordinance, the Township Clerk shall file a copy of this Ordinance with
the County Planning Board as required by law. The Township Clerk shall also file with the said County
Planning board copies of all other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use.
§ 1205 ENACTMENT
This Ordinance shall take effect on July 24, 2000 and upon the filing thereof with the Monmouth County
Planning Board after final passage, adoption, and publication by the Township Committee of the
Township of Neptune in the manner prescribed by law.
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – I
INDEX
A
abandonment, 5, 15, 171, 172, 196, 197
accessory apartment, 5, 142
accessory building, 5, 13, 24, 125, 126, 128, 136, 170, 220, 225
accessory buildings and structures, 128
accessory structure, 5, 8, 26, 27, 125, 127, 131, 132, 139, 150, 151, 210, 302
accessory use, 5, 14, 82, 92, 112, 113, 119, 120, 121, 125, 126, 128, 134, 136, 137, 138, 152, 167,
168, 184, 302, 329
acre, 5, 31, 32, 33, 34, 100, 101, 112, 113, 128, 156, 235, 238, 290, 295, 297, 299, 313
adaptive re-use, 5
addition, 5, 6, 102, 103, 104, 105, 131, 133, 155, 157, 158, 159, 169, 173, 175, 188, 197, 208,
218, 223, 227, 238, 242, 247, 263, 279, 287, 288, 290, 292, 301, 303, 306, 308, 309, 328, 330
administrative officer, 5, 8, 25, 27
adult entertainment use, 5, 18, 156
adult retirement community, 6, 101, 104
alley, 6
alteration of building, 6
antenna, 6, 8, 90, 125, 126, 168, 169, 170
HAM radio, 14
satellite dish, 22, 125, 126
apartment, 6, 9, 11, 22, 24, 122, 125, 126, 145, 156, 165, 222, 254
applicant, 6, 20, 30, 105, 106, 134, 139, 146, 161, 172, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 198, 209,
227, 232, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 252, 254, 255, 258, 259, 260, 261, 263, 264, 266, 267, 268,
269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 280, 281, 282, 283, 298, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306,
307, 314, 315, 318, 319, 320, 324, 325, 326, 327, 329
application
fees, 315
application for development, 19, 172, 198, 214, 239, 251, 252, 255, 256, 258, 260, 262, 264, 265,
266, 267, 268, 273, 275, 281, 303, 313, 315
approval
final, 12, 20, 106, 144, 177, 222, 232, 261, 268, 274, 276, 277, 278, 280, 281, 282, 304, 323,
324, 326
preliminary, 20, 273, 275, 276, 277, 280, 281
approving authority, 6, 20, 141, 177, 194, 322
area
F.A.R., 13, 130, 139, 145, 151, 153, 165, 244, 316
floor, 5, 13, 17, 25, 100, 102, 104, 122, 127, 130, 139, 140, 141, 145, 151, 152, 153, 163, 165,
167, 169, 170, 180, 222, 244, 267, 273, 274, 276, 281, 286, 315, 316, 324
improvable, 15, 138, 286
leasehold, 15
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – II
sign, 23, 160, 172, 173
area of special flood hazard, 6, 15, 187, 190
as-built survey, 6
assessed value
equalized, 12, 315
assisted living facility, 6, 156
automatic car wash, 6, 7
automobile dealership, 6
automotive
detailing shop, 7
fueling station, 7, 13, 158
gasoline station, 7, 159
automotive body repair and painting, 6, 7
automotive service station, 7, 158, 159
awning, 7, 8, 23, 173, 180, 181, 183
B
bank, 7, 152, 319
banners, pennants or bunting, 7
bar, 7, 22
basement, 7, 8, 11, 13, 16, 186, 188, 190, 220, 288, 290, 293
bed and breakfast, 7, 112, 160
bed and breakfast guesthouse, 7
bed and breakfast homestay, 7
billboard, 7, 160, 161
board of jurisdiction, 7, 126, 134, 137, 144, 162, 166, 171, 216, 217, 239
boatyard, 7, 128, 129, 136, 137
breakaway wall, 7, 11
building
coverage, 8, 139, 145, 150, 151, 153, 263
envelope, 8, 136, 138, 162, 236
footprint, 8
height, 8, 104, 120, 129, 145, 150, 151, 153, 223, 286, 316
line, 8, 27, 102, 148, 181, 183
C
canopy, 8, 23, 159, 180, 181, 183
cellar, 8, 13
cemetery, 8, 129, 309
certificate of appropriateness, 8
certificate of completeness, 8
change of use, 8, 135, 140, 173, 263, 327
channel, 8, 13, 187
child care center, 8, 129
clear cutting, 8
COAH, 8, 10, 25, 315, 316, 317
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – III
co-location, 8, 168, 169, 170
commercial recreation facility, 8
commercial vehicles, 8, 122, 123
common open space, 9, 104, 106, 253, 270, 271, 290, 294
common ownership, 9, 14, 105, 141
community center, 9
community residence, 9, 121
community shelter, 9, 121
conditional use, 9, 83, 90, 121, 136, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168,
242, 244, 250, 253, 256, 258, 259, 263, 265, 301
conservation easement, 9, 128, 137, 288, 293
construction official, 9, 328, 329
conversion, 10, 27, 327, 330
corner lot, 16, 101, 123, 124, 127, 130, 143, 183, 201, 204, 222, 229
coverage
building, 8, 139, 145, 150, 151, 153, 263
impervious, 15, 16, 150, 151, 316
lot, 16, 104, 127, 148, 166, 169, 262, 265
critical slope, 22, 194
curbline, 10, 14, 146, 205, 227, 232
cut, 12, 153, 184, 206, 213, 235
D
deck, 8, 10, 24, 124
decorative wall, 132, 133
demolition, 8, 10, 12, 19, 246, 301, 304, 305, 306, 307, 312
density, 1, 10, 31, 32, 33, 34, 100, 101, 112, 113, 245, 256, 271, 286, 315
design criteria and guidelines, 10, 207
design flood, 13
design guidelines, 155, 166, 198, 207, 229
detailing shop, 7
development
application for, 19, 172, 198, 214, 239, 251, 252, 255, 256, 258, 260, 262, 264, 265, 266, 267,
268, 273, 275, 281, 303, 313, 315
fees, 10, 315, 316, 317
planned, 6, 17, 20, 25, 106, 149, 253, 269, 272, 273
planned commercial, 20, 49, 199
planned unit, 2, 6, 20, 257, 270, 271, 272, 281
distribution facility, 10, 141
disturb, 10, 191, 194
dripline, 10
drive through facility, 10
driveway, 10, 16, 123, 124, 130, 139, 144, 151, 153, 162, 175, 204, 205, 225, 228, 231, 316, 324
duplex, 10
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – IV
dwelling unit, 5, 10, 11, 13, 14, 22, 30, 32, 33, 34, 100, 101, 102, 103, 105, 112, 113, 122, 125,
140, 141, 144, 145, 146, 160, 165, 167, 175, 196, 197, 205, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225,
245, 255, 262, 273, 274, 275, 276, 281, 313, 314, 324, 327
E
easement, 11, 15, 102, 106, 132, 133, 187, 227, 238, 255, 264, 298, 326
elevated building, 11
envelope
building, 8, 136, 138, 162, 236
equalized assessed value, 12, 315
erosion, 10, 12, 187, 190, 191, 192, 193, 198, 205, 213, 234, 317
excavation, 10, 12
extended stay lodging facility, 12
exterior alteration, 12, 303
exterior architectural feature, 12, 209, 301
F
FAA, 12, 134, 169, 170
family, i, 11, 12, 26, 32, 33, 34, 46, 92, 101, 102, 111, 112, 113, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126,
127, 140, 142, 168, 175, 197, 205, 221, 223, 235
family day care home, 12, 122, 142
FCC, 12, 26, 125, 126, 169
fees
application, 315
development, 10, 315, 316, 317
fence, 12, 102, 123, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 157, 158, 162, 166, 195, 203,
220, 224, 225, 235
final approval, 12, 20, 106, 144, 177, 222, 232, 261, 268, 274, 276, 277, 278, 280, 281, 282, 304,
323, 324, 326
flag lot, 16
flood, 1, 3, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16, 24, 143, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 213, 233, 242, 250, 265, 288, 293
flood fringe area, 12
flood hazard area, 12, 13, 233, 288, 293
Flood Insurance Rate Map, 12, 187
flood insurance study, 13
flood of record, 13
flood plain, 13, 16, 24, 187, 213, 265
flooding, 6, 12, 13, 186, 187, 189, 198
floodway, 12, 13, 15, 188, 190, 288, 293
floor
lowest, 16, 184, 188, 189, 190
floor area, 5, 13, 17, 25, 100, 102, 104, 122, 127, 130, 139, 140, 141, 145, 151, 152, 153, 163,
165, 167, 169, 170, 180, 222, 244, 267, 273, 274, 276, 281, 286, 315, 316, 324
floor area ratio, 13, 130, 139, 145, 150, 151, 153, 165, 168, 244, 316
footprint
building, 8
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – V
front lot line, 13, 16, 166
front porch line, 13, 148
fueling station, 7, 13, 158
funeral home, 13, 18
G
garden center, 13
gasoline station, 7, 159
golf course, 14, 101, 103, 104, 106
greenhouse, 14
H
health & fitness club, 14
height
building, 8, 104, 120, 129, 145, 150, 151, 153, 223, 286, 316
heliport, 14
helistop, 14, 134
historic
flared avenue open space, 14, 254
hotel, 15, 112, 140, 163, 164, 167, 182, 184
integrity, 14
landmark, 14, 308
site, 2, 14, 19, 207, 248, 249, 257, 301, 304, 305, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312
sites inventory, 14
home
manufactured, 16, 17, 188, 190
occupation, 14, 122, 123, 165
home occupation, 14, 122, 123, 165
home professional office, 14, 121, 122, 165
hospital/medical center, 14
hotel, 11, 14, 15, 92, 101, 103, 113, 140, 147, 152, 160, 163, 167
historic, 15
I
impervious cover, 15, 16, 150, 151, 316
improvable area, 15, 138, 286
improvement, 10, 15, 17, 21, 23, 24, 25, 104, 134, 177, 190, 192, 193, 199, 236, 248, 303, 310,
317, 321, 323, 325, 326, 327, 328
incombustible material, 15, 184
industry
light, 15
J
junk, 15, 19
junkyard, 15
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – VI
K
kennel, 15
L
leasehold area, 15
leasehold line, 14, 15, 27
line
building, 8, 27, 102, 148, 181, 183
front lot, 13, 16, 166
leasehold, 14, 15, 27
lot, 16, 18, 22, 27, 29, 30, 31, 102, 123, 127, 128, 130, 131, 137, 142, 154, 161, 166, 170, 203,
204, 233, 234, 298
rear lot, 16, 27, 127, 130
setback, 8, 16, 22, 234, 298
side lot, 16, 27, 124, 130, 132, 142, 205, 211
street, 16, 25, 27, 123, 130, 132, 143, 145, 148, 159, 204, 222, 229, 230, 233
loading space, off-street, 15, 135
long-term care facility, 15
lot
corner, 16, 101, 123, 124, 127, 130, 143, 183, 201, 204, 222, 229
coverage, 16, 104, 127, 148, 166, 169, 262, 265
flag, 16
non-conforming, 18
reverse frontage, 16, 234
through, 16, 130
lot depth, 16, 120, 148, 286
lot frontage, 16, 157, 234, 286
lot line, 16, 18, 22, 27, 29, 30, 31, 102, 123, 127, 128, 130, 131, 137, 142, 154, 161, 166, 170,
203, 204, 233, 234, 298
front, 16
rear, 16
side, 16
lot width, 16, 197, 234, 265, 286
lowest floor, 16, 184, 188, 189, 190
M
maintenance guarantee, 16, 211, 279, 296, 317, 318, 319, 323
major site plan, 20, 255, 275, 277, 283
man-made structure, 14, 192
manufactured home, 16, 17, 188, 190
manufactured home park, 17
manufactured home subdivision, 17
manufacturing, 15, 17, 55, 65, 77, 88, 89, 110
marina
recreational, 17
marine related sales and services, 17, 128, 136, 137, 138
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – VII
marquee, 8, 17, 23
membership club, 17
mezzanine, 17
minor site plan, 17, 260, 267, 268, 269, 292, 293
mixed use residential building, 17
mobile home, 17, 143, 164
monopole, 18, 170
mortuary, 18
motel, 18
motion-picture theater, 26
motor vehicle, 6, 7, 10, 18, 19, 89, 90, 123, 124, 125, 136, 137, 157, 158, 159, 178, 203, 204, 218,
229, 230, 231
multi-family dwelling, 11, 30, 165, 222, 224
multi-level parking structure, 18, 92, 139, 151, 153
N
national register criteria, 18
new construction, 8, 18, 21, 188, 189, 190, 302, 303
nightclub, 18, 103
non-conforming
lot, 18
structure, 18, 196, 197
non-conforming use, 18, 147, 196, 244, 253
nuisance, 18, 30, 161, 173, 214, 263
nursery, 10, 18, 21, 90, 140, 211
nursing home/convalescent home, 18
O
office, 14, 18, 20, 26, 39, 53, 55, 65, 66, 70, 76, 82, 83, 86, 89, 90, 92, 97, 99, 103, 104, 110, 117,
130, 134, 139, 143, 144, 145, 152, 153, 156, 162, 165, 169, 173, 176, 227, 240, 241, 243, 245,
251, 252, 255, 258, 264, 279, 303, 320, 329
home professional, 14, 121, 122, 165
professional, 20, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 42, 49, 112, 113, 122, 165, 201
off-site, 20, 139, 147, 257, 258
off-tract, 17, 18, 25, 144, 283, 317, 324, 325, 326
on-site, 7, 26, 102, 136, 137, 142, 143, 144, 147, 148, 162, 181, 223, 225, 227, 317
on-tract, 19, 276
open space, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 19, 27, 92, 103, 104, 106, 145, 146, 148, 152, 154, 155, 161, 164, 184,
207, 208, 210, 217, 218, 223, 224, 233, 234, 236, 253, 256, 257, 258, 263, 265, 270, 271, 272,
317, 329
common, 9, 19, 104, 106, 253, 270, 271, 290, 294
historic flared avenue, 14, 254
ordinary maintenance and repair, 19, 206
outdoor storage, 19, 104, 122, 129, 136, 137, 140, 157, 158
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – VIII
P
park, 16, 17, 19, 90, 130, 164, 206, 237
parking lot, 15, 19, 92, 102, 121, 129, 130, 137, 138, 141, 142, 166, 180, 202, 203, 204, 211, 212,
218, 220, 223, 224, 225, 227, 229, 230, 324
parking space, off-street, 19, 138, 139, 327
parking structure, multi-level, 18, 92, 139, 151, 153
patio, 19, 224
performance guarantee, 19, 134, 271, 272, 278, 279, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 326, 329
performing arts theater, 26
permit, 5, 12, 19, 24, 30, 103, 121, 124, 131, 133, 135, 139, 144, 148, 172, 187, 189, 191, 205,
214, 228, 229, 235, 236, 238, 242, 244, 246, 250, 253, 256, 257, 259, 263, 265, 269, 279, 301,
304, 305, 306, 307, 312, 313, 315, 316, 324, 326, 327, 328, 329
zoning, 19, 27, 30, 121, 122, 127, 131, 132, 133, 143, 144, 164, 172, 174, 177, 186, 187, 194,
211, 236, 262, 263, 269, 301, 315, 317, 327, 328, 329
person with head injury, 19
personal boatslip or dock, 19
personal service establishment, 20, 167
place of worship, 20
planned commercial development, 20, 49, 199
planned development, 6, 17, 20, 25, 106, 149, 253, 269, 272, 273
planned unit development, 2, 6, 20, 257, 270, 271, 272, 281
porch, 8, 13, 20, 124, 148, 207, 221
preliminary approval, 20, 273, 275, 276, 277, 280, 281
principal structure, 20, 22, 92, 124, 125, 139, 142, 143, 144, 152, 160, 163, 186, 244, 245
principal use, 3, 5, 7, 20, 26, 42, 45, 48, 56, 59, 66, 68, 71, 77, 92, 100, 111, 128, 134, 136, 139,
149, 157, 159, 167, 168, 169, 178
private garage, 13
professional office, 20, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 42, 49, 112, 113, 122, 165, 201
home, 14, 121, 122, 165
prohibited use, 20
protection, 8, 20, 187, 209, 235, 249, 281, 327
public purpose use, 20
public utility, 20, 23, 166, 167, 303, 323
R
rear lot line, 16, 27, 127, 130
reception and banquet hall, 20
reconstruction, 10, 21, 24, 25, 27, 143, 169, 170, 327, 330
recreational facility, 21, 46, 70, 85, 96, 109
refuse and recycling area, 21, 220
rehabilitated dwelling unit, 11
rehabilitation, 8, 11, 21, 208, 315, 316
replacement plan, 21, 154
replacement tree, 21, 236, 237
research laboratory, 21
restaurant, 17, 21, 101, 103, 113, 140, 147, 160, 302
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – IX
drive-through, 21, 162
take-out, 21
restoration, 8, 21, 23, 301, 309, 321
retail sales and services, 21, 167
retail services, 21
retaining wall, iii, 26, 193, 194, 195, 196, 205, 239, 328
reverse frontage lot, 16, 234
row house, 22
S
sales and services
marine related, 17, 128, 136, 137, 138
satellite dish antenna, 22, 125, 126
school
private, 22
public, 22, 256
vocational, 22
selective cutting, 22
self-storage facility, 22, 168
setback, 8, 14, 16, 22, 102, 104, 124, 125, 127, 128, 131, 133, 136, 137, 141, 142, 145, 146, 148,
150, 151, 156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 162, 169, 170, 173, 177, 186, 195, 197, 205, 211, 218, 220,
223, 234, 286, 298, 315
setback line, 8, 16, 22, 234, 298
setting, 21, 22, 106, 166, 210, 270, 274, 277, 280, 311, 318
side lot line, 27, 124, 130, 132, 142, 205, 211
sidewalk sale, 22, 146, 147
sign area, 23, 160, 172, 173
silviculture, 24
single-family
dwelling, 31, 32, 33, 111, 112, 113, 123, 124, 125, 130, 138, 141, 142, 202, 203, 205, 218, 221,
222, 234, 301, 302
single-family detached dwelling, 11
site plan, 3, 12, 17, 24, 30, 103, 107, 133, 134, 144, 145, 152, 156, 161, 172, 198, 199, 202, 209,
215, 216, 218, 225, 229, 235, 236, 238, 242, 244, 250, 254, 259, 260, 262, 263, 265, 266, 267,
268, 269, 270, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 280, 281, 282, 287, 289, 290, 291, 292, 295, 297,
301, 302, 315, 317, 320, 324, 325, 327, 328, 329
major, 20, 255, 275, 277, 283
minor, 17, 260, 267, 268, 269, 292, 293
slash, 24
slope
critical, 22, 194
steep, 22, 193, 194, 195, 233, 234, 328
soil conservation district, 24
solid waste enclosure, 24
specimen tree, 24, 235
start of construction, 18, 24
state soil conservation committee, 24
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – X
steep slope, 22, 193, 194, 195, 233, 234, 328
storage
outdoor, 19, 104, 122, 129, 136, 137, 140, 157, 158
storage shed, private, 24
story, 17, 25, 102, 114, 165, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 200, 223, 224, 231
story, one-half, 25
stream corridor, 15, 25
street line, 16, 25, 27, 123, 130, 132, 143, 145, 148, 159, 204, 222, 229, 230, 233
stripping, 25, 192, 194
structure
man-made, 14, 192
non-conforming, 18, 196, 197
principal, 20, 22, 92, 124, 125, 139, 142, 143, 144, 152, 160, 163, 186, 244, 245
subdivision
major, 12, 20, 24, 25, 103, 217, 236, 255, 274, 280, 283, 295, 297
minor, 17, 25, 217, 245, 267, 268, 269, 299
substandard
dwelling unit, 11
substandard dwelling unit, 11
substantial improvement, 25, 188, 189, 190
substantive certification, 25, 316
swimming pool, 26, 38, 75, 127, 128, 194, 218, 328
swimming pool, portable, 26
T
tavern, 17, 26
telecommunications or transmission tower, 26
terrace, 19
thinning, 26, 194
through lot, 16, 130
topsoil, 26, 190, 191, 192
tower, telecommunications or transmission, 26
townhouse, 9, 22, 24, 26, 101, 102, 222
dwelling unit, 11
trailer, 11, 26, 123, 125, 143, 144, 145, 219
tree, 6, 10, 21, 24, 26, 36, 42, 50, 84, 94, 154, 155, 193, 194, 206, 211, 212, 227, 232, 233, 234,
235, 236, 237, 238, 257, 291, 313
two-family
dwelling unit, 11
two-family dwelling, 205
U
use
change of, 8, 135, 140, 173, 263, 327
non-conforming, 18, 147, 196, 244, 253
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Index – XI
principal, 3, 5, 7, 20, 26, 42, 45, 48, 56, 59, 66, 68, 71, 77, 92, 100, 111, 128, 134, 136, 139,
149, 157, 159, 167, 168, 169, 178
prohibited, 20
public purpose, 20
W
wall
decorative, 132, 133
retaining, iii, 26, 193, 194, 195, 196, 205, 239, 328
wall, decorative, 26, 132, 133
warehouse, 26, 50, 61, 94, 135, 203
wireless telecommunication facility, 26, 169, 171
wooded acres permitted for development, 27
Y
yard
front, 8, 16, 27, 102, 104, 122, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 137,
141, 142, 148, 156, 157, 158, 159, 162, 163, 186, 195, 218, 223, 286
junk, 15
rear, 27, 104, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 129, 130, 131, 133, 142, 145, 154, 157, 159, 162, 168,
186, 211, 220, 224, 286
side, 27, 104, 124, 127, 130, 131, 142, 156, 159, 162, 225, 286
Z
zoning officer, 27
zoning permit, 19, 27, 30, 121, 122, 127, 131, 132, 133, 143, 144, 164, 172, 174, 177, 186, 187,
194, 211, 236, 262, 263, 269, 301, 315, 317, 327, 328, 329
P U B L I C S T R E E T
P U B L I C S T R E E T
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
Side Yard
P U B L I C S T R E E T
APPENDIX A: CORNER LOTS
Three Front Yards
P U B L I C S T R E E T
P U B L I C S T R E E T
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Front Yard
Side Yard
APPENDIX A: CORNER LOTS
Triangular Configuration
P U B L I C S T R E E T
P U B L I C S T R E E T
Building
Envelope
Side Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Dwellings should face this way
APPENDIX A: CORNER LOTS
Two Front Yards
NOTES: ALL FENCES SHALL BE CONSTRUCTED SO THAT A “FINISHED” SIDE IS LOCATED FACING OUTWARD
FROM THE PROPERTY UPON WHICH IT IS LOCATED. FENCES MAY ONLY BE ERECTED AT OR
BEHIND A LOT LINE.
FRONT YARD FENCES ARE NOT PERMITTED ON PROPERTIES EAST OF CENTRAL AVENUE.
MAXIMUM FENCE HEIGHTS — HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
PORCH
DWELLING
DWELLING
Historic District Sidewalk
Historic District Sidewalk
5’ Rear Yard Fence 4’ Side Yard Fence
2.5’ Front Yard Fence
PORCH
APPENDIX B: FENCES IN HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
APPENDIX C: TYPES OF FREESTANDING SIGNS
ADDRESS #’S
SIGN HEIGHT
HORIZONTAL
DIMENSION
TYPE “A”
ADDRESS #’S
SIGN HEIGHT
APPURTENANCE HEIGHT
HORIZONTAL
DIMENSION
TYPE “B” SIGN
HEIGHT
HORIZONTAL
DIMENSION
TYPE “C”
APPENDIX D: TYPES OF BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGNS
WALL WALL PROJECTING
PAINTED
WINDOW
TEMPORARY
AWNING
8 SPACES
at 9 feet wide by 18 feet long
TYPICAL PARKING LOT ISLAND & TREE PLANTING (between 11 and 99 spaces)
6’
4’
4’ wide sidewalk
APPENDIX E: PARKING LOT
ISLANDS AND TREE PLANTINGS
8 SPACES at 9 feet wide by 18 feet long
TYPICAL PARKING LOT ISLANDS & TREE PLANTING (greater than 99 spaces)
4’ wide sidewalk
6’ x 6’ planting diamond
4’ wide planting strips
7’
*Details per Sternberg Vintage Lighting Catalog
PILGRIM PATHWAY MAIN AVENUE
LIGHT POST STYLE
LOCATIONS OTHER THAN
HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR
WEST LAKE AVENUE
HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
APPENDIX F: LIGHTING
APPENDIX F: WEST LAKE AVEUNE LIGHTING
Milwaukee Harp
on a steeped octagonal
post
Liberty Harp
on a North Yorkshire cast
iron post
*Details per Holophane Corporation 1998 Outdoor Architectural Lighting Catalog
Straight lattice design security grille
Brick pattern lattice design security grille
APPENDIX G: SECURITY GRILLES
APPENDIX H: STREET TREE/ SIDEWALK/
UTILITY EASEMENT LOCATIONS
CARTWAY
10’
CARTWAY
SIDEWALK
SHADE TREE
EASEMENT
R.O.W. LINE
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Phone
Electric
Cable TV
10’
5’
4’
CURB
30’
ON CENTER
OPTION “A”
CARTWAY
10’
CARTWAY
SIDEWALK
STREET TREE
PARKWAY R.O.W. LINE
UNDERGROUND UTILITY
EASEMENT
Phone
Electric
Cable TV
10’
5’
4’
CURB 30’
ON CENTER
OPTION “B”
PORCH
BUILDING
Lot Line
Front Porch Line
APPENDIX I: HISTORIC FLARED AVENUE OPEN SPACE
Building Line
APPENDIX J: SHADE TREE COMMISSION
TREE PLANTING GUIDE
TREE GUIDELINES
1. Trees should not be planted or placed under power lines. Under special situations
shrubs or small trees with a mature height of 25 feet or less may be placed in and
around power lines provided they are maintained below the wires.
2. Trees of any kind should NOT be placed between the sidewalk and curb unless
pre-approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
3. All maintenance of trees and shrubs are the responsibility of the property owner.
4. The Shade Tree Commission reserves the right to deny permission for removal of
any rare or endangered species, any tree of historical significance or that would
register in the top 10 size tree in New Jersey.
5. See attached list of trees that are suggested for planting in Neptune Township.
6. By appointment only – a member of the Shade Tree Commission will make an
on-site inspection of property in Neptune Township. These appointments are
subject to the availability of the members and at no cost to the homeowner.
APPENDIX J: SHADE TREE COMMISSION
TREE PLANTING GUIDE
SHADE TREE GUIDELINES
Suggested List by Type
TREES FOR WET LOCATIONS
White Cedar
Dark American Arborvitae
Red Maple Cultis
Amalanchier Spprculxs
River Birch & Cults
Green Ash & Cults
Sweet Gum
Sweet Magnolia
Blackgum
American Sycamore
Swamp White Oak
Pin Oak
Willow Spp. & Cults
Arborvitae, species
Birch, species
Gray Dogwood
Silky Dogwood
Balsam Fir
Canaan Fir
Linden, species
Scarlet Maple
White Spruce
SHRUBS FOR WET LOCATIONS
Red Twig Dogwood
Summer Sweet
Yellow Twig Dogwood
Inkberry Holly
Goat Willow
Cranberry
Arrow-wood Viburnum
Nanny berry
European Cranberry
American Cranberry
APPENDIX J: SHADE TREE COMMISSION
TREE PLANTING GUIDE
SHADE TREE GUIDELINES
Suggested List by Type
TREES TOLERANT TO POLLUTION (DRIVEWAYS/PARKING LOTS)
Arborvitae
Carolina Hemlock (better than Canadian Hemlock)
Linden, species
Locust, species
Oak, species
Olive, species
Austrian Pine
Scotch Pine
Mugho Pine (dwarf ornamental pine)
TREES FOR WINDBREAKS AND SCREENING
Black Alder
Arborvitae (pyramidal species)
Fir, species
Pine, species (excluding Black Pine)
Spruce, species
FLOWERING TREES
Chinese Dogwood – 20’
Gray Dogwood – 15’
Red Flowering Dogwood – Cherokee Chief 15-20’
White Flowering Dogwood – Curnus Florida – 40’
Japanese Crabapple – 25’
Sargent Crabapple – 8’
Ginkgo – 40-50’
Eastern Redbud – 20’
Cleveland Select Pear – 30-40’
Sourwood – 25’ (moist, acid soil)
Magnolia Sieboldll – 10-15’
Saucer Magnolia – 15-20’
Bradford Pear – 25-30’
Kwanzan Cherry
Flowering Plum, Thundercloud – 15-20’
Holly, species
APPENDIX J: SHADE TREE COMMISSION
TREE PLANTING GUIDE
TREES FOR PLANTING IN LAWN AREAS – MAXIMUM 40’
ORNAMENTAL (FLOWERING)
Callery Pear – Redspire, Aristocrat, Autumn Blaze
Scholartree
Golden Rintree
Red Horse Chestnut – Briotli
Flowering Cherry – Kwanzan, Sargent, Higan
Merrill Magnolia
SHADE TREES
European Hornbeam
Hedge Maple
Shantung Maple
River Brich
Amur Corktree
Honey Locust – Imperial
Sawtooth Oak
EVERGREEN TREES
American Holly
False Cypress
Leyland Cypress
Spruce – Blue, White
ZONING SCHEDULE A-I
USE REGULATIONS - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 HD-R-1 HD-O HD-R-2
Age Restricted Residences P
Assisted Living Facility C C
Bed & Breakfast Guesthouse C
Bed & Breakfast Homestay C
Cemetary P P P
Community Centers P P P C C P
Community Shelter P P P P P P P
Detached Single Family Residence P P P P P P P P
Family Day Care A A A A A A A
Historic Hotel C
Historic Hotel Restaurant/Retail C
Home Occupation A A A A A A
Home Professional Office A A A A A A
Long-term care facility P
Marina P
Multi-family Dwellings P P
Ocean Grove Camp Meeting
Association (OGCMA) P P P
Professional Office C
Personal Boatslip or Dock A
Place of Worship P P P P P P
Public or Private Elementary, Middle or
High School P P P P P
Public Utility Facility C C
Recreation Facility P P P P P
Townhouses P P
Parking for Principal Use A A A A A
Parking Lot C
KEY:
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Conditional Principal Use (See Section # 415 for Conditional Use Standards)
A = Accessory Use
NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Residential
Adult Retirement Community P P
Age Restricted Residences
Senior Citizen Apartment Building P
Detached Single Family Residence P P P P
Multi-family Dwellings P P
Accessory Apartments C C
Townhouses P P
Mobile home park C
Home Occupation A A A
Home Professional Office A A A
Swimming pools, private A A A
Tennis courts, private A A A
Development Options
Planned Commercial Development P P
Planned Unit Development P
Retail Trade
Automotive parts and accessories store (no repairs
or service)
Auto Auction
New car dealers
Used car dealers
Automobile Dealerships P
Recreational vehicle dealerships
Motorcycle, mini-bike, mo-ped dealers
Boat and marine equipment dealers P
Tire dealers (sales only)
Furniture stores P P P P P P
Floor covering stores P P P P P P C P
Home furnishings stores P P P P P P C P
Household appliance stores P P P P C P
Radio, television & other electronics stores P P P P P P P C P
Computer & software stores P P P P P P P C P
Musical instrument Stores P P P P P P P C P
Music stores (CDs, cassettes, videos, records) P P P P P P P C P
Home centers P P P
Hardware stores P P P P P P P
Outdoor lumberyards P
Building material and plumbing supply dealers C P
Page 1 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Power equipment stores C P
Grocery (except convenience) stores P P P P P
Convenience stores P P P P P P P
General stores P P P P
Retail bakeries P P P P P P P P
Delicatessens P P P P P P P
Butcher shops P P P P P P
Fish & seafood markets P P P P P P
Fruit & vegetable markets P P P P P P
Beer, wine & liquor stores P P P P P
Pharmacies & drug stores P P P P P P
Cosmetics, beauty supplies & perfume store P P P P P C P
Food (health) supplement stores P P P P P C P
Health & personal care stores P P P P P C P
Gasoline fueling stations C
Gasoline fueling stations with convenience stores C
Family clothing & apparel stores P P P P P P C P
Lingerie and corset stores P P P P P C P
Swimwear stores P P P P P P C P
Jewelry stores P P P P P P C P
Shoe stores P P P P P P C P
Hobby, toy & game stores P P P P P P C P
Bicycle stores P P P P P P C P
Sporting goods stores (excluding firearms) P P P P P P C P
Firearms and ammunition dealers P
Arts & craft shops P P P P P P C P
Family book stores P P P P P P P
Magazine/newspaper stands P P P P P P P
Department stores P P P P
General merchandise stores P P P C P
Florists / flower shops P P P P P P P
Gift shops P P P P P P P
Greeting card stores P P P P P P P
Seasonal holiday stores P P P P
Christmas tree sales (outdoor) P P P P P
Office equipment, supplies & stationery stores P P P P P P C P
Pet food & pet supplies stores P P P P P C P
Page 2 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Pet stores P P P P P
Electronic shopping & mail-order houses C
Membership warehouse club (retail) P P P
Vending machines (outdoor)
Heating/fuel oil dealers & distributors P
Flea markets
Tobacco shops P P P P P P
Art dealers P P P P P P P
Antique shops P P P P P P P
Garden Centers / Nurseries P P A P
Outdoor Displays and Sales A A
Finance & insurance
Commercial banking P P P P P P P P P P P P
Savings institutions P P P P P P P P P P P P
Bank P P P P P P P P P P P P
Credit unions P P P P P P P P P P P P
Consumer lending P P P P P P P P P P P
Real estate credit P P P P P P P P P P P
All other nondepository credit intermediation P P P P P P P P P P P
Financial clearinghouse & reserve activities P P P P P P P P P P P
Investment banking & securities dealing P P P P P P P P P P P
Securities brokerage P P P P P P P P P P P
Direct life Insurance carriers P P P P P P P P P P P
Direct health & medical insurance carriers P P P P P P P P P P P
Insurance agencies & brokerages P P P P P P P P P P P
Claims adjusting P P P P P P P P P P P
All other insurance related activities P P P P P P P P P P P
Real estate & rental & leasing
Offices of real estate agents P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of real estate appraisers P P P P P P P P P P P P
Other activities related to real estate P P P P P P P P P P P
Consumer electronics & appliances rental P P P P
Videotape & disc rental P P P P P P P
Home health equipment rental P P P P P P P
Consumer goods rental P P P P
Musical instrument rental P P P P P P P
General rental centers P P P P
Rental of rolling beach chairs
Educational services
Page 3 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Private or Public Elementary, Middle or High School P P P P
Early childhood education center P P P P P
Vocational School P P P
Computer training facility P P P P P P P
Apprenticeship training P P P P P P
Other technical & trade schools P P P P P
Sports & recreation instruction P P P P P P P P P
Art, music, dance & martial-arts instruction P P P P P P P P P P
All other miscellaneous schools & instruction P P P P P P P
Educational support services A A A A P A A A
Health care and social assistance
Offices of physicians (exc mental health) P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of physicians, mental health P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of dentists P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of chiropractors P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of optometrists P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of physical, occupational and speech
therapists, and audiologists P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of podiatrists P P P P P P P P P P P P
All other outpatient care centers P P P P P P P P P P P P
Diagnostic Imaging centers P P P P P P P P P P P P
Home health care services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Ambulance and first aid services P P P P P P P P
General medical & surgical hospitals P
Hospital P
Assisted Living Facility C C P
Homes for the elderly C C P
Long term care facility P
Nursing care facilities P
Other residential care facilities P
Nonresidential services for elderly & disabled
persons, including adult day care P P P P P P P P P
Child Care Center P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Family Day Care P P P P
Community Shelter P P P
Arts, entertainment, recreation & cultural
Agents, managers for artists & other public
entertainers P P P P P P P
Page 4 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Independent artists, writers & performers P P P P P P P
Adult Entertainment Use C
Nightclub P P
Amusement arcades P P P
Gambling industries
Psychic readings & fortune telling services
Marinas P P
Personal Boatslip or Dock P
Bowling centers P P P P
Billiards / pool halls P P
Golf course, full size P P
Golf course, miniature P P P P
Golf course driving range P P
Health and Fitness Club P P A P P P P P A
Indoor recreational facility P P P P P
Public Community Centers P P P C P P P P P
Public Parks and recreational facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Recreational clubhouse, concession stand A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Community swimming pool, indoor P P
Community swimming pool, outdoor
Theater, Motion Picture (indoor) P P P P P
Theater, Performing Arts P P P P P P P
Places of Worship P P P P P P
Grantmaking foundations P P P P P P P P
Civic & social organizations P P P P P P P P P P P P
Professional organizations P P P P P P P P P P P P
Labor unions & similar labor organizations P P P P P P P P P P P P
Accommodation & food services
Bed & Breakfast Guesthouse P
Bed & Breakfast Homestay P
Historic Hotel
Historic Hotel Restaurant/Retail
Hotels (excluding casino hotels) P P P P P
Hotels, Extended Stay Lodging Facilities P P P P
Motels
Drinking places (alcoholic beverages) P P P P
Food service contractors / catering P P P P P P P P
Banquet facilities P P P P P P P
Full-service restaurants P P P P P P P P P P P P
Page 5 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Outdoor Dining Facility A A A A A
Restaurant P P P P P P P P P P P
Restaurant, drive-through C C C P C C C
Restaurant, take-out P P P P P P P P
Snack & nonalcoholic beverage bars P P P P P P P
Personal Services
Barber & beauty shops, beauty salons & parlors,
hairdressers P P P P P P
Cosmetic salons & cosmetology services P P P P P P
Hotel beauty parlors and beauty shops P P P P P P
Manicure salon or nail services P P P P P P
Wig grooming service P P P P P P
Diet & weight reducing centers P P P P P P
Baths (steam, Turkish, vapor, mineral) P P
Depilatory salons (hair removal) P P P P P
Ear piercing services P P P P P
Body piercing services P P
Electrologist's studio P P P P P
Electrolysis studio P P P P P
Massage parlor P P
Scalp treatment P P P P P P
Hair replacement P P P P P
Tanning salons P P P P P
Tattooing shop
Funeral homes P P P P P P
Cemeteries P P
Retail services
General automotive repair & maintenance
(mechanical & electrical systems) C P
Automotive body repair, painting & interior repair &
maintenance C P
Automotive oil change & lubrication shops C P
Installation of auto phones C P
Automotive Body Repair and Painting C P
Automotive Service Station C P
Marine related sales and services C
Automatic car washes P C
Consumer electronics repair & maintenance P P P C P
Household item repair and maintenance P P P C P
Page 6 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Computer & office machine repair & maintenance P P P C P
Communication equipment repair & maintenance P P P P P
Commercial equipment (excluding auto & electrical)
repair & maintenance P P P P P
Appliance repair & maintenance P P P P P
Furniture cleaning, refinishing and repair shops P P P P P
Musical instrument repair shop P P P P P P P
Leather goods repair services P P P P P P P
Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors P P P P P P P
Bicycle repair shops P P P P P P P
Locksmiths P P P P P P P
Welding shops and blacksmiths P P P
Machine shops P P P
Gunsmiths (no retail) P
Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance services P P P
Coin-operated laundries & drycleaners P P P P
Dry-cleaning & laundry services (excluding coin-op) P P P P P P
Linen supply P P P P
Tailor and mending of garments P P P P P P P
Film developing services, retail P P P P P P P
Pet grooming services P P P P P P
Kennels
Professional services
Offices of lawyers P P P P P P P P P P P P
Offices of certified public accountants P P P P P P P P P P P P
Other accounting services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Architectural services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Landscape architectural services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Professional planning services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Engineering services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Building inspection services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Testing laboratories P P P P P P P P
Custom computer programming services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Computer systems design services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Computer facilities management services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Page 7 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Other computer related services P P P P P P P P P P P P
Administration & general management consulting
services P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Other scientific & technical consulting services P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Advertising agencies P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Other services related to advertising P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Veterinary services / animal hospital P P P P P P
Photography studios & videography services P P P P P P P P P P P P P
All other professional, scientific & technical services P P P P P P P
Support services
Corporate, subsidiary & regional managing office P P P P P P P P
Office administrative services P P P P P P P P P P P
Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association P P
Facilities support services P P P P P P P P
Employment placement agencies P P P P P P P
Private mail centers P P P P P P P P P P
Quick printing P P P P P P P P P
All other business support services P P P P P P P P P
Travel agencies P P P P P P P P
Investigation and security services P P P P P P P
Security systems services (except locksmiths) P P P P P P P
Janitorial services P P P
Landscaping maintenance services P P P
Carpet & upholstery cleaning services P P P
Other services to buildings & dwellings P P P
Municipal facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P
Fire department facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public safety facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P
First aid facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P
Board of Education facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public works facilities P P
Materials recovery facilities
Resource Production
Soil preparation, planting, & cultivating (for profit) P
Commercial nurseries P
Greenhouses P P
Page 8 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Animal husbandry / keeping of livestock
Agriculture processing
Silviculture P
Mining activities and related services
Construction Trades
Plumbing, heating & AC contractors C P
Painting & wall covering contractors C P
Electrical contractors C P
Masonry & stone contractors C P
Carpentry contractors C P
Floor laying & other floor contractors C P
Roofing, siding, & sheet metal contractors C P
Concrete contractors P
Structural steel erection contractors P
Glass & glazing contractors C P
Excavation contractors P
Landscaping contractors P
Building equipment & other machine installation
contractors C P
All other special trade contractors P
Manufacturing
Frozen specialty food manufacturing P P
Animal slaughtering P
Meat processed from carcasses P
Rendering & meat by-product processing P
Commercial wholesale bakeries P
Knit fabric & lace mills P
Canvas & related product mills P
All other miscellaneous textile product mill P
Lumber millwork (including flooring) P
Commercial lithographic printing P
Other commercial printing P
Prepress services P
Medicinal & botanical manufacturing P P P
Research Laboratory P P P
Pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing P P P
All other miscellaneous chemical product & prep
manufacturing P
Fabricated structural metal manufacturing P
Page 9 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Sheet metal work manufacturing P
Electroplating, polish, anodize, color P
Industrial mold manufacturing P
Other metalworking machinery manufacturing P
Radio, TV broadcast & wireless communications
equipment manufacturing P
Other electronic component manufacturing P
Automatic environmental control manufacturing P
Surgical & medical instrument manufacturing P
Dental laboratories P P P
Sign manufacturing P P
All other miscellaneous light manufacturing P
Wholesale trade
Automobile & other motor vehicle wholesale P
Furniture wholesale P
Home furnishing wholesale P
Computer & peripheral equip & software wholesale P
Other professional equipment & supplies wholesale P
Metal service centers & offices wholesale P
Electrical equipment, wiring supplies, construction
materials wholesale P
Other electronic parts & equipment wholesale P
Hardware wholesale P
Refrigeration equipment & supplies wholesale P
Industrial machinery & equipment wholesale P
Industrial supplies wholesale P
Service establishment equipment & supplies
wholesale P
Recyclable material wholesale P
Other miscellaneous durable goods wholesale P
Stationery & office supplies wholesale P
Industrial & personal service paper wholesale P
Drugs & druggists' sundries wholesale P
Women's, children's, infants' clothing wholesale P
General line grocery wholesale P
Packaged frozen food wholesale P
Page 10 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Beverage Wholesale P
Dairy product (excluding dried or canned) wholesale P
Poultry & poultry product wholesale P
Fish & seafood wholesale P
Meat & meat product wholesale P
Fresh fruit & vegetable wholesale P
Other grocery & related products wholesale P
Plastics materials & basic forms, shapes wholesale P
Flower, nursery stock, florists' supplies P
Tobacco & tobacco product wholesale P
Other miscellaneous nondurable goods wholesale P
Transportation, storage & Warehousing
General freight trucking, long-distance (Truckload) P
General freight trucking, long-distance (Less Than
Truckload LTL) P
Long term storage of wholesale goods P
Self-storage facility C
Flex storage space P
Boatyards A
Junkyards
Outdoor storage
Household & office goods moving P
Business & other motor vehicle transit systems P
Taxi service P P P P P
School & employee bus transportation operations P P P
Motor vehicle towing operations P P
Freight transportation arrangement P
Couriers P P P P P P
Local messengers & local delivery P P P P P P
Helistops A A A
Parking for principal use A A A A A A A A A A A A
Information
Billboard C
Newspaper publishers P P P P P P
Page 11 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
Zoning Schedule A-2
Use Regulations
Business, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Principal Use
C = Permitted Conditional Use
A = Permitted Accessory Use
TYPE OF USE B-1 B-2 B-3 HD-B-1 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 LI PUD/R1 CIVIC
Book publishers P P P P P P
Software publishers P P P P P P
Film & sound recording studios P P P P P P P
Telephone communication distribution A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Centralized telephone utility installations C C C C
Coaxial cable communication distribution A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Centralized coaxial cable utility installations C C C C
Television & radio antenna broadcasting P
Emergency services radio communication facilities A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Wireless telecommunications facility C C/P C
Data Center P P P
Satellite dish and ham radio antennas
Utilities
Public Utility Facility C C C C
Natural gas distribution A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Electric power transmission & distribution A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Electricity regulating substations C C C C C C C C C C C
Electric power generation plant A
Public water supply purveyance & distribution A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Sanitary sewer lines A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Sanitary sewer treatment plant C
\\Nept-svr4400\User Files\R-Gardella\Zoning\Zoning_Ordinance\Schedules\[Schedule_A-2(11-10-2003).xls]Non-Residential
Page 12 of 12 NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 02-14; No. 02-42; No. 03-035
ZONING SCHEDULE B - ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum Density
(d.u. per acre)
Maximum Floor
Area Ratio
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Frontage (feet)
Minimum Lot Depth
(feet)
Front Yard Setback
(feet)
Side Yard Setback
(feet)
Combined Side
Yard Setback (feet)
Rear Yard Setback
(feet)
Maximum Percent
Building Cover
Maximum Percent
Total Lot Cover
Maximum Number
of Stories
Maximum Building
Height (feet)
Minimum
Improvable Area
(M.I.A. in square feet)
M.I.A. - Diameter of
Circle (feet)
R-1 12,500 3.40 N/A 100 100 125 35 10 25 35* 25% 35% 2.5 35 2,600 33
R-2 10,000 4.30 N/A 100 100 100 25 10 25 30* 30% 40% 2.5 35 2,400 32
R-3 7,500 5.80 N/A 75 75 100 20 10 20 30* 30% 45% 2.5 35 2,000 29
R-4 5,000 8.70 N/A 50 50 100 20 5 15 30* 50% 65% 2.5 35 1,200 23
R-5
Single-family 5,000 8.70 N/A 50 50 100 20 5 15 30* 50% 65% 2.5 35 1,200 23
Multi-family 120,000 10 N/A 250 250 250 20 15 30 15 30% 55% 3 48 39,600 129
Town-house 120,000 8 N/A 250 250 250 20 15 30 15 30% 55% 3 48 39,600 129
B-1, C-4, C-6, C-7 15,000 N/A 0.6 100 100 100 15 0/10 25 20 35% 80% 3 48 7,200 55
B-2 20,000 N/A 1.0 100 100 100 20 15 35 20 40% 70% 3 45 8,400 60
B-3 10,000 8 0.7 100 100 100 20 10 20 20 40% 80% 3 35 4,800 45
C-1 2.5 acres N/A 0.6 500 500 600 50 30 60 40 30% 65% 2 40 84,900 189
C-2, C-3, C-5 50,000 N/A 0.6 200 200 250 40 30 60 40 30% 65% 2 30 19,500 91
LI 40,000 N/A 1.6 150 150 200 40 25 50 25 40% 70% 4 60 16,800 84
PUD See Schedule Section 405
CIVIC 200,000 N/A 1.0 150 150 150 50 50 150 75 40% 80% 6 100 96,000 201
HD-R-1 1,800 24.2 N/A 30 30 60 ** 2 4 0 85% 90% 2.5 35 1,000 21
HD-O
Single-family 1,800 24.2 N/A 30 30 60 ** 2 4 0 85% 90% 2.5 35 1,000 21
Existing Hotel 3,600 N/A 3.5 60 60 60 ** 2 4 0 85% 90% 4 50 1,900 28
New Hotel 10,000 N/A 3.5 90 90 60 ** 2 6 0 85% 90% 4 65 5,400 48
HD-R-2 18,000 48 N/A 120 120 120 5 2 4 10 85% 90% 3 40 9,700 64
HD-B-1 3,600 24.2 2.8 30 30 60 0 0 0 0 90% 95% 3 35 2,100 30
* see Section 411.07 relating to Supplementary Regulations for Decks and Porches
** see Section 413.06 for Supplementary Yard Regulations in Ocean Grove
NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 03-035
ZONING SCHEDULE C - SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS EXCEPT HISTORIC ZONE DISTRICTS
Freestanding
Type A
Freestanding
Type B
Freestanding
Type C
Directory
Nameplate
Wall-mounted
Awning
Directional
Apartment Complex Y
Assisted Living Facility Y Y
Automatic Car Wash Y Y Y
Automobile Sales Y Y Y
Automotive Body Repair and Painting Y Y
Automotive Service Station Y Y
Bank Y Y Y Y
Cemetary Y
Child Care Center Y Y
Community Centers Y Y Y
Community Shelter Y
Computer training facility Y Y Y
Detached Single Family Residence
Family Day Care
Financial Institution, freestanding Y Y Y
Funeral Home Y Y Y Y
Garden Center/Nursery Y Y Y Y
Golf Course Y Y Y
Health Club or Gymnasium Y Y Y
Home Occupation
Home Professional Office
Hospital (for humans) Y Y Y Y
Hotel, non historic Y Y Y
Indoor Recreational Facility Y Y Y
Light Manufacturing Y Y
Long-term care facility Y Y Y Y
Marina (recreational only) Y Y Y Y
Marine related sales and services Y Y
Multi-family Complex Y Y Y
Multi-family dwellig Y
Nightclub Y Y Y
Place of Worship Y Y Y
Professional Office, multi tenant Y Y Y
Professional Office, single tenant Y Y Y
Public or Private Elementary, Middle or High School Y Y Y
Public Parks and Recreational Facility Y Y Y
Research Laboratory Y Y
Restaurant, non drive-in freestanding Y Y Y
Restaurant, drive-through, freestanding Y Y Y Y
Restaurant, take-out (non-freestanding) Y Y
Retail Sales & Services, multi tenant Y Y Y Y
Retail Sales & Services, single tenant Y Y Y
Self-storage facility Y Y Y
Senior Apartment Complex Y Y
Theater, Motion Picture Y Y Y Y Y
Theater, Performing Arts Y Y Y
Townhouse Complex Y Y
Warehousing, non-retail Y Y
NOTES:
A. A "Y" indicates the sign is permitted, however, see Section 416 to determine quantity.
B. A blank entry indicates the sign is not permitted as an accessory use.

ZONING SCHEDULE B - ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum Density
(d.u. per acre)
Maximum Floor
Area Ratio
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Frontage (feet)
Minimum Lot Depth
(feet)
Front Yard Setback
(feet)
Side Yard Setback
(feet)
Combined Side
Yard Setback (feet)
Rear Yard Setback
(feet)
Maximum Percent
Building Cover
Maximum Percent
Total Lot Cover
Maximum Number
of Stories
Maximum Building
Height (feet)
Minimum
Improvable Area
(M.I.A. in square feet)
M.I.A. - Diameter of
Circle (feet)
R-1 12,500 3.40 N/A 100 100 125 35 10 25 35* 25% 35% 2.5 35 2,600 33
R-2 10,000 4.30 N/A 100 100 100 25 10 25 30* 30% 40% 2.5 35 2,400 32
R-3 7,500 5.80 N/A 75 75 100 20 10 20 30* 30% 45% 2.5 35 2,000 29
R-4 5,000 8.70 N/A 50 50 100 20 5 15 30* 50% 65% 2.5 35 1,200 23
R-5
Single-family 5,000 8.70 N/A 50 50 100 20 5 15 30* 50% 65% 2.5 35 1,200 23
Multi-family 120,000 10 N/A 250 250 250 20 15 30 15 30% 55% 3 48 39,600 129
Town-house 120,000 8 N/A 250 250 250 20 15 30 15 30% 55% 3 48 39,600 129
B-1, C-4, C-6, C-7 15,000 N/A 0.6 100 100 100 15 0/10 25 20 35% 80% 3 48 7,200 55
B-2 20,000 N/A 1.0 100 100 100 20 15 35 20 40% 70% 3 45 8,400 60
B-3 10,000 8 0.7 100 100 100 20 10 20 20 40% 80% 3 35 4,800 45
C-1 2.5 acres N/A 0.6 500 500 600 50 30 60 40 30% 65% 2 40 84,900 189
C-2, C-3, C-5 50,000 N/A 0.6 200 200 250 40 30 60 40 30% 65% 2 30 19,500 91
LI 40,000 N/A 1.6 150 150 200 40 25 50 25 40% 70% 4 60 16,800 84
PUD See Schedule Section 405
CIVIC 200,000 N/A 1.0 150 150 150 50 50 150 75 40% 80% 6 100 96,000 201
HD-R-1 1,800 24.2 N/A 30 30 60 ** 2 4 3.1 85% 90% 2.5 35 1,000 21
HD-O
Single-family 1,800 24.2 N/A 30 30 60 ** 2 4 3.1 85% 90% 2.5 35 1,000 21
Existing Hotel 3,600 N/A 3.5 60 60 60 ** 2 4 3.1 85% 90% 4 50 1,900 28
New Hotel 10,000 N/A 3.5 90 90 60 ** 2 6 3.1 85% 90% 4 65 5,400 48
HD-R-2 18,000 48 N/A 120 120 120 5 2 4 10 85% 90% 3 40 9,700 64
HD-B-1 3,600 24.2 2.8 30 30 60 0 0 0 3.1 90% 95% 3 35 2,100 30
* see Section 411.07 relating to Supplementary Regulations for Decks and Porches
** see Section 413.06 for Supplementary Yard Regulations in Ocean Grove
NOTE: Amended per Ordinance No. 03-035

Page 1 of 30
ORDINANCE NO. 04-23
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE, BY
ADDING SECTION 528 ENTITLED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND
SECTION 811.01 ENTITLED ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey, as follows:
 SECTION 1 - Land Development Ordinance, Article V, Section 528, Stormwater
Management, is added as follows (all text is new):
528.1: Purpose
A. Policy Statement
Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through nonstructural or
low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural
BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management measures and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural measures include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site conditions
and the origin, nature, and the anticipated loading of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for major development.
C. Applicability
This ordinance shall be applicable to any site plan or subdivision application that
requires preliminary or final review after the effective date of the adoption of this
ordinance.
Major development that has received one of the following approvals pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law: preliminary or final site plan approval; final municipal building
or construction permit; minor subdivision, preliminary or final subdivision approval, prior
to the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance, is exempt from the rules of this
ordinance.
If any of the above approvals is amended, revised or expires, exemption shall be
deemed void, and the project in its entirety shall comply with the rules of this ordinance.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements
Development approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered an
integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be 
Page 2 of 30
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances,
rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
E. Definitions for this Section are found in 528.12 “Definitions.”
F. This Neptune Township ordinance was based on the Model Ordinance called
“DRAFT Model Stormwater Control Ordinance for Municipalities” proposed by the NJ
DEP in “NJDEP-NJ Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual-Feb 2004-
Appendix D” at http:// www. state. nj. us/ dep/ watershedmgt/ bmpmanualfeb2004. htm .
528.2. General Standards
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed
to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity,
and stormwater runoff quality standards in this section. To the maximum extent
feasible, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water
quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The
standards do not apply to new major development to the extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance
with Department rules. Such alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater
quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects as would be
provided under the standards in this subchapter.
3. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) at
N.J.A.C.5: 21, the RSIS shall apply in addition to this section except to the extent
the RSIS are superseded by this section or alternative standards applicable
under a regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management
Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules. 
Page 3 of 30
528.3: Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow
on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the Department's
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13: 1B15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/ or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements at Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed
areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an above ground utility line provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with
a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of permeable
material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements at Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G
may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the
use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and
measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements at Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G, existing structures currently in use, such as homes and
buildings would need to be condemned; and 
Page 4 of 30
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas,
including the potential to obtain through purchase or condemnation lands not
falling under 528.D.3 above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving
stream, that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate for requirements of
Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in 528.3.F and 528.3.G
shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies at
528.3.E into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any
nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in 528.3.E.2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management measures incorporated into site design
shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of
runoff over impervious surfaces and lawns in excess of one (1) acre;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as
the time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant
point of the watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and
planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers
and pesticides.
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into
and through stable vegetated areas; 
Page 5 of 30
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or minimize the
release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. These source controls
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash
and debris in drainage systems;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills
or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or
commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying
fertilizer in accordance with the requirements established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules.
3. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to
meet the performance standards in Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G shall be
dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed
with the Monmouth County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent
restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
4. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management measures is available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The manual is
available on the Department of Environmental Protection's stormwater web page
at http:// www. njstormwater. org.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Standards
1. This section contains minimum design and performance standards to control
erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control
are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows: 
Page 6 of 30
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at
Section 528.4, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100% of the average annual pre-construction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction to post-construction for the 2-year storm is
infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement applies to all project
areas within the Township of Neptune, as defined by this
ordinance.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(a) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/ or
petroleum products are loaded/ unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/ unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than 'reportable quantities' as defined
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with Department approved remedial action
work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(b) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material".
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery,
located at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other industrial
activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants,
solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater. 
Page 7 of 30
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include,
but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high
water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater
recharge area.
c. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff
calculations at Section 528.4, complete one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff
hydrographs for the 2, 10, and 100 year storm events do not
exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the
site for the 2, 10, and 100 year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full development
under existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction peak runoff rates for the 2, 10 and 100 year storm
events are 50, 75 and 80 percent, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the
post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to the
portion of the site on which the proposed development or project
is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if
the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood
damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis
in accordance with 1, 2 and 3 above shall only be applied if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of
major development at Section 12 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil 
Page 8 of 30
Conservation District for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally associated
with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include
the development of land for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing
of agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80
percent of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual
average. Stormwater management measures shall only be required for water
quality control if an additional (one-quarter) 1/4 acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not
apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C.7: 14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt
under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design storm is
1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in
Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account the
implementation of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 528.6, or found on the
Department's website at www. njstormwater. org. The BMP Manual and other 
Page 9 of 30
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 528.6. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the
Department at the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required 80% TSS
reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/ 100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS % Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See Section 528.5.C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80% TSS removal rate shall
apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on
site in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation
using a weighted average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the
maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated
load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water
quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent
feasible, the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
performance standards in Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G. 
Page 10 of 30
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from
the address identified in Section 528.6.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C.7: 9B-1.4, stormwater
management measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater
runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C.7: 9B and perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14
drainage. These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These areas shall be
designated and protected as follows:
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under Subsection (1) above shall only be allowed
where previous development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn
area). The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the
special water resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the remaining
special water resource protection area be reduced to less than
150 feet as measured in accordance with one of the following:
(a). perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway, or
(b). from the 100 year flood line where the bank is
undefined, or
(c). from the centerline of the waterway where the bank
flood lines are undefined. 
Page 11 of 30
(3) All encroachments proposed under subparagraph (2) above
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey", established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq.
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special
water resource protection area cannot comply with the Standard For OffSite Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey", established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in
accordance with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of
the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section
shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the
special water resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District staff
to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
d. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional
stormwater management planning committee as an element of a regional
stormwater management plan, or by a municipality through an adopted
municipal stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor protection
plan for a waterway subject to Section 528.2.G(8) has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the
plan shall be the applicable special water resource protection area
requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to 528.G.8 shall maintain or enhance the current 
Page 12 of 30
functional value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in 528.G.8.a.(1) above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water
Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
e. This subsection does not apply to the construction of one individual
single family dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a lot
receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on or before February
2, 2004, provided that the construction begins on or before February 2,
2009.
528.4: Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless
Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 4—Hydrology, and Technical Release 55—Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
b. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method
for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge,
there is a presumption that the pre-construction condition of a site or portion
thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff
coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at Section 528.4.A.1.a and
the Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Section 528.4.A.1.b. A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be
used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the
hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five
years without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time
of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
3. In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall
account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, 
Page 13 of 30
depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction
stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer
shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious
and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume
of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected
impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS
Technical Release—55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, and other
methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is
below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C.7: 13, the
design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New
Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P. O. Box 427 Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
528.5: Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into
account the existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally
critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns;
and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize
maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning.
Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third
(1/3) the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch (1”)
and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches (6”). In addition, the design
of trash racks must comply with the requirements of Section 528.7.D. 
Page 14 of 30
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed,
and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are
consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C.5: 21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this
requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice
size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches (2 1/2”)in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum
safety standards for stormwater management basins at Section 528.7.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the proposed
measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards established by this
subchapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of 528.1
et.seq. provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
528.6: Sources for Technical Guidance
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from Maps and Publications,
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P. O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended.
Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells, extended
detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious
paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended. 
Page 15 of 30
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be obtained
from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into
N.J.A.C.2: 90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by contacting the
State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed
in N.J.A.C.2: 90-1.3(a) 4. The location, address, and telephone number of each
Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P. O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C.2: 90-1.3(a) 4. The location,
address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be
obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P. O. Box 330, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
528-7: Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design
and operation of stormwater management basins. This subchapter applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
B. The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater management basins.
C. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the
outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the
basin outlets in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six inch
(6”) spacing between the bars.
b. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure. 
Page 16 of 30
c. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed
two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of
opening through the rack.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable,
and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ ft sq.
e. The trash rack shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable
for emergencies and maintenance.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure.
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches (2”) across
the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ ft sq.
3. For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the permanent
installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily
accessible means of egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
a. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape
provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior
approval of the reviewing agency identified in Section 528.7.D a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this requirement.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater
management basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than two
and one-half feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps.
Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be located
approximately two and one-half (2-1/2) feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and one-half
feet above the permanent water surface. See Section 528.7.E for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin. 
Page 17 of 30
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for
an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than 3
horizontal to 1 vertical.
D. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency of the Township of Neptune, that the variance
or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin
528.8: Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to
this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the
Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at 528.8.C below as part of
the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth
in this ordinance.
3. The applicant shall submit eight (8) copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with Section
528.8.C of this ordinance.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval
The applicant's Site Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal engineer and the
municipal board or official from which municipal approval is sought. That
municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning
and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
C. Checklist Requirements
The following information shall be required: 
Page 18 of 30
1. Topographic Base Map
The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of
the site be submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of
the proposed development, at a scale of 1"= 200' or greater, showing 2-foot
contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category 1 waters,
wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands
and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural
and manmade features not otherwise shown.
Additionally, a Drainage System Map shall be submitted showing all areas which
extend a minimum of 2000 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development,
at a scale of 1”=200’, showing all wetland areas, rivers, and streams, based on
Geographic Information System (GIS) data from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJ DEP), the New Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS),
or both.
2. Environmental Site Analysis
A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made features of the
site and its environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s)
A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the
location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and other
landscaping, and seasonal high ground water elevations. The map(s) shall also
show the location of streams and rivers, and each type of wetlands, based on
Geographic Information System (GIS) data from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJ DEP), the New Jersey Geologic Survey (NJGS), or
both. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes
in natural conditions shall also be provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan
This plan shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Sections 528.2 through 528.5 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at
the source by land management and source controls whenever possible. 
Page 19 of 30
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map
The following information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land
area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the
type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and
dispose of stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each
outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms
specified in Section 528.3 of this ordinance.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e. g.
infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a
soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to
determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the
location of the control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan
The design and planning of the stormwater management facility shall meet the
maintenance requirements of Section 528.9.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements
The municipal official or board reviewing an application under this ordinance
may, in agreement with the Township Engineer, waive submission of any of the
requirements in Sections 528.8.C.1 through 528.8.C.6 of this ordinance when it
can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it
would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
528.9: Maintenance and Repair
A. Applicability 
Page 20 of 30
1. Projects subject to review as in Section 528.1.C of this ordinance shall comply
with the requirements of Section 528.9.B and 528.9.C.
B. General Maintenance
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
Guidelines for developing a maintenance and inspection program are provided in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual and the NJDEP
Ocean County Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual, dated June 1989 available from the NJDEP, Watershed
Management Program.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks
and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, and
trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures
are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation
to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person under an applicable
ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the
owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or project,
unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions
based on Section 528.9.B.7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must
be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the
function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or
replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, and trash; restoration
of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration
of vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective
maintenance for the structural stormwater management measures incorporated
into the design of the development, including a record of all inspections and
copies of all maintenance-related work orders. 
Page 21 of 30
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per
year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by Sections 528.9.B.6 and
528.9.B.7 above.
9. The requirements of Sections 528.9. B. 3 and 528.9. B. 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the
municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to
public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance, the municipality
shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal engineer or his
designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair, the municipality or County may immediately proceed to do so and
shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major development
is located from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-53.
D. Penalties
Any person who violates any portion or section of this ordinance shall be subject to the
penalties, as specified herein.
528.10: Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
ordinance its most reasonable application.
"CAFRA Planning Map" means the geographic depiction of the boundaries for Coastal
Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to
N.J.A.C.7: 7E-5B. 3.
"CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes" means those areas within boundaries accepted by
the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C.7: 8E-5B. "Compaction" means the increase in soil
bulk density. 
Page 22 of 30
"Core" means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the
surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
"County review agency" means an agency designated by the County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N. J. S. A 58: 16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinances.
"Department" means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
"Designated Center" means a State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as
designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet.
"Design engineer" means a person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
"Development" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in
the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-1 et seq. In
the case of development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that
requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB)
and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N. J. S. A 4: 1C-1 et seq.
"Drainage area" means a geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point along
a receiving waterbody.
"Environmentally constrained area" means the following areas where the physical
alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through regulation, easement,
deed restriction or ownership such as: wetlands, floodplains, threatened and
endangered species sites or designated habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of
endangered or threatened species are identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
"Environmentally critical areas" means an area or feature which is of significant
environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage
priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous
open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and
Nongame Species Program.
"Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood designated by the Urban
Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N. J. S. A 55: 19-69. 
Page 23 of 30
"Erosion" means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
"Impervious surface" means a surface that has been covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
"Infiltration" is the process by which water that seeps into the soil from precipitation.
"Major development" means any "development" that provides for ultimately disturbing
one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or
exposure and/ or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation. Projects undertaken by any government agency which otherwise meet the
definition of "major development" but which do not require approval under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-1 et seq. are also considered "major development."
"Municipality" means any city, borough, town, township, or village.
"Node" means an area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating
facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
"Nutrient" means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this State and any state, interstate or federal agency.
"Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated
under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended ( 42 U. S. C. 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
"Recharge" means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
"Sediment" means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a
product of erosion.
"Site" means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
"Soil" means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
"State Development and Redevelopment Plan Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1)" means
an area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning
Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment
and revitalization efforts.
"State Plan Policy Map" is defined as the geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official
map of these goals and policies.
"Stormwater" means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities.
"Stormwater management basin" means an excavation or embankment and related
areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may either
be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a 
Page 24 of 30
permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
"Stormwater management measure" means any structural or nonstructural strategy,
practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or reduce
stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or
groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
"Stormwater runoff" means water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm sewers,
resulting from precipitation.
"Tidal Flood Hazard Area" means a flood hazard area, which may be influenced by
stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
"Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood
given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment
Authority.
"Urban Enterprise Zones" means a zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone
Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52: 27H-60
et. seq.
"Urban Redevelopment Area" is defined as previously developed portions of areas:
(1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes,
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
(4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
"Waters of the State" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands,
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries
of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
"Wetlands" or "wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
SECTION 2 – The Land Development Ordinance, Article VIII, Section 811.01, Environmental
Impact Statement, is added as follows (all text is new):
Environmental Impact Statement.
A. An Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required as part of any application for
development involving new buildings or any land disturbance which requires approval of
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
B. Contents of EIS. The EIS shall discuss and analyze those factors required for the
particular project as provided in subsection C. and any other factors pertinent to the
project. Where the information is provided elsewhere in the application, it may be
incorporated by reference. The applicant may request a preapplication conference with
the Planning Board to discuss the scope and detail of the EIS, and the Planning Board
may seek the advice of the Environmental Commission in determining said scope and
detail. The EIS shall address each of the items outlined below to the degree and extent 
Page 25 of 30
it is pertinent to the project. In preparing the EIS, the applicant may utilize resource
information available from the Township {including the Environmental Resource
Inventory Final version dated 2003}. Application requiring an EIS may be rejected upon
recommendation of the Environmental Commission and by resolution of the Board for
failure to furnish sufficient information to enable the Board to make an adequate
environmental appraisal.
C. The EIS shall contain the following:
(a) Name and qualifications of the persons or firm preparing the statement.
(b) An abstract or summary of the major points and conclusions of the statement.
Current and/or future property owner
(c) Plan and description of proposed project: A project description, complete with
site plans, which shall specify the purpose of the proposed project, including
products and services, if any, being provided, and the regional, municipal and
neighborhood setting, including current land use of the project site and
properties within five hundred (500) feet of the site
(d) An inventory of existing conditions for the project site, the surrounding area
and other areas affected by the project. In the presentation, attention should
be given to the identification and description of critical impact areas, including
but not necessarily limited to streams and stream corridors, swamps,
marshes, steep slopes, highly erodible soils, areas of high-water table, flood
prone areas, aquifer recharge areas, unique stands of native vegetation and
important wildlife feeding or breeding grounds. The inventory should include,
but not necessarily be limited to, an analysis of the following.
[1] Soils and their properties to be mapped on page 1 of the plat.
[2] Topography.
[3] Geology.
[4] Groundwater hydrology.
[5] Surface water.
[6] The size of the subwatershed and the location of the site within the
subwatershed(s).
[7] Vegetation, wildlife and aquatic species and communities.
[8] Land use.
[9] Air quality.
[10] Water quality.
[11] Ambient noise level.
[12] Aesthetic features.
[13] The location species and diameter of all trees to be removed and other
requirements of the Township Tree removal ordinance at Section 525.
(e) A description of the services and/or natural resources to be utilized by the
project. The discussion should include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following: 
Page 26 of 30
1. Wastewater management. An estimate of the expected quantity and type of
wastewater from the proposed impact development. If disposal is on site,
discuss the relation to topography, soils, wetlands and underlying geology,
including water table, aquifer recharge areas and all wells within five hundred
feet (500) of the disposal areas; include results of percolation tests and soil logs
required by ordinance. If disposal is to an existing private facility or to a public
facility, identification, owner and location of the plant and location of the existing
collection point to which the proposed project would be connected. Documentary
evidence that the expected flows from the proposed facility will be accepted and
can be treated adequately by the private or public facility must accompany the
environmental impact statement.
The applicant should demonstrate compliance with all applicable state, county
and Township health regulations.
2. Water supply. If the water is to be supplied from the site and a flow of one
hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or less is required, an impact
assessment of water supply is required if the anticipated demand exceeds the
available safe yield of the aquifer contained within the property limits indicated in
the Township’s resource inventory. In such case the applicant must substantiate
and explain the anticipated demand, present proof that the aquifer contained
within the property limits can yield the desired amount of water, demonstrate that
wells proposed for installation will meet acceptable standards and assess the
effect of proposed withdrawals on existing and proposed wells and surface water
bodies within the geologic formation. If the plan includes fifty (50) or more
dwelling units, certification of the adequacy of the proposed water supply and
sewerage facilities must be obtained from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and must be included in the EIS.
If the water is to be supplied from any existing private or public facility, the
identification, owner and location of the facility and the location of existing
distribution point to which the proposed project would be connected shall be
provided. The applicant will submit documentary proof that the facility has the
available excess capacity in terms of its allowable diversion and equipment to
supply the proposed project and is willing to do so. The applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment that
the total consumption of groundwater from on-site and off-site sources will not
exceed the available safe yield of the aquifer contained within the property limits.
3. Surface drainage and stormwater management. Discussion of the stormwater
management plan to be submitted in accordance with Section 528 and
compliance with the provisions of that Section.
4. Stream corridors. A description and map of any streams and immediate
environs, steep banks, springs and wetlands and streamside vegetation located
on the property, in accordance with the standards of the Land Development
Ordinance concerning stream corridors, and evidence of compliance with these
standards. Include a map depicting the floodway and flood hazard area as
reflected in flood hazard area delineation maps on file with the Township, along
with evidence of compliance with Section 419. The applicant shall supply copies
of all resource information provided to the NJDEP Division of Water Quality in
support of an application for any required Stream Encroachment Permit.
5. Solid waste disposal. Estimate the volume of solid wastes, by type, including
excess earth, expected to be generated from the proposed project during 
Page 27 of 30
construction and operation and describe plans for collection, storage,
transportation and disposal of these materials; identify the location(s), type(s)
and owner(s) of the facility (facilities) which will receive such solid wastes;
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Statewide Mandatory
Source Separation and Recycling Act.
6. Air quality. Describe each source, its location, the quantity and nature of
materials to be emitted from any furnace or other device in which coal, fuel oil,
gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, wood or other these combustible material will be
burned, or if any other source of air pollutants, including automobiles attracted by
the facility, will be present on the site during or after construction. Evidence of
compliance with any applicable state and federal regulations shall accompany
the EIS. If a state or federal emission permit is required, a copy of all resource
data submitted with the application for the permit shall also accompany the EIS.
7. Noise. A statement of anticipated effects on noise and vibration levels,
magnitude and characteristics related to on-site activities and proposed
method(s) of control. Background levels of noise throughout the anticipated area
affected must be determined. Any applicant for industrial and commercial
enterprises must show that after construction and during normal operation the
enterprise will not exceed the State of New Jersey regulations controlling
industries and commercial stationary sources (N.J.A.C. 7: 29-1.1 et seq.).
8. Traffic. Determine the present traffic volume and capacity of the road(s) serving
the project and the nearest major intersection; calculate the traffic generated by
the proposed project and any increase in background levels during the course of
the project's completion; set forth projected volumes for roads and intersections
upon completion of the project, and compare the projected level of service (LOS)
to the existing LOS; and, describe traffic control measures that will be
incorporated to mitigate the impact.
9. Community impact. An analysis of the factors affecting the finances of the
Township, which shall include a comparison of the estimated tax receipts and
fiscal outlay for municipal services, estimated number and types of jobs to be
provided; calculation of the number of school-age children to be produced; and,
any addition to existing municipal services rendered by the project.
10. Visual impact. Discuss how the natural or present character of the area will be
changed as a result of the proposed development, and the steps taken to
mitigate the impact.
11. Artificial light. A statement of anticipated effects on light, magnitude and
characteristics related to as onsite activities and proposed methods of control,
with particular attention to the control of sky glow.
12. Critical and environmentally sensitive area. Quantify and discuss the impact on
critical areas, including stream corridors, wetlands and slopes greater than fifteen
percent (15%); and environmentally sensitive areas, including highly erodible
soils, areas of high water table, mature stands of native vegetation, aquifer
recharge and discharge areas and other environmentally sensitive features,
areas, or conditions not addressed elsewhere in the EIS. The analysis should
include a quantification of pre-development and post-development conditions on
the site. 
Page 28 of 30
13. Energy conservation. A description of the site in terms of its physical orientation
to solar access and prevailing winds, addressing the building and site design and
arrangement in terms of energy efficient principles and maximum utilization of
renewable energy sources.
14. Environmental protective measures. The EIS shall contain a listing of all
environmental protective measures which will be used should the proposed
project be implemented. These are measures which will avoid or minimize
adverse effects on the natural and man-made environment of the site and region
during the construction and operation of the facility.
15. Adverse impacts which cannot be avoided. The EIS shall contain a summary list,
without discussion, of the potential adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided should the proposed project be implemented. Short-term impacts
should be distinguished from irreversible impacts. Any impacts on critical areas,
which include but are not limited to streams, floodways, wetlands, slopes of
fifteen percent (15%) or greater; and environmentally sensitive areas, which
include but are not limited to highly erodible soils, areas of high water table,
aquifer recharge areas and mature stands of native vegetation, should specify
the type of criteria involved and the extent of similar areas which will not be
affected.
16. Summary environmental assessment. The EIS shall contain a concise summary
of the environmental impact assessment for the proposed project. This summary
will evaluate the adverse and positive environmental effect of the project should it
be implemented and the public benefits expected to derive from the project, if
any.
17. Permits. List any permits required for this project from federal, state, local, or
other governmental agencies, including the name of the issuing agency, whether
the permit has been applied for, and if so, the date of the application, whether the
application was approved or denied (include date) or is pending, and the number
of the application or permit.
18. A listing and assessment of the probable impact of the project on the
environment and community including both adverse and beneficial effects, based
on the pertinent items enumerated under subsection (e) 1- 17.
19. A thorough discussion of steps to be taken, during and after construction, to
minimize adverse impacts to the development site and probable off-site impacts.
20. Alternatives to the proposed project that might avoid some or all of the adverse
impacts as described in subsection (e) 18 with no discussion
21. Provide information on the off-site secondary impacts as follows:
(1) Surface runoff and flooding.
(2) Nonpoint source pollution.
(3) Sedimentation and erosion.
(4) Water supply quality and quantity.
(5) Traffic congestion.
(6) Habitat fragmentation.
D. Planning Board/Board of Adjustment review. In reviewing an EIS the Planning
Board/Board of Adjustment shall take into consideration the effect of the proposed 
Page 29 of 30
project upon all aspects of the environment, including but not limited to sewage disposal,
water quality, water supply, preservation of trees and vegetation, the protection of
watercourses, protection of air resources, protection of aquifers, protection of public
lands and their uses and ecosystems and the avoidance of any nuisance factors. The
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment will submit the EIS for review to the Environmental
Commission and may submit such statement to such other governmental bodies and to
such consultants, as it may deem appropriate. The Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
shall request that an advisory report shall be made to it by the governmental body or
consultant within forty-five (45) days of the submission of the EIS to such governmental
body or must consultant. The Planning Board/Board of Adjustment shall reject the
proposed project on an environmental basis, if it can reasonably determine that the
proposed project:
1. Will result in appreciable harm to the environment or to the public health and
safety;
2. Has not been designed with a view toward the protection of natural resources;
and,
3. Will place any excessive demand upon the total resources available for such
project and for any future project.
E. Conditions. The steps to be taken to minimize the adverse environmental impacts
during construction and operation and the alternatives which may be approved by the Planning
Board shall constitute conditions of the approval of the EIS, together with such other conditions
as the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment may impose. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until compliance shall have been made with such conditions.
SECTION 3 – Amendments to Submission Checklists
The submission of the Environmental Impact Statement shall be indicated by the
addition to the following submission checklists:
812.02 – Site Plan Checklist
 13. Environmental Impact Statement
812.03 – Minor Site Plan Checklist
 13. Environmental Impact Statement
812.04 – Preliminary Major Subdivision Checklist
 12. Environmental Impact Statement
SECTION 4 - Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect after final passage, adoption, and publication by the
Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, in the manner prescribed by law. 
Page 30 of 30
SECTION 5 - Severability
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this ordinance.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: May 24, 2004
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: June 14, 2004
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Thomas J. Catley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 04-39
AN ORDINANCE TO FURTHER AMEND AND SUPPLEMENT THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY ADDING A FAIR SHARE/AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE
COUNCIL ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune that the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended to include
Article XII – “Affordable Housing” as follows:
SECTION 1.
A. Purpose. This section of the Township of Neptune Code sets forth regulations regarding
low- and moderate-income housing units in the Township of Neptune that are consistent
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et. seq. as effective on June 6, 1994. These rules are
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985 and the Township of Neptune’s constitutional
obligation to provide for its fair share of low- and moderate-income housing.
B. Township of Neptune’s fair share obligation will be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income households as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.20.
C. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to low-income tax credit
regulations:
1. at least half of all units within each inclusionary development will be affordable
to low-income households; and
2. at least half of all rental units will be affordable to low-income households; and
3. at least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low-income households.
D. Inclusionary developments that are not age-restricted will be constructed in conjunction
with realistic market demands so that:
1. the combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at least 10 percent and no
greater than 20 percent of the total low- and moderate-income units; and
2. at least 30 percent of all low- and moderate-income units are two bedroom units;
and
3. at least 20 percent of all low- and moderate-income units are three bedroom units;
and 
4. low- and moderate-income units that are age-restricted may utilize a modified
bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of bedrooms will equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development.
E. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria will be used in
determining maximum rents and sale prices:
1. efficiency units will be affordable to a one person household; and
2. one bedroom units will be affordable to 1.5 person households; and
3. two bedroom units will be affordable to three person households; and
4. three bedroom units will be affordable to 4.5 person households; and
5. median income by household size will be established by a regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b); and
6. the maximum sales prices of low- and moderate-income units within each
inclusionary development will be affordable to households earning no more than
70 percent of median income. In averaging an affordability range of 55 percent
for sales units, the municipal ordinance will require moderate-income sales units
to be available for at least three different prices and low-income sales units to be
available for at least two different prices.
7. for both owner-occupied and rental units, the low- and moderate-income units
will utilize the same heating source as market units within an inclusionary
development; and
8. low-income units will be reserved for households with a gross household income
less or equal to 50 percent of the median income approved by COAH; moderateincome units will be reserved for households with a gross household income less
than 80 percent of the median income approved by COAH as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-
7.4 (g); and
9. the regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 9.16 will be applicable for
purchased and rental units.
F. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
1. establish one rent for a low-income unit and one for a moderate-income unit for
each bedroom distribution; and
2. gross rents, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, will be established so
as not to exceed 30 percent of the gross monthly income of the appropriate 
household size as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4 (f). The tenant-paid utility allowance will
be consistent with the utility allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
3. the maximum rents of low- and moderate-income units within each inclusionary
development will be affordable to households earning no more than 60 percent of
median income. In averaging an affordability range of 52 percent for rental units,
developers and/or municipal sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for a
low-income unit and one rent for a moderate-income unit for each bedroom
distribution.
G. For sale units:
1. the initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied for-sale housing
unit will be established so that after a downpayment of five percent, the monthly
principal, interest, homeowner and private mortgage insurance, property taxes
(based on the restricted value of the low- and moderate-income unit) and
condominium or homeowner fee do not exceed 28 percent of the eligible gross
monthly income; and
2. master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate condominium or
homeowner association fees or special assessments of low- and moderate-income
purchasers so that low- and moderate-income purchasers shall pay fifty percent
(50%) of those fees and special assessments paid by market purchasers. This fifty
percent (50%) percentage is consistent with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-
7.4(e). Once established within the master deed, the fifty percent (50%)
percentage will not be amended without prior approval from COAH; and
3. Township of Neptune will follow the general provisions concerning uniform deed
restriction liens and enforcement through certificates of occupancy or
reoccupancy on sale units as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3; and
4. The Township of Neptune will require a certificate of reoccupancy for any
occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting from a resale as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c); and
5. municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units will be
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 – 9.8. Municipal rejection of repayment options
for sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9; and
6. the continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain low- and
moderate-income sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10; and
7. eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on sale units will
be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11; and
8. the regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12 – 9.14 will be applicable to lowand moderate-income units that are for sale units. 
H. In zoning for inclusionary developments the following is required:
1. low- and moderate-income units will be built in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-
5.6(d):
Minimum Percent of Low/Moderate Percent of Market Housing
Income Units Completed Units Completed
 0 25
 10 25 plus one unit
 50 50
 75 75
 100 90
 100
2. a design of inclusionary developments that integrates low- and moderate-income
units with market units is encouraged as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6 (f)
I. Development Fee Ordinance. A development fee ordinance was approved by COAH on
April 6, 2004 and adopted by the Township of Neptune Committee on June 14, 2004 (by
Ord. #04-22).
J. Controls on Affordability and Length of Controls. To provide assurances that low- and
moderate-income units are created with controls on affordability over time and that lowand moderate-income households occupy these units, the Township of Neptune will
designate The Township Administrator with the responsibility of ensuring the
affordability of sales and rental units over time:
1. The Township Administrator will be responsible for those activities detailed in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a); and,
2. In addition, The Township Administrator will be responsible for utilizing the
verification and certification procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in
placing households in low- and moderate-income units; and,
3. Regarding newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units:
a) newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units will remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at least ten years
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2(b); and,
b) The Township Administrator will require all conveyances of newly
constructed units to contain the deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted
by COAH and referred as Technical Appendix E as found in N.J.A.C.
5:93; and
c) housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential structure
will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject to a minimum
ten-year control on affordability pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2(b). The 
Township Administrator will require COAH’s appropriate deed restriction
and mortgage lien.
4. Regarding rehabilitated units:
a) rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at
least six (6) years, except that this minimum duration of affordability
control shall be increased in accordance with the minimum required
duration specified in future rounds/cycles of COAH’s rules, if applicable;
and,
b) rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least ten (10) years;
and
c) The Township Administrator will require COAH’s appropriate deed
restriction and mortgage lien.
5. Regarding newly constructed and/or gut rehabilitated rental units:
a) newly constructed and/or gut rehabilitated low- and moderate-income
rental units will remain affordable to low- and moderate-income
households for at least ten years pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2(e). The
Township Administrator will require the deed restriction and lien and deed
of easement referred as Technical Appendix H as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93;
and,
b) affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period of at
least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental bonus credit
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15, then the controls on affordability will
extend for 30 years (N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9); and,
c) alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner suitable to
COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will house low- and
moderate-income households for at least 10 years except if the alternative
living arrangement is to receive a rental bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.15, then the controls on affordability will extend for 30 years
(N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8).
K. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et. seq. incorporates the need
to eliminate unnecessary cost generating features from the Township of Neptune’s land
use ordinances. Accordingly the Township of Neptune will eliminate development
standards that are not essential to protect the public welfare and to expedite or fast track
municipal approvals/denials on certain affordable housing developments. The Township
of Neptune will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1 –10.3. 
L. Applicability. The Township of Neptune has a fair share obligation of twenty-three (23)
units, of which zero (0) units is new construction. This ordinance shall apply to:
1. the Township of Neptune’s rehabilitation program, the purpose of which is to
rehabilitate substandard housing units occupied by low- and moderate-income
households;
2. any and all developments that contain proposed low- and moderate-income units;
and,
3. any public lands, with or without improvements, determined to be no longer
needed for municipal purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21, which permits
private sales to certain organizations for a nominal consideration, when such land
will be conveyed from The Township of Neptune to:
a) any duly incorporated nonprofit organization for the purpose of building
or rehabilitating residential property for resale pursuant N.J.S.A. 40A:12-
21(j); or
b) any duly incorporated nonprofit housing corporation or any limiteddividend housing corporation or housing association organized pursuant to
P.L.1949, c.184 (C.55:16-1 et seq.) for the purpose of constructing
housing for low- or moderate-income persons or families or handicapped
persons pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(l).
SECTION 2.
Article XII in the Township’s Land Development Ordinance entitled Amendment,
Severability, Interpretation, Repealer & Enactment” shall be renumbered as Article XIII.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: September 13, 2004
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: September 27, 2004
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Thomas J. Catley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

 DRAFT
1
ORDINANCE NO. 05-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY AMENDING THE
PROVISIONS OF SECTION 406.01 (CIVIC ZONE) TO
PROVIDE BULK AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR
HOSPITALS AND ADDING ADDITIONAL ALTERNATE
MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune,
County of Monmouth, as follows:
SECTION 1
The Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and specifically
Section 406.01. E. (C Civic) shall be amended and supplemented as follows: (New text
is underlined)
E. Bulk regulations. See Schedule B-1 for all permitted uses with the exception of a
Hospital.
SECTION 2
The Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and specifically
Section 406.01 (C Civic) is amended and supplemented to add new subsection G. as
follows:
G. Regulations for hospital use:
1. Bulk requirements:
a. Minimum Lot Area- 200,000 square feet.
b. Maximum Floor Area Ratio- 1.5.
c. Minimum Lot Width- 150 feet.
d. Minimum Lot Frontage – 150 feet.
e. Minimum Lot Depth- 150 feet.
f. Minimum Front Yard Setback- 50 feet.
g. Minimum Side Yard Setback-50 feet.
h. Minimum Combined Side Yard Setback- 150 feet.
i. Minimum Rear Yard Setback- 75 feet. A rear yard setback of 25 feet shall be
permitted for the portion of the rear yard of the hospital use, which abuts public
property.
j. Maximum Percent Building Cover- 50%.
k. Maximum Percent Impervious Cover- 100%.
l. Maximum Number of Building Stories/Height- Principal Building - 13 stories/ 240
feet.
m. Maximum height of multilevel parking structure- 8 stories/115 feet.
n. Minimum Improvable Area- 96,000 square feet
o. Minimum Improvable Area-Diameter of a Circle- 201 feet.
p. Height Exemptions 
 DRAFT
2
The maximum height requirement for a hospital use shall apply except for the
following:
(1) The height of roof-mounted mechanical equipment, any elevator overrun and
roof-mounted radio masts and antennas shall not exceed 25 feet above the level
of such roof provided architectural-compatible screening of the mechanical
equipment is constructed to minimize the visual appearance. The elevator
overrun, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be defined as the building area
located above the elevator shaft.
(2) Due to the mechanical equipment required for a hospital use, the aggregate
area covered by all such features shall not be limited, provided appropriate
screening at the roof level is installed.
(3) Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 415.B.1, roof-mounted personal
wireless facilities shall not project more than the height of the elevator overrun.
q. Setback exemption. The below–ground portion of any underground parking
structure shall be exempt from the setback requirements.
2. Design Requirements
a. Parking Lot Landscaping. The Parking Lot landscaping requirements of Section
509. I., which requires that no more than eight (8) parking spaces shall be placed
in one continuos row of parking without an intervening landscaped island strip,
may be relaxed by the Planning Board due to the uniqueness of the hospital use
provided the decreased landscaped is mitigated by supplemental landscaping
elsewhere on the site.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 412.17.B., the minimum parking space
width of hospital parking spaces for employees and those spaces located within a
multilevel parking structure or accommodated by valet attendants may be
reduced to eight and one-half (8.5) feet, at the discretion of the Planning Board.

SECTION 3.
The Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and specifically
Section 602 (Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment) is amended and
supplemented as follows:
A. Membership.
Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby created consisting of seven (7) regular
members and four (4) alternate members, each of whom shall be appointed by the
Township Committee
B. Terms of Members
2. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their appointment as
“Alternate No. 1”, “Alternate No. 2”, “Alternate No. 3” and “Alternate No. 4”.
SECTION 4.
If any subsection, paragraph or provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect the remaining provisions of
this Ordinance. 
 DRAFT
3
SECTION 5.
All ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6.
This ordinance shall take effect after publication and passage according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 13, 2005
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: June 27, 2005
ATTEST:
____________________________ __________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Thomas J. Catley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO 07-11
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE, COUNTY OF MONMOUTH,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY BY AMENDING VARIOUS
SECTIONS TO PROVIDE CLARIFICATIONS AND
UPDATES
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby
amended as follows:
Section 1
Section 201 (Definitions) is hereby amended and supplemented to modify the definitions
of the following terms as follows (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions
indicated in brackets with strike-through [thus]):
Building height – The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
proposed finished grade at all corners of the building to the top of the highest roof
beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average height
between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Lot, through- A lot other than a corner lot which adjoins two (2) street lines which are at
opposite ends of the lot. A through lot shall be considered to have two front yards if the
adjoining streets are improved or accessible to vehicular traffic. If the adjoining
street line, which is opposite the street address of the property, is not improved or
accessible to vehicular traffic, the yard opposite the street address shall may be
considered a rear yard for purposes of fence permits.
Story, half
A space under a pitched roof at the top of a building, the floor of which is not more than
two (2) feet below any plan, which will not qualify for living space under BOCA ) Building
Officials and Code Administrators International Inc.).
That portion at the top of a building under a sloping or pitched roof, the perimeter
knee wall of at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, upon which the roof rafters
rest, is not greater than three (3) feet above the floor deck of such half story.
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the use of architectural embellishments,
as permitted in this Chapter.
Figure__: Story, half
Section 2
Section 201 (Definitions) is hereby amended and supplemented to add the following
definitions:
“Balcony - An open air structure attached to a building in some cases in a cantilevered
manner, without a roof, and located above the first floor level (in a split level house, this
would be above the second, or middle level). The edges of the balcony shall have a
railing and the structure shall meet the setback requirements for the building to which it
is attached. Balconies shall not project more than eight (8) feet from the building and
shall not exceed more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area per 30 foot of lot
frontage. For purposes of this Chapter, an open air structure supported from the ground
is considered a "deck" when not situated directly above an open air covered porch.
Hot Tub or Spa - A structure placed on or below the surface of the ground and filled
with water. Any hot tub located outdoors shall have a cover capable of being locked. The
hot tub system includes devices to heat, circulate and filter the water and may or may
not have an accompanying deck. Facilities with more than sixty (60) square feet of water
surface area shall be considered swimming pools. “
Section 3
Section 404.09 (C-6 – Route 33 Eastern Commercial) is hereby amended and
supplemented to add the following use to the list of permitted uses in subsection B.
Permitted Uses:
“Quasi-governmental Postal facilities.”
In addition, Zoning Schedule A-2 (Use Regulations)of the Land Development Ordinance
is also amended accordingly.
Section 4
Section 411.07 (Porches and Decks) is hereby amended and supplemented as follows:
(Additions indicated in boldface thus):
“A. Applicability. This Subsection includes regulations for attached, accessory porches
and decks located on properties used for residential purposes outside the historic zone
districts. The terms of ‘porch’ and ‘deck’ are defined in Subsection 102. Subsection
§413.06 includes applicable regulations associated with porch locations in historic zone
districts.”
Section 5
Section 411.08 (Private Garages) is hereby amended and supplemented to add
paragraph D. as follows:
“ D. Height. The maximum building height of a private garage shall not exceed sixteen
(16) feet.”
Section 6
Section 411.12 (Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts) is hereby amended and
supplemented to delete Section 411.12 in its entirety and the following inserted in its
place and stead: (Additions indicated in boldface thus):
“411.12 Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Tennis Courts
Swimming pools, hot tubs and tennis courts shall be permitted on all lots used for single
family dwellings in residential districts and on any tract developed for multi-family
development. Swimming pools, hot tubs and tennis courts are considered accessory
structures, and shall require an approved zoning permit prior to construction, and shall
be subject to the following provisions:
A. Location. Any swimming pool , hot tub or tennis court shall only be
permitted in a rear or side yard area.
B. Coverage. The surface area of a swimming pool, hot tub or tennis court
shall be considered impervious. Tennis courts consisting primarily of
grass shall not be considered impervious. Swimming pools, hot tub and
tennis courts shall be subject to the applicable lot coverage requirements
set forth in this Ordinance. Any area paved with concrete, asphalt, brick
or other solid surface which functions as a walkway to or completely
surrounds a swimming pool or tennis court shall also be considered
impervious.
C. Setbacks. No part of the surface area of a swimming pool , hot tub or
tennis court, including structures attached thereto, or any pool filtering
equipment whether or not such is attached, shall be closer than ten (10)
feet to any side or rear lot line. Any impervious area which functions as a
walkway to or completely surrounds a swimming pool or tennis court shall
be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from any lot line.
D. Swimming pool fencing. A continuous fence consisting of a minimum of
four (4) feet in height shall enclose the perimeter of the entire swimming
pool area. Such fence shall be designed to securable control access to
the swimming pool area. Where such fence is located on a corner lot, and
the fence on the side facing the street is non-solid, that
portion of the fence shall be adequately screened with evergreen shrubs
not less than four (4) feet in height.
E. Tennis court fencing. A fence consisting of a minimum of eight (8) feet in
height to a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height for tennis courts shall be
required. Said fence may not be located within a required setback area.
F. Swimming Pool Drainage. No swimming pool shall drain into a public
sanitary sewer or be located in such a manner that water from the pool or
filtering equipment drains onto another property.”
Section 7
Section 412.05 (Corner and Through Lots) is hereby amended and supplemented to
revise paragraph C as follows (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated
in brackets [thus]):
“ C. Each lot shall have a rear yard except for through lots. In an instance of a through
lot and in an instance of a corner lot where the frontage is equal, the yard opposite the
street address of the property shall be deemed the rear yard.”
Section 8
Section 413.06 (Yard Requirements) is hereby amended and supplemented to add the
following new subsection:
“ G. Original open air balconies where being reconstituted by the renovation are not
restricted. New open air balconies may not exceed 150 square feet and shall be
setback a minimum of 1’-6” from the applicable front or side yard setback line. In the
event the covered porch directly below it has projecting steps or stairs, such steps or
stairs shall be excluded from the area footprint in the calculation.”
Section 9
Section 418.B.3 (Height Exemptions and Permitted Projections) is hereby amended and
supplemented as follows: (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated in
brackets with strikethrough [thus]:
“3. [Ground story] B[b]ay windows, provided they project no more than two (2) feet into
the required yard.”
Section 10
Section 502 (Architectural Standards) B. is hereby amended and supplemented to add
the following :
“ Additional guidance for applications for land development shall be provided by the
following documents:
• West Lake Avenue Improvement Area Architectural Design Guidelines (June 2002);
• Shark River Waterfront Improvement Area Architectural Design Guidelines (May
2003);
• Route 33/Corlies Avenue Improvement Corridor Architectural Design Guidelines
(June 2003);
• Route 66 Avenue Improvement Corridor Architectural Design Guidelines (July 2003);
and,
• Ocean Grove Historic District Commercial Building Façade Architectural Design
Guidelines (September 2003).
A copy of the listed documents shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk’s office
and available for purchase by interested individuals.”
Section 11
Section 505 (Driveway Design Standards) B.4 Table 5.2, entitled “Driveway Width
Requirements,” shall be amended and revised as follows (Additions indicated in boldface
thus; deletions indicated in brackets [thus]):
TABLE 5.2: DRIVEWAY WIDTH REQUIREMENTS
Land Use Type
One Way Traffic Two Way Traffic
Minimum
Width (FT)
Maximum
Width (FT)
Minimum Width
(FT)
Maximum
Width (FT)
Single & twofamily dwellings
9 10 18 22 9 10 18 22
Townhouses &
apartments
15 18 18 22
All other
residential
10 15 18 20
Nonresidential
uses
15 18 20 24
Warehouse & light
industrial uses
18 22 26 30
Section 12
Section 509 (Landscaping) is hereby amended and supplemented to revise paragraph D
as follows (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated in brackets [thus]):
“Planting sizes. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of three [(3)] and onehalf (3.5) inches at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
in height at time of planting. Low-growing evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of two
and one-half (2½) feet in height at time of planting. Size of other plantings shall depend
on setting and type of plant material.”
Section 13
Section 524 (Subdivision Development Standards) B.4 is hereby amended and
supplemented as follows (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated in
brackets [thus]):
“4. Frontage. To the greatest extent possible, lot frontage shall not be less than the
required lot width. For detached single family residential development only, a [seventy
five percent] reduction of 25% of the required [in] lot frontage may be permitted,
provided the required lot width is met at the front setback line, and provided all other bulk
requirements for the particular lot are met.”
Section 14
Article V is hereby amended and supplemented to add new subsections 529 and 530, as
follows:
§529. Township acceptance of stormwater management system.
An applicant for major subdivision approval shall be required to dedicate proposed
stormwater management systems to the Township and shall enter into an agreement
with the Township to that end. Such agreement shall be a condition of final approval and
shall be fully executed prior to release of performance guarantees, and acceptance of
the stormwater management agreement shall require payment of the fee set forth in
Section 530. in consideration of the Township assuming all future maintenance of the
stormwater management facilities. The form of agreement shall be approved by the
Township Attorney. The agreement, upon execution, shall be recorded by the applicant
in the office of the County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter file a copy of the recorded
agreement with the Township. Upon certification by the Township Engineer that the
performance guarantee for the project may be released, acceptance of the stormwater
management facilities by the Township shall be specifically stated in the resolution
authorizing the guarantee release. The Township shall retain the cash portion of the
guarantee a sum equal to the maintenance fee approved as to amount by the Township
Engineer in accordance with the formula in this chapter. In the event that the cash
portion of the guarantee is less than the required maintenance fee, the developer shall
post the deficit in cash. Any interim performance guarantee reductions authorized by the
Township shall not be construed to mean that all or any part of the stormwater
management system has been accepted by the Township nor shall any such interim
reduction reduce the cash portion of the guarantee to an amount less than the required
maintenance fee. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to maintain the stormwater
management system during construction.
§530. Stormwater management maintenance fee.
For purposes of this section, the calculation of the maintenance fee will be based on the
type of stormwater management system which is to serve the development, that is, a
surface system, such as a detention or retention basin and subsurface infiltration system
or a combination of the above. The fee shall be determined as follows:
(1) Surface stormwater management systems (detention or retention basins). The
amount of the maintenance fee shall be the annual maintenance cost per acre multiplied 
by the twenty-five year maintenance period multiplied by the maintenance area in acres.
The maintenance area of the stormwater management basin shall be defined to be the
area included within a line drawn around the top of the bank of the basin, plus an
additional 25 feet outward from the top of the bank. The annual maintenance cost per
acre shall be $1,025.00. The minimum contribution, regardless of the size of the basin,
will be $ 10,000.00.
(2) Surface infiltration system. The amount of the maintenance fee shall be determined
as follows: $1.00 per linear foot of the infiltration system per year for maintenance
multiplied by a twenty-five year period, plus twice the cost of the subsurface infiltration
system (not including structures). The replacement cost shall be the amount of the
performance guaranties for the subsurface infiltration system, plus the amount of $27.50
per linear foot for road repair for any portion of the roadway disturbed by such
replacement determined by the Township Engineer. The minimum fee, regardless of the
length of infiltration system, shall be $10,000.00.
(3) Combination systems. The required fee shall be based on a combined total of the
above.
Section 15
Section 811.01 (Environmental Impact Statement) shall be amended and supplemented
to delete paragraph A of section 811.01 in its entirety and insert the following in its place
and stead (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated in brackets [thus]):
“A. An Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required as part of any application for
major development involving new buildings or any land disturbance which requires
approval of the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment. A major development is
any development that provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land
or increasing impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more. Disturbance for
the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or
movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
Projects undertaken by any government agency which otherwise meet the
definition of ‘major development’ but which do not require approval under the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. are also considered ‘major
development’.”
Section 16
Section 415.08 (Drive-through Restaurants) is hereby amended and supplemented to
revise D.2 of section 415.08 as follows (Additions indicated in boldface thus):
“2. Two (2) internally illuminated menu boards not to exceed twelve (12) square feet
each in area may be provided within the building envelope.
Section 17
Section 1102 (Zoning Permits). is hereby amended and supplemented to add new
paragraph F entitled, “Waiver of Grading Plan.” 
“F. Waiver of Grading Plan. The Township Director of Engineering and Planning may
waive the submission requirement of a proposed lot grading and elevation plan, required
in Paragraph D above, for properties within the Historic Zone Districts and in other
specific cases where the proposed average grade changes, before development and at
the completion of development, is less than eighteen (18) inches. A waiver may be
granted if the applicant submits a written request to the Director of Engineering and
Planning for the waiver accompanied by sufficient elevation information for the Director
of Engineering and Planning to make a determination concerning the request and the
Director of Engineering and Planning approves of the waiver request in writing.”
Section 18
Article VI is hereby amended and supplemented to create new section 606 Technical
Review Committee as follows:
“§606 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
A committee to be known as the Technical Review Committee is hereby established.
The Technical Review Committee shall review all applications for development prior to
consideration by the Planning Board and or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Members. The Technical Review Committee shall consist of the Board Engineer, the
Board Attorney, the Board Planner and the Township Director of Engineering and
Planning.
B. Purpose. The Technical Review Committee shall be responsible for meeting with the
applicant and his/her professionals to discuss the technical review letters of the
Board’s professionals prior to the public hearing. The Committee will also discuss
any technical comments of municipal agencies including but not limited to Fire
Prevention, Environmental Commission, Police, and Shade Tree Commission. The
purpose of the meeting shall be to resolve many of technical issues related to the
subject development application to increase the efficiency of the Planning and
Zoning Board meetings.
C. Meeting Schedule. The Administrative Officer of the appropriate Board, upon receipt
of technical review letters from its professionals, shall schedule all Technical Review
Committee meetings. Said meetings shall be scheduled sufficiently in advance of the
Board meeting so that the applicant’s professionals may submit revised plans for
Board review.
D. The Technical Review Committee shall function in an advisory capacity and have no
final authority on any application review.
E. All professional fees for the Technical Review Committee members shall be paid
from the applicant’s escrow account that shall be established prior to an application
being deemed complete.”
Section 19
Section 1000 is hereby amended and supplemented to delete Section 1000 in its entirety
and insert the following in its place and stead:
§ 1000 APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES
A. Fee schedule. Every application for development shall be accompanied
by a check payable to the municipality in accordance with the following
schedule:
TABLE 10.1: APPLICATION FEES
Type of Application Administrative Fee
Appeals and Interpretations $100.00
Appeal to Governing Body $250.00
Conceptual/Informal Reviews $50.00
Bulk
Variances
Residential $100.00
Nonresidential $250.00 per variance
Use Variances $750.00
Conditional Use $500.00
Subdivision
Minor $750.00
Major Preliminary $750.00 plus $75.00 per lot.
Final $500.00 plus $40.00 per lot.
Site Plan
Minor Site Plan $500.00
Major
Site
Plan
Residential Prelim $750.00 plus $60.00 per dwelling unit
Final 50% of Preliminary
Nonresidential
Prelim $1,500.00 plus $50.00 per acre, plus $0.08
per square foot of proposed building area.
Final 50% of preliminary
General Development Plan $2,000.00
Certified List per MLUL 40:55D-12c. $10.00 or $0.25/name, whichever is greater
Special Meeting $1,500.00
Resubmission or Revision Fee $100.00 or 40% of original fee, whichever is
greater
Tax Map Revisions $300.00 plus $25.00 per lot or unit.
Zone Change Request $250.00
Appeal to the Township Committee $250.00
Tree Removal Permit
For new residential building lots, $25.00
dollars per tree, up to a maximum of
$300.00 per lot;
For all other properties, $25.00 per tree up
to a maximum of $600.00 for each acre.
Zoning Permit $35.00
Historic Preservation Commission
Certificate of Appropriateness $10.00
Certification of Pre-existing Nonconforming
Use (from Administrative Officer or Zoning
Board of Adjustment)
$100.00 per use.
Research Letter (from Administrative
Officer) $75.00
Extension of Approvals $250.00
Soil Removal $100.00 per lot.
As-Built Survey Review $100.00 per lot.
Plot Plan/Grading Plan Review $100.00 per lot.
Certificate of Occupancy Engineering
Inspection
$250.00 per lot.
Historic Preservation Commission
Demolition
(partial or total)
$25.00
TABLE 10.2: ESCROW FEES
Type of Application Escrow
Appeals and Interpretations $750.00
Conceptual/Informal Board Review $750.00
Conceptual/Informal Technical Review $1,500.00
Bulk
Variances
Residential $200.00
Residential Requiring Engineering
Review $750.00
Nonresidential $1,250.00
Use Variances $1,500.00
Conditional Use $2,000.00
Subdivision
Minor $2,500.00
Major Preliminary
0-5 lots - $2,500
6-24 lots - $4,500
25-100 lots - $7,500
101+ - $10,000
Final 50% of Preliminary
Site Plan
Minor Site Plan $1,500.00
Major
Site
Plan
Residential Prelim $2,000.00 plus $25.00 per dwelling unit
Final 50% of preliminary
Nonresidential
Prelim
$1,000.00 plus
0-5,000 sf -$1,500.00
5,001-10,000 sf - $3,500.00
10,001 - 25,000 sf -$6,500.00
25,001-75,000 sf -$8,500.00
75,000 sf + - $10,000.00
Final 50% of preliminary
General Development Plan Same as Preliminary Site Plan
Certified List None
Special Meeting $500.00
Resubmission or Revision Fee 40% of original fee.
Administrative Approval of Changes $500.00 per change.
Appeal to the Township Committee None
Issuance of a Permit in Certain Areas $200.00
Tree Removal Permit $500.00
Zoning Permit/Certificate of Appropriateness None
Historic Preservation Commission
Demolition $1,800.00
Review of Architectural elevations by
Township
Architect (if required by Planning or Zoning
Board Officials)
$1,500.00
Certification of Pre-existing Nonconforming
Use (from Administrative Officer or Zoning
Board of Adjustment)
None
Extension of Approvals $1,000.00
Treatment Works Approval $500.00
Soil Removal
$100.00 for review of an application by
the Township Engineer and inspection of
the site, plus $0.05 per sq. foot of area
disturbed due to the removal of soil
Section 20
Section 1010 (As-built plan requirements) is hereby amended and supplemented to
delete Section 1010 in its entirety and insert the following in its place and stead:
§ 1010. Plot plans and as-built survey.
A. Two signed and sealed copies of individual plot plans shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer to accompany any permit application for new residential or
commercial construction and for any residential or commercial building addition. The
individual plot plan shall be utilized to review the project for adequate drainage and
grading and compliance to all applicable Township standards.
B. The Municipal Engineer will review the submitted documents and either disapprove
or approve the submitted plot plan. The applicant will be notified if any revisions are
required.
C. The Construction Official shall not issue a building permit until the Municipal
Engineer approves the proposed individual plot plan.
D. Each individual plot plan shall be drawn to scale of not less than one inch equaling
50 feet, signed and sealed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-7.3 by a professional
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, and shall be no smaller than 8 1/2
inches by 14 inches.
E. Individual plot plans shall include the following information:
(1) Bearing and distances.
(2) North arrow, written and graphic scale.
(3) Existing/proposed easement and dedications.
(4) Existing/proposed building, pool, decks, patios, porches, sheds and accessory
structures dimensions.
(5) Existing/proposed sidewalks, driveways and retaining walls.
(6) Building envelope graphically depicting and dimensioning zoning setback
requirements and/or setbacks approved by the Board if (applicable).
(7) Street name, right-of-way width, pavement width and composition of the 
street(s) fronting the lot.
(8) The title block on the plot plan must include the property address, the block and
lot number of the property in question and the name of the applicant.
(9) Limits of clearing and soil disturbance. Show number of trees over four (4)
inches diameter to be removed.
(10) Existing trees to be protected and remain. Include tree replacement plan.
(11) Location of wetlands, floodplains, stream encroachment lines and/or any other
environmental constraints to the property. If there are no wetlands, then a note
should be added to the plan stating that no wetlands exists on the subject
property.
(12) Sufficient street elevations including center line, gutter and top of curb (if
applicable); existing and proposed lot elevations to include, at a minimum,
property corners, midpoints of property lines, building corners and center of lot;
the finished floor, basement and garage floor elevations of the proposed
structure; and sidewalk elevations. Adjacent dwellings, corner elevations and
topography within 25 feet of property lines. All elevations shall be according to
the NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum) and the source of datum so
noted. Any specific circumstances for which elevation requirements cannot be
met will be subject to review by the Municipal Engineer and Construction
Official on a case-by-case basis. Under no circumstances shall individual lots
be graded in such a manner as to redirect stormwater runoff onto an adjacent
and/or downstream property or disturb or change the existing drainage patterns
of an adjacent lot. Drainage flow arrows shall be provided to clearly depict the
directions of stormwater runoff. No grading or the creation of sump conditions
shall be permitted on adjacent lot(s) unless permission has been specifically
granted, in writing, by the owner of said adjacent lot(s).
(13) Location of any storm drainage pipes within 25 feet of the property including
pipe size, grade and invert.
(14) Lot grading shall be designed to provide positive runoff with grades at a
minimum slope of 1.5%.
(15) Swales designed to convey surface runoff shall be designed with suitable
subgrade material containing well draining sand or gravel, stone, sand mix
topsoil or other material acceptable to the Township Engineer. A construction
detail shall be included on the plan.
(16) Utility connections, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, gas,
electric, telephone and cable.
(17) Elevations, cross sections, and dimensions of driveways and retaining walls.
(18) Prior Board approval or waiver granted for construction in easements.
(19) Other items that may be required by the Municipal Engineer for proper
construction of the site.
F. Plot plans of Planning Board approved projects shall match approved
subdivision/site plans.
G. If a basement is proposed, a subsurface soil investigation certified by a licensed
engineer shall be submitted with the plot plan.
H. The applicant shall submit a foundation survey prior to an inspection of the
foundation for approval and backfilling. This survey shall include the location of the
foundation and the actual floor elevations. If the as-built survey establishes locations
or elevations different from those submitted in the plot plan, changes in the proposed
grading shall be noted. A revised grading plan shall be submitted to the Engineering
and Planning Department.
I. The applicant shall submit three copies of a final as-built survey for new residential or 
commercial construction and residential or commercial building additions signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in the state of New
Jersey prior to requesting a final certificate of occupancy (CO) inspection from the
Municipal Engineer. For major subdivisions and site plans a minimum of two (2)
inter-visible bench marks shall be set in New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System
(NAD ’83) and shown on the as-built survey.
J. The as-built plan shall address constructed conditions and/or location of:
(1) Final grading;
(2) Roads including curbing and sidewalks;
(3) Utilities;
(4) Building location;
(5) Driveways and parking lots;
(6) Stormwater management facilities, including as-built topographic contours and
volume calculations;
(7) Walls and fences, and
(8) Other structures deemed pertinent by the Municipal Engineer.
K. Exemption from the requirements of this section for a residential building addition
requires the approval of the Municipal Engineer, said exemption to be contingent
upon:
(1) Proof that the subject addition is not in a flood hazard zone
(2) A survey locating the existing dwelling and showing the proposed
improvements
(3) A site inspection by a Township engineering inspector to verify that the
proposed addition will not create drainage problems.
Section 21
Section 1009 (Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy) is hereby amended and
supplemented to delete Section 1009 in its entirety and insert the following in its place
and stead:
§ 1009. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
A. Occupancy permits for any buildings will be issued only when the
installation of any curbs, sidewalk, aprons, all utilities, all functioning
water supply and sewage treatment facilities, all necessary storm
drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot and surrounding land, rough
grading of lots, final course for the driveway and base course for the
streets, topsoil and seed for the lot, shade/street trees, unless formally
waived by the Municipal Engineer, are installed to serve the lot and
structure for which the permit is requested. Applicant shall submit copies
of approved tree removal and soil removal permits (if applicable).
B. Streets, if installed prior to final approval, shall not be paved until all
heavy construction is complete.
Section 22
Section 1102 (Zoning Permits) is hereby amended and supplemented to delete
paragraph D “Lot grading and elevation plan” in its entirety and insert the following in its
place and stead:
C. Lot grading and elevation plan. As a condition precedent to the issuance
of a new zoning permit, a proposed plot plan for each individual lot shall
be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for review and approval. Details
of the individual plot plan shall conform to the submission requirements
outlined in Section 1010 “Plot Plan and As-built Survey”.
Section 23
Section 1102 (Zoning Permits) is hereby amended and supplemented to delete
paragraph E “Location plans”.
Section 24
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be and
the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 25
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted
by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair
the remainder of this Ordinance.
Section 26
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and
upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
Attachments:
Schedule A-2:Use Regulations
Zoning Map
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: February 12, 2007
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: March 12, 2007
ATTEST:
____________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell James W. Manning, Jr.
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 07-25
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING SECTION 412 OF
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY ADDING AND AMENDING THE PROVISIONS FOR
TEMPORARY TRAILERS, DUMPSTERS, PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
AND LIKE PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE CONTAINERS
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State of New
Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, Section 412.21, shall be amended as follows:
 §412.21 TEMPORARY TRAILERS, DUMPSTERS, PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS AND LIKE
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE CONTAINERS
A. Temporary trailers – Definition. A wheel-based non-commercial structure that is used for
the transportation or storage of goods or materials, as a construction office, for temporary
short-term habitation in case of calamity, or other occupancy subject to the provisions of
this Ordinance. A box container which has been temporarily or permanently removed
from a chassis or truck bed shall be considered a “trailer.”
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit trailers hauling, loading or unloading
merchandise in the course of their customary function. No trailer shall be used except as
specified hereunder.
 B. Natural calamity. Trailers used for temporary residency by any occupant of a dwelling
that is being reconstructed due to damage from a fire, flood, or other natural calamity shall
be subject to the following provisions:
1. The trailer is placed only on the same lot which contains the dwelling that is being
 reconstructed.
2. An approved zoning permit shall be obtained from the Director of Code
Enforcement prior to the placement of such temporary trailer on the site. The
Director of Code Enforcement, under the advisement of the Construction Code
Official and Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for determining the
most practical location for such trailer.
3. The time period of occupancy of such trailer shall not exceed six (6) months,
provided however, that the Director of Code Enforcement may extend the time
period of occupancy for an additional time period of occupancy for an additional
time period up to three (3) months due to exceptional circumstances that prevent
the reconstruction and re-occupancy of the damaged building within the initial six
(6) month time period. However, in no instance shall such trailer be occupied for a
time period to exceed nine (9) months, unless extended by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. Construction and storage trailers. Trailers used for construction offices and for
storage of materials and supplies on a job site may be used during the period of
construction only. Such trailers may be used only during the construction phase of
a development. All material storage and construction office trailers must be
removed if no site work or construction activity has occurred on-site for forty-five
(45) days or more, or if construction activity has substantially slowed. Such
trailers must be removed upon the completion or final occupancy of the new
structure(s). 
2
C. Trailers for the disposal of materials or for the storage of materials and supplies
not related to the construction job undertaken shall be subject to the provisions
below concerning dumpsters, PODS, mobile attics and like portable on-demand
storage containers.
D. Office and classroom trailers. Trailers for temporary use including but not limited
to modified mobile homes for office use and classroom space may be placed on a
lot in a non-residential zone provided that:

1. “Temporary use” means use prior to final occupancy of a permanent
structure;
2. The “temporary use” is in conjunction with a principal building and a
permitted use being undertaken, or approved to be undertaken on the lot;
3. Trailers are not to be located between a principal structure and the front
street line and all required setbacks and yards specified for the respective
zone are observed;
4. On a corner lot, trailers shall not be located between a principal building
and any adjacent street line and shall observe all required setbacks and
yards specified for the respective zone;
5. Site plan approval for a permanent principal structure on the same lot is
obtained prior to placement of a trailer;
6. Use of a trailer permitted under this section does not commence prior to
site plan approval and does not exceed one year from the date of such site
plan approval unless extended by the Planning Board;
7. The time period of occupancy of such trailer shall not exceed six (6)
months, provided however, that the Director of Code enforcement may
extend the time period of occupancy for an additional time period of
occupancy for an additional time period of up to three (3) months due to
exceptional circumstances within the initial six (6) month time period.
However, in no instance shall such trailer be occupied for a time period to
exceed nine (9) months, unless extended by the Planning Board.
 E. Sales offices.
 1. In subdivisions and site plans approved for residential construction, the
 Director of Code Enforcement may permit a temporary sales office,
 provided that, prior to issuance of a construction permit for such temporary
 sales office, final approval for the tract upon which the temporary sales
 office is to be located shall be effective. Only one (1) temporary sales
 office is permitted per tract.
 2. A site plan must be submitted to the Director of Code Enforcement for
 review for compliance with all area and yard requirements and all design
 standards required in the zone district where it is located. Any relief from
 the aforesaid requirements or standards may only be granted by the
 appropriate board of jurisdiction.
 3. Parking on other than accepted public roadways. The following 
3
 minimum on-site parking spaces must be provided:
 (a) One (1) space for each employee
 (b) One (1) space for each ten (10) units or portion thereof for the
 first fifty (50) units in any project
 (c) One (1) space for each twenty-five (25) additional units or
 portion thereof in any project greater than fifty (50) units.
 The parking area surface may be gravel if maintained in a dust-free
 manner. However, the area of the driveway at least twenty-five feet
 from the street cartway shall be constructed on bituminous asphalt to
 prevent tracking of stone or dirt onto the public street
 4. A zoning permit and a certificate of occupancy are required for all
 temporary sales offices.
 5. The temporary sales office may only be located on the site until the 15th
 or final certificate of occupancy is issued for the dwelling units, whichever
 occurs first. At that time, the developer shall have thirty (30) days to
 remove the temporary sales office and any appurtenances from the site
and restore any area disturbed. If the developer desires to continue a
sales office use, it must thereafter be from within a proposed dwelling unit.

 6. Sales shall be limited to dwelling units being marketed in the tract on
 which the temporary sales office is located; sales of off-tract dwelling
 units are prohibited. Building materials and all other materials except
those directly related to the promotion and sale of dwellings in the tract,
such as decorating samples, brochures and offices supplies, may not be
stored in the sales office. Use of the sales office for living quarters is
prohibited.
 7. The municipal agency may also approve a temporary sales office in
 conjunction with its review and approval of the site plan or subdivision
 application, provided that the site plan and traffic control plan therefore
 have been submitted.
F. No trailer may be temporarily or permanently used for storage of materials in any
zone district except to the extent permitted with regards to dumpsters, PODS,
mobile attics and like portable on-demand storage containers to the extent
permitted under Section G.
G. Portable Storage Unit – Definition. A transportable unit designed and used for the
temporary storage of household goods, personal items, construction materials and
supplies and other materials which are placed on a site for the use of occupants of
a dwelling or building on a limited basis. Portable storage units include but are not
limited to certain trade named units called “PODS”, “mobile attics” and like portable
on-demand storage containers.
Dumpster – Definition. A rigid container generally used for routine collection,
temporary storage of solid waste, construction materials, industrial and other
waste materials generally on a temporary basis which is a portable detachable
device. 
4
Placement of Dumpsters, portable storage units and like portable on-demand
storage containers on private property:
1. Garbage containers often known as “dumpsters” as defined above, shall
require a permit issued by the Director of Code Enforcement and a
payment of a fee of Thirty ($30.00) Dollars and shall be limited to use not to
exceed ninety (90) days unless a longer period is granted by site plan
approval before the Planning Board or Zoning Board. Portable storage
units or like storage containers placed on private property shall be limited
to thirty (30) days placement and shall require a temporary storage permit
from the Director of Code Enforcement upon payment of a fee of Thirty
($30.00) Dollars. Such dumpsters and portable storage units shall be
placed either on vacant private property or located on the side yard or back
yard of any existing building on private property and should the applicant
require or request placement in the front of a building or private property
said application shall be treated as the same as an application under
Section H of this Ordinance. No property owner or agent for the property
owner shall be allowed to apply for dumpster or portable storage unit
permits in excess of two (2) permits per year per property. All dumpsters
and portable storage units shall be appropriately labeled as to the date the
permit was issued and the date of required removal representing the
maximum time period for use under the permit.
2. Front yard shall be defined in accordance with the Zoning Code of the
Township.
H. Prohibition of dumpsters, portable storage units or like portable on-demand
storage containers in certain private property areas and in public areas.
1. It shall be generally unlawful for any person to construct or place a storage
container for garbage, such as a “dumpster” or a storage container for
portable on-demand storage, such as a portable storage unit as defined in
this ordinance upon any front yard of private property or upon any
Township owned or unaccepted dedicated street, avenue, highway, lane,
alley or public place. No permit shall be issued for such use or storage of
dumpsters, portable storage units or like portable on-demand storage
containers unless the applicant establishes a hardship by satisfying one or
more of the following criteria:
(a) Narrowness of distance between property lines making placement
of the dumpster, portable storage units or like portable on-demand
storage containers elsewhere other than at the front of said private
property or at a public area difficult if not impossible.
 (b) Parking needs affected.

 (c) Traffic flow affected.
(d) Other reasons establishing the necessity of placement on the front
of private property or on a public area.
2. Should the applicant demonstrate a hardship warranting placement of a
dumpster, portable storage unit or like portable on-demand storage
container on the front yard of private property or on a public area as
defined above, the Director of Code Enforcement shall issue a permit with 
5
regards to dumpsters, portable storage units or similar portable on-demand
storage containers on a temporary basis, in the case of a dumpster for a
period not to exceed ninety (90) days and in the case of a portable storage
unit or like portable on-demand storage containers not to exceed thirty (30)
days. Extensions cannot be granted for more than the aforesaid time
period set unless a longer period is granted by site plan approval before
the Planning Board or Zoning Board. Both a permit for a dumpster and a
permit for portable storage container shall require a fee of Thirty ($30.00)
Dollars.
3. Any permit may be revoked by the Director of Code Enforcement if it is
determined that the existence of the dumpster, portable storage unit or like
portable on-demand storage container is affecting traffic flow or affecting
the safety or welfare of the public.
I. Notice of Failure to Comply.
The Director of Code Enforcement is hereby authorized to notify, in writing, by
mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested and regular mail or hand
delivering to the owner, or person or entity in control of the property where the
dumpster or portable on-demand storage container is located or person or entity
that in the opinion of the Township controls, owns or leases the subject dumpster
or container or the agent of the owner or person or entity in control therein of the
particular violation. The person or entity shall have five (5) days from the date of
receipt of the notice to cure the violation. Said notice shall be deemed to serve as
a continuing notice for the remainder of the calendar year and the Township may,
without further notice, correct any existing violation in accordance with this
Ordinance.
 J. Failure or refusal to comply.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of an owner, tenant, person or entity in control
or his or her agent to comply with this Ordinance per the aforesaid notice within
the time period prescribed by this Ordinance then the Township is authorized to
either issue citations of violation as set forth more fully in this Ordinance and/or to
remove the subject dumpster or storage container without further notice. The
Township may act with regards to this provision without notice if it determines an
emergency condition exists requiring action with regards to the dumpster or
container.
 K. Unpaid charges to constitute lien on property.
Should the Township be required to move the dumpster or container in order to
correct any violation of this Ordinance, the Director of Code Enforcement shall
certify the costs of removal and storage of said dumpster or container and shall be
authorized to forward the bill to the property owner or person or entity in control of
said property or dumpster or container for payment within thirty (30) days of the
date of the bill and any continuing storage costs. The amount of the charge shall
become a lien upon the lands and properties for which the dumpster or container
was located or properties of the owner, tenant or controller of the dumpster or
container where such container or dumpster served the benefit and use of in the
opinion of the Township. Should the person or entity who owns, leases or controls
the dumpster or container failed to pay all charges and remove the dumpster or
container from Township custody within ninety (90) days of the Township removing
and storing the same then the Township may sell the property at public auction. If 
6
the dumpster or storage container identifies the owner of the dumpster or
container, the same shall be notified of the proposed sale in writing ten (10) days
prior to public sale.
 L. Other violations: penalties.

In the event that any person or entity fails to comply with this Ordinance by
committing an unlawful act, a fine not exceeding One Thousand Two Hundred Fifty
($1,250.00) Dollars per violation, a term of imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days or any
combination thereof shall be imposed.

 All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but only to
the extent of such inconsistency.
 The Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and publication as
required by law.

APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 11, 2007
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: July 09, 2007
ATTEST:
____________________________ ______________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell James W. Manning, Jr.
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

1
ORDINANCE NO. 07-46
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING AN
ORDINANCE ENTITLED THE REVISED GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE ADOPTED
BY THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE AND AMENDED FROM TIME
TO TIME THEREAFTER TO REVISE AND AMEND SECTION
907 OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE RELATIVE TO
DEMOLITION WITHIN AN HISTORIC DISTRICT

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE THAT THE REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE ARE HEREBY AMENDED TO PROVIDE FOR THE REPEAL OF SECTION 907 OF
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AND THE ADOPTION OF THE WITHIN REVISED
ORDINANCE RELATIVE TO DEMOLITION WITHIN AN HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Section 1. Declaration: The Township Committee declares that revisions to the
demolition application procedure for all structures located within Ocean Grove are critical to
insure historic preservation and to maintain the designation of Ocean Grove as a National
Historic District. To insure preservation, the Township Committee concludes that revisions to
the demolition application procedure are necessary in order to establish strict guidelines to
provide for the review and evaluation of demolition applications so as to prevent widespread
demolition of historic structures within Ocean Grove. The Township Committee states that all
applications for demolitions or partial demolitions shall be submitted, reviewed and determined
by the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the within ordinance. Further, the
Township Committee is determined to impose sanctions for those property owners or
developers within Ocean Grove who unilaterally act to demolish or partially demolish a structure
within Ocean Grove without the requisite approvals as required herein. The Township
Committee declares that such actions are necessary to preserve the historic character of Ocean
Grove and the designation of Ocean Grove as a National Historic District. The Township
Committee further declares that the process to review and consider demolition and partial
demolition applications should further include a clear and concise appeal process for any
Applicant who believes the Historic Preservation Commission has acted arbitrarily in the review
and determination of any application. Finally, the Township Committee believes that such
revisions are necessary to clearly define the rights and responsibilities of all applicants, property
owners and the Historic Preservation Commission in the evaluation of all demolition applications
within Ocean Grove.
Section 2. Definitions: As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
following subscribed meanings:
 (a) Demolition: shall mean the total demolition of more than fifty (50%) of the exterior
walls of any structure, as determined by a qualified professional, situate within the Historic
District and which shall consist of the razing or removal of said structure and/or the removal of
such of the distinguishing or defining characteristics (as applicable) to the style of such structure
or the removal of any architecturally or historically significant exterior elements from the
structure which define or contribute to its classification within the Historic District. Demolition
shall not be required for the removal, repair or replacement of the exterior sheathing, removal
and replacement of a porch or deck, removal and replacement of any windows, doors, stairs, 
2
steps, gutters, leaders, downspouts, finials, brackets or exterior adornments, removal, repair or
replacement of a roof, provided further that in the case of a roof, any such repair or replacement
shall be in kind and shall not alter or compromise the existing roof line, roof pitch or massing.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all such exterior repairs or replacements will still require the
Applicant obtain a requisite Certificate of Appropriateness as required under applicable
ordinance. Any total demolition, as defined herein, shall require any owner to obtain a
demolition permit in accordance with the requirements set forth herein, which permit to be
issued by the Construction Department.

 (b) Partial Demolition: shall mean the removal or demolition of 15% or more of the
exterior walls of any Key, Supporting or Contributing Structure located within the Historic
District, as determined by a qualified professional and approved or confirmed by the
Commission or the removal of such architecturally or historically significant features which
would compromise the classification of a structure within the Historic District as determined by
the Commission. An Applicant seeking to partially demolish a portion of a Key, Supporting or
Contributing Structure shall obtain a demotion permit from the Commission in accordance with
the procedures set forth herein. Partial Demolition shall not be required for the removal, repair
or replacement of the exterior sheathing, removal and replacement of a porch or deck, removal
and replacement of any windows, doors, stairs, steps, gutters, leaders, downspouts, finials,
brackets or exterior adornments, removal, repair or replacement of a roof provided further that in
the case of a roof, any such repair or replacement shall be in kind and shall not alter or
compromise the existing roof line, roof pitch or massing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all such
exterior repairs or replacements will still require the Applicant obtain a requisite Certificate of
Appropriateness as required under applicable ordinance. Partial Demolition shall not include
those structures classified as “Other Structures”, so classified by the Commission, shall not
require a formal demolition application for a partial demolition. However, an Applicant shall be
required to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission.

 (c) Structure: shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel
of land; provided the word “structure” shall be construed when used herein though followed by
this the phrase “or part or parts thereof and all equipment therein” unless the context requires a
different meaning and shall include any commercial building of any type, residential or nonresidential building or dwelling of any type or character, located within the Historic District,
including all accessory or other structures as defined in the Land Development Ordinance,
Township of Neptune.
 (d) Historic District: shall include any structure, commercial building of any type,
residential or non-residential building or dwelling situate within that portion of Neptune Township
identified as Ocean Grove
 (e) Commission: as used herein Commission shall mean the “Neptune Township
Historic Preservation Commission”, “Historic Preservation Commission” or the “HPC”.
 (f) Illegal Demolition: Any demolition or partial demolition of a structure within the
Historic District undertaken, commenced, started, completed or otherwise proceeding without
first obtaining a demolition approval from the Historic Preservation Commission (except as may
be provided pursuant to Section 17 (Exceptions) and an actual demolition permit issued by the
Construction Official shall be deemed an illegal demolition for purposes of this ordinance. 
3
 (g) Key Structure: Includes all structures located within Ocean Grove originally
constructed circa 1869 through 1910 which generally include building styles identified as
Eastlake, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Stick Style, Queen Anne, Tent/tent Cottages,
Bungalow/Craftsman and Early Summer Cottage Vernacular styles as classified or recognized
by the Commission. Key structures shall not be demolished except where the Commission
determines that such demolition or partial demolition shall not be detrimental to the historic
designation and shall satisfy the criteria established herein. Key structures shall be carefully
scrutinized by the Commission prior to the issuance of a demolition approval and the issuance
of a demolition permit by the Construction Official; to demolish or partially demolish a Key
Structure within the Historic District.
 (h) Contributing Structure: Includes those structures located within Ocean Grove
originally constructed circa 1910 through1941 which generally include consisting primarily of
Colonial Revival, Shingle Style, American Four-Square, Bungalow/Craftsman and other Late
Pattern Book Victorian as classified or recognized by the Commission. Contributing structures
shall not be demolished except where the Commission determines that such demolition or
partial demolition shall not be detrimental to the historic designation and shall satisfy the criteria
established herein. Contributing structures shall be carefully scrutinized by the Commission
prior to the issuance of a demolition approval and the issuance of a demolition permit by the
Construction Official to demolish or partially demolish a Contributing Structure within the Historic
District.
 (i) Supporting Structures: Includes those dwellings or structures constructed through
World War II to date which sensitively replicate, emulate or complement the historic styles of the
Victorian Era or the basic form or detail of the historic dwellings which preceded them as
classified or recognized by the Commission. Supporting structures shall not be demolished
except where the Commission determines that such demolition or partial demolition shall not be
detrimental to the historic designation and shall satisfy the criteria established herein.
Supporting structures shall be carefully scrutinized by the Commission prior to the issuance of a
demolition approval and the issuance of a demolition permit by the Construction Official to
demolish or partially demolish a Supporting Structure within the Historic District.
 (j) Other Structures: Includes those dwellings or structures constructed after World
War II which may not contribute to the overall historic styles or craftsmanship of its preceding
historic dwellings or structures as classified or recognized by the Commission.
(k) Zoning Board of Adjustment: as used herein, “Zoning Board of Adjustment” or
“Zoning Board” shall mean the “Neptune Township Zoning Board of Adjustment”.
(l) Tech Review Committee: as used herein, shall mean a sub committee of the
Historic Preservation Commission consisting of a minimum of two (2) Commission members
who shall periodically meet to review current or pending demolition applications or those cases
involving potential illegal demolitions and to review the demolition application process with
current or future Applicant’s in order to resolve any procedural questions or inquiries by any
such Applicant and to make such other recommendations to the Commission as may be
required under this Ordinance.

 (m) Distinguishing or Defining Characteristics: as used herein shall refer to those
architecturally or historically significant elements of a structure, including, but not limited to; the
style of the structure, massing, exterior features including, materials, finials, brackets, 
4
ornamental designs, turrets, gables, pents, roofline or such other features applicable to that
structure or era of construction.
 (n) Exterior Wall: as used herein shall mean a wall, bearing or non-bearing, that is
used as an enclosing wall for a structure, other than a fire wall, and that has a slope of sixty (60)
degrees (1.05 rad) or greater with the horizontal plane.
(o) Demolition by Neglect: shall result in the demolition or partial demolition of any
structure created or occurring by decay, rot and/or deterioration of such structure caused or
created by the neglect of the Owner of the said structure to properly maintain the structure
causing the structure to become unsafe.
 (p) Qualified Professional: shall mean an expert qualified in the field of
engineering, structural engineering, architecture, architectural history, prehistoric archeology or
historic archeology or similar related discipline.
(q) Demolition Application or Demolition Application Process: shall mean the
process by which an Applicant applies to the Historic Preservation Commission for an approval
to demolish or partially demolish a structure within the Historic District as provided herein. A
demolition approval granted by the Historic Preservation Commission advises the Construction
Official that the Applicant has satisfied the requirements hereunder and authorizes the
Construction Official to issue a permit for a demolition or partial demolition subject to any further
additional requirements of the Construction Official provided under Neptune Township
Ordinance, applicable current state regulations or building codes.
 (r) Demolition Approval: shall mean an approval issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission for a demolition or partial demolition pursuant to the terms herein
which authorizes the Construction Official to issue a permit for a demolition or partial demolition
to the Applicant subject to any further additional requirements of the Construction Official
provided under Neptune Township Ordinance, applicable current state building regulations or
building codes
Section 3. Application Procedure: An Applicant seeking to demolish or partially
demolish a structure within the Historic District shall first submit an application for a demolition
approval to the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission, on forms prepared or otherwise
prescribed by the Commission. The Applicant shall provide their name, address and telephone
number. In the case of a contract purchaser, developer, contractor or tenant, the Applicant shall
further provide a written certification or affidavit from the Property Owner authorizing said
contract purchaser, developer, contractor or tenant to proceed with the demolition application.
The Secretary shall cause said certification or affidavit to be placed on file with the Commission.
Upon receipt of the completed application, the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission
shall schedule the Applicant for a meeting with the Tech Review Committee to review the
demolition application process.

 Section 4. Tech Review Committee: All applications for demolition or partial
demolition shall initially be reviewed by the Tech Review Committee of the Commission. The
Tech Review Committee shall meet with each applicant and review each application for
demolition or partial demolition. In the event the Tech Review Committee determines that the
application is appropriate for demolition or partial demolition, than the Secretary shall cause the
application to be listed for a demolition hearing before the full Historic Preservation Commission. 
5
If the Tech Review Committee determines that the application does not require a demolition
hearing, it may convert the application into an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
and schedule said application for consideration by the Commission, subject to final approval by
the Commission.
Section 5. Procedure Before Hearing: An Applicant scheduled for a Demolition
Hearing pursuant to an application submitted for demolition or partial demolition shall, a
minimum of ten (10) days prior to the Demolition Hearing, submit the following to the
Commission Secretary:

(a) Any and all escrow and application fees as required by the Neptune Land
Development Ordinance for the within application.
(b) Executed Notice of Hearing mailed to all property owners within 200 feet of the
subject property and all governmental or public entities as required under Neptune
Township Ordinance, inclusive of The Township of Neptune Historical Society,
Historical Society of Ocean Grove, State Office of Historic Preservation, State
Historic Sites Committee, Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and the
Department of the Interior and National Trust for Historic Preservation
(c) Certification or Affidavit of Mailing of such Notice of Hearing to all property owners
within 200 feet of the subject property and all governmental or public entities as
required under Neptune Township Ordinance.
(d) Affidavit of Publication for publication of a notice of hearing which shall have been
published no sooner than twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled hearing date or
later than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing date in an official newspaper
of the Township of Neptune. The within notice shall identify the nature of the
application, a description of the application sought, the physical address of the
subject property, the lot and block number, the date, time and location of the
demolition hearing and the telephone number of the Commission Secretary who
can provide additional information on the application.
(e) Copies of any maps or surveys, photographs or reports of experts retained by the
Applicant to be presented at the demolition hearing.
(f) Such other documentation as may be requested by the Commission.
Section 6. Inspection of Property: Prior to the date fixed for the requisite demolition
hearing required herein, the Applicant shall make the subject property available to members of
the Historic Preservation Commission for their review and inspection. The dates and times of
inspection shall be arranged between the Commission Secretary and the Applicant and shall be
at such times deemed convenient for Commission members to attend. The Applicant or his
representative shall be present during any such inspection.
Section 7. Commission Expert: The Commission may, from the escrow paid by the
Applicant, retain an expert(s) for the purpose of independently reviewing any such reports,
treatises or other documents submitted by the Applicant or any expert retained by the Applicant
relative to the demolition application. Any expert(s) retained by the Commission shall have
access to all reports relative to the application and shall further have access to the subject
property at such times as may be arranged between the Commission Secretary and the
Applicant. At the direction of the Commission, any such expert(s) retained may be required to
submit a written report and/or provide such expert testimony as may be requested during the
demolition hearing. The cost of such expert shall be the responsibility of the Applicant and shall
be paid from the escrow collected from the Applicant pursuant to Neptune Township Ordinance
1000, Table II, Escrow Fees. At the request of the Commission Secretary, the Applicant shall 
6
make such additional escrow payments or contributions necessary to defer any costs relative to
this application including such application fees, expert fees, legal fees and Court Reporting or
transcript preparation fees incurred by the Commission relative to the application.
Section 8. Demolition Hearing: On the date specified in the legal notices set forth
herein, the Commission shall conduct a Demolition Hearing in order to determine whether to
grant the application for Demolition Approval and the authorization for the issuance of a
demolition permit by the Construction Official for the purpose of a demolition or partial
demolition. The within hearing may be adjourned at the discretion of the Commission to permit
the completion of all required testimony from the Applicant and the public and to insure a fair,
complete and impartial presentation. The Applicant shall present his application to the
Commission for a determination by the Commission relative to demolition approval. The
Applicant may be represented by counsel. The Applicant may present testimony to the
Commission including personal testimony, lay and expert testimony in support of the
application. All witnesses may be questioned by the Commission, the Commission attorney and
by the public. All testimony presented shall be given under oath. The demolition hearing shall be
conducted in the following order:
(a) Introduction of Application to the Commission and public.
(b) Administration of Oath to Applicant and any witnesses.
(c) Marking of any exhibits inclusive of the application and expert reports.
(d) Opening statement of the interest parties (Applicant and Objectors).
(e) Presentation of Applicant’s case, which shall include all testimony of all lay and
expert witnesses. At the conclusion of such testimony, Commission members and
the public may ask any questions of the Applicant or any witness presented by the
Applicant.
(f) Presentation of Commission expert (if any). At the conclusion of such testimony,
Commission members, Applicant and the public may ask any questions of the
Commission expert.
(g) Presentation by any Objector (if any), which shall include all testimony of all lay and
expert witnesses. At the conclusion of such testimony, Commission members,
Applicant and the public may ask questions of any witness presented by the
Objector.
(h) Public comment. The public shall be permitted to make statements for or against the
application. All statements made by the public, either in support or against the within
application shall be made under oath.
(i) Closing statements by the Applicant and Objector on the subject application.
(j) Conclusion of Hearing. Applicant shall be notified of the waiting period required
under this ordinance, the required posting of notification and the publication at both
the commencement and conclusion of the waiting period. The Commission will fix
dates for the receipt of initial findings of facts to be prepared by the Commission
Attorney and the date for formal adoptions of such findings of facts. The Chairperson
shall announce all dates to the public.
(k) The Chairperson may modify or amend this procedure set forth above in order to
facilitate an orderly presentation of the matter before the Commission, including the
receipt in evidence of all documents and exhibits presented and all testimony on the
within application.

 Section 9. Burden of Proof: The Applicant shall bear the burden of proof in all matters
relative to the demolition or partial demolition of a structure within the Historic District. Such
burden of proof shall include the presentation of testimony, lay or expert, introduction of exhibits, 
7
reports, photographs scientific testing, maps, surveys or any other exhibits which will permit the
Commission to make certain findings of fact as set forth in Section 10 herein. The failure of the
Applicant to present such evidence necessary for the Commission to make the requisite findings
of fact required herein shall be grounds for denial of the demolition approval and the requisite
demolition permit.
Section 10. Findings of Fact: The Historic Preservation Commission shall not approve
an application for demolition approval so as to authorize the Construction Official to issue a
demolition permit for either a total demolition or partial demolition until after it has conducted a
demolition hearing and has heard and considered testimony relative to the following specified
criteria as applied to each structure within the Historic District, herein referred to as the “findings
of facts”. The decision to grant or deny the demolition approval for a total demolition or partial
demolition and to authorize the Construction official to issue a demolition permit shall be based
upon the criteria set forth herein. The Commission shall either grant or deny a demolition
approval for either a total demolition or partial demolition and shall make specific findings of fact
based upon the following criteria:
(a) The classification of the structure as a key structure, contributing structure,
supporting structure or other structure as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission
(b) The age or approximate age of the current structure together with the age or
approximate age of any additions to the structure.
(c) The specific architectural style of the structure, if such architectural style can be
identified.
(d) The existing ownership, historical ownership, current use and historical use of the
structure.
(e) The rationale or reasoning of the applicant for requesting demolition or partial
demolition.
(f) The architectural and/or historical importance of the structure and its status within
the Historic District or national listings of such properties after notification by the
Historic Preservation Commission to the appropriate agency(s) charged with this
responsibility including, but not limited to, State Office of Historic Preservation, State
Historic Sites Committee, Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation,
Department of the Interior and national Trust for Historic Preservation.
(g) Any examples, displays or designs which adopt or promote a seashore style or
vernacular including design features and craftsmanship located at the subject
property that could not be reproduced easily inclusive of brackets, finials, window
openings, glass windows, pents, decks, porches, rooflines or such other exterior
features.
(h) The structural soundness and integrity of the structure and the economic feasibility
of restoring, repairing or rehabilitating the structure so as to comply with the
requirements of the applicable building codes as determined by a qualified
professional. The within rehabilitation or restoration may include a gut renovation of
the subject property or an adaptive reuse or revision to the property.
(i) The impact of the demolition or partial demolition on the Historic District and the
surrounding neighborhoods within the Historic District compared with the existing
condition of the property.
(j) The effect such demolition or partial demolition will have upon the economic base of
both the surrounding neighborhood and Historic District.
(k) The effect the demolition or partial demolition would have upon the public’s interest
in architectural, historic and aesthetic matters generally including the maintenance of 
8
an existing streetscape, massing or historic continuity that the structure may be
associated with.
(l) The importance of the structure to the Township of Neptune and the Historic District
to the extent that such demolition or partial demolition would result in the loss of an
architecturally and/or historically significant structure to the detriment of the public
interest.
(m) The extent to which the structure represents an historic era by design, location
and/or massing or retains a design or craftsmanship indicative of the period that it
could not be reproduced or reproduced only with great difficulty.
(n) The location of the subject property in relation to prominent areas or streets featured
within the Historic District whose removal would negatively impact on the seashore
vernacular found in the Historic District.
Section 11. Waiting Period. Following the conclusion of the public hearing on the
requested demolition or partial demolition application, there shall be established a waiting period
to (a) allow for the preparation of the requisite findings of fact as required herein; (b) to allow a
party or interested parties to establish a procedure for the acquisition of the property in order to
preserve or rehabilitate the subject property. The waiting period shall be as follows:
(a) In the case of an application for the total demolition of a structure characterized as a
key structure, contributing structure or supporting structure, a minimum of ninety (90)
days to a maximum of one-hundred and fifty (150) days from the conclusion of the
public hearing.
(b) In the case of an application for a total demolition of a structure characterized as an
“other structure”, a minimum of sixty (60) days to a maximum of one-hundred and
twenty (120) days.
(c) In the case of a partial demolition to any structure located within the Historic District,
a minimum of sixty (60) days to a maximum of ninety (90) days.
(d) In the case of a key structure, for good cause shown, the Commission
 may extend the waiting period an additional one-hundred and twenty
 (120) days to permit an interested party to establish a procedure to
 acquire and preserve the subject property.

Section 12. Notice. Commencing after the conclusion of the demolition hearing and for
the length of waiting period specified in Section 11 herein, the Applicant shall cause notice of
the proposed demolition or partial demolition to be publicly advertised as follows:

(a) By posting a notice of the proposed demolition or partial demolition in a conspicuous
location at the proposed structure facing the street fronting the subject property. In
the case that the affected property shall front on two (2) public streets; the within
notice shall be posted facing both public streets the demolition notice shall include:
(a) The address of the subject property.
(b) The lot and block of the subject property
(c) The applicable ordinance section
(d) The nature and scope of the application (demolition or partial demolition)
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the Historic Preservation Secretary
who can supply information relative to the within application
(f) Name, address and telephone number of the Applicant or the representative of the
Applicant with knowledge concerning the property 
9
(g) Notice advising a party or interested parties who may wish to establish a procedure
for the acquisition of the property in order to preserve or rehabilitate the subject
property.
(h) The date and time fixed for the adoption of the findings of fact by the
 Historic Preservation Commission
(b) By publishing notice of the proposed demolition or partial demolition in
an official newspaper of the Township of Neptune, which notice shall incorporate the elements
of the within demolition notice set forth above, and which publication shall:
 (1) Be published in an official newspaper within ten (10) days of the commencement of
the waiting period set forth in Section 11 herein; and
(2) Be published in an official newspaper no less than ten (10) days or more than
fifteen (15) days prior to the conclusion of the waiting period as set forth in Section 11 herein.
 Applicant shall provide proof of the posting of the requisite demolition notice and proof of
publication in an official newspaper of the Township of Neptune (Affidavit of Publication) prior to
the formal adoption of the findings of fact required by Section 10 herein.
Section 13. Procedure where application for demolition or partial demolition
approval is Granted: Upon the adoption of the findings of fact required under Section 10
herein, the Commission shall grant or deny the within application. In the event the application is
Granted; the following procedure shall apply:
 (a). Upon passage of the Resolution Adopting Certain Findings of Fact, the Secretary
shall transmit a copy of the Resolution Adopting Certain Findings of Fact to the Applicant,
Construction Official and to the Zoning Officer within ten (10) days following formal adoption.
(b) Applicant shall thereafter be permitted to apply to the Construction Official for the
formal issuance of the demolition permit for demolition or partial demolition required in the
Historic District. Applicant shall be responsible for the payment of any and all fees required by
the Construction Official and/or the Township of Neptune.
 (c) Applicant shall further comply with any and all requirements of the Construction
Official and the Zoning Officer relative to the actual procedure used in the demolition or partial
demolition of the structure.
 (d) The demolition permit or the right to seek the issuance of demolition permit to
demolish or partially demolish a structure within the Historic District shall be valid for a period of
two (2) years from the date of the adoption of the findings of fact by the Commission. Upon
request of the Applicant, and for good cause shown, the Commission may grant an extension to
the Applicant to demolish or partially demolish a structure for an additional one (1) year period.
If demolition or partial demolition is not completed within the time constraints set forth herein,
said approval shall be deemed to have expired and the Applicant shall be required to submit a
new application for demolition or partial demolition for consideration by the Commission
Section 14. Procedure where application for demolition or partial demolition is
Denied: Upon the passage of the Resolution Adopting Certain Findings of Fact required under
Section 10 herein, the Commission shall grant or deny the within application. In the event the
application is Denied; the following procedure shall apply:
 (a). Upon passage of the Resolution Adopting Certain Findings of Fact, the Secretary
shall transmit the within findings of fact to the Applicant, Construction Official, Zoning Officer
and to the Secretary, Zoning Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days following formal adoption. 
10
 (b) Applicant shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt of a duly executed copy of
the Resolution Adopting Certain Findings of Fact as required under Section 10 herein, by which
to appeal the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission denying the application for
demolition or partial demolition approval of a structure within the Historic District.
 (c) Should an Applicant desire to appeal the denial of the application, the Applicant shall
perfect said appeal by filing a Notice of Appeal with the Secretary, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
on such forms required by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and in accordance with procedures
determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
 (d) Upon the filing of an appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Secretary,
Historical Preservation Commission shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment the
complete file of the within application including, but not limited too; the initial application, all
exhibits and reports introduced into evidence and the Resolution Adopting Findings of Fact
which denied the within application. Upon transmittal, jurisdiction of the within application shall
be venued in the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
 (e) Upon the filing of the within appeal, Applicant shall be required to post all required
escrows and pay any filing fees as may be required to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, The
Applicant shall further take steps to secure all necessary transcripts of the demolition hearing
held before the Historic Preservation Commission or post all required escrows necessary to
secure written transcripts of all proceedings before the Historic Preservation Commission.
 Section 15. Decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment: The decision of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment with respect to any appeal filed from a decision of the Historic Preservation
Commission relative to the demolition or partial demolition approval of any structure situate
within an Historic District shall be deemed a final decision. Any further appeal challenging any
decision, ruling or determination of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be cognizable in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Monmouth County.
Section 16. Procedure following appeal to Zoning Board of Adjustment: The
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be the sole appeal within the Township of
Neptune from all matters cognizable before the Historic Preservation Commission. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall issue a written decision which may affirm, reverse, dismiss or remand
the within appeal back to the Historic Preservation Commission for such additional findings or
conclusion as may be specified in accordance with the following:
(a) Affirmation: Should the Zoning Board of Adjustment affirm the decision
of the Historic Preservation Commission, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt a
Resolution affirming the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission which may adopt
specific findings in support of affirmation. Certified copies of the within Resolution shall be
transmitted to the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission, Zoning Officer, Construction
Official and to the Applicant. The Applicant shall have the right to appeal said determination to
the Superior Court of New Jersey, Monmouth County, in accordance with Section 16. If no
appeal is filed within 45 days of the filing of the within Resolution, the within affirmation shall be
deemed final. Thereafter, the Applicant shall be barred from making a new application for
demolition or partial demolition affecting the subject property for a period of two (2) years from
the final decision of the Historic Preservation Commission or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
whichever is later. Any transfer, assignment or change in ownership shall not abrogate or
shorten the within period. The Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall record the
within decision in the official records of the Commission.
(b) Reversal: Should the Zoning Board of Adjustment reverse the decision
of the Historic Preservation Commission, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt a
Resolution reversing the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission and shall adopt 
11
specific findings in support of reversal. Certified copies of the within Resolution shall be
transmitted to the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission, Zoning Officer, Construction
Official and to the Applicant. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the right to
appeal said determination to the Superior Court of New Jersey, Monmouth County, in
accordance with Section 16. If no appeal is filed within 45 days of the filing of the within
Resolution, the within affirmation shall be deemed final. The Secretary, Historic Preservation
Commission shall record the within decision in the official records of the Commission.
(c) Dismissal: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may dismiss any appeal
filed from a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission for any reason, including but not
limited to; (a) failure of the Applicant to timely file the within appeal; (b) failure of the Applicant to
post any required escrows or pay any required application fees; (c) failure of the Applicant to
promptly secure transcripts of any proceedings conducted before the Historic Preservation
Commission and deliver same to the Secretary, Zoning Board of Adjustment; (d) failure of the
Applicant to comply with all scheduling notices or briefing schedules established by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment; (e) failure of the Applicant to prosecute said appeal before the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or (f) such other reasons as may be determined by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall record the within decision in
the official records of the Commission.
(d) Remand: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may remand any appeal to the Historic
Preservation Commission for such additional testimony, findings of facts, conclusions at law or
such additional testimony as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall direct. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall adopt a Resolution remanding the within matter with specific instructions for
any such supplemental evidence, findings or conclusions as may be required. The Zoning
Board may also establish a reasonable time limit to transmit said supplemental findings. The
Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall transmit all supplemental findings to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall proceed further based upon
those additional findings consistent with this section.
Section 17. Illegal Demolition: Any demolition or partial demolition of a structure within
a Historic District undertaken, commenced, started, completed or otherwise proceeding without
a demolition approval issued by the Historic Preservation Commission and a demolition permit
issued by the Construction Official shall be deemed an illegal demolition; except as may be
provided in Section 17(Exceptions). The owner of said structure which has been demolished or
partially demolished or which demolition activities have commenced shall be solely responsible
to secure the requisite demolition approval and demolition permit as required hereunder. The
owner of the said structure upon which demolition or partial demolition activities have
commenced shall not evade responsibility hereunder based upon the failure to act or the actions
or inactions of others including any qualified professional, contractor, tenant, contract purchaser
or assignee relative to the demolition or partial demolition without having first secured the
requisite demolition approval and demolition permit in accordance with the procedures set forth
herein.
Exceptions: The sole exceptions to securing a demolition approval and demolition
permit for the demolition or partial demolition shall be in the case of condemnation ordered by
the Construction Official, Township of Neptune, based upon a determination that the structure,
in its present condition, represents an imminent threat to the health and safety of any occupants
or adjoining property owners or structures or to the public at large or based upon an Order
entered by a Judge, Superior Court of New Jersey, Monmouth County which authorizes,
approves and orders a condemnation of said structure. 
12
(a) Procedure Upon Discovery of an Illegal Demolition: Upon such
Notification by a Township Inspector, Police Official or based upon a upon a complaint brought
by any citizen, the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall immediately request a
Commission Member(s) to inspect the subject property to determine whether the property is the
subject of an illegal demolition. Upon confirmation by the Commission Member(s), the
Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall request the Construction Official or designee
to conduct an immediate inspection of the affected property. Should any inspection made by
the Construction Official or designee confirm that an illegal demolition has been undertaken,
commenced, started, completed or otherwise proceeding without a demolition permit the
following procedure shall apply:
(1) The Construction Official or designee shall notify the Secretary, Historic
Preservation that an illegal demolition has occurred. The Construction Official or
designee shall confirm the correct address, applicable lot and block and the name of
the registered owner of the subject property.
(2) The Construction Official or designee may take such appropriate action within his or
her jurisdiction including the issuance of a “stop work order” and which “stop work
order” shall be posted at the subject property in accordance with applicable local
and state regulations and/or building codes The Construction Official or designee
shall provide copies of the “stop work order” to the registered owner of record and
to such professionals or contractors whom the Construction Official or designee may
identify in accordance with applicable local and state regulations and/or building
codes. The Construction Official or designee shall supply the Secretary, Historic
Preservation Commission with copies of any written findings as well as copies of the
“stop work order” issued with respect to the subject property.
(3) The Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission shall immediately issue a written
“Notice of Apparent Violation” to the registered owner of the subject property and
forward said notice by regular and certified mail, postage pre-paid, to the address of
the structure and to such other address on record with the Tax Assessor, Township
of Neptune. The “Notice of Apparent Violation” shall specify the nature of the
apparent violation, the action taken by the Construction Official and direct the Owner
to file an application for a demolition permit in accordance with the procedures set
forth herein within five (5) working days of the issuance of the Notice of Apparent
Violation.
(4) In the event the property owner fails to submit the required application, the
Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission or designee shall cause a municipal
court complaint to be signed and issued against the property owner of record. The
matter shall be cognizable in the municipal court and prosecuted by the commission
attorney or the municipal prosecutor.
(5) In the event the property owner disputes the determination that the activity
constitutes a demolition or partial demolition, the within matter shall be listed for
review by the Tech Review Committee or the entire Historic Preservation
Commission. No public notice shall be required for this review. The Applicant shall
appear and present such documentation, exhibits and testimony in support of the
position that a demolition permit is not required. Applicant shall have the burden to
establish that a demolition permit is not required. In the event the Historic
Preservation Commission determines that a demolition permit is required, Applicant
shall have five (5) working days to submit such an application to the Secretary, 
13
Historic Preservation Commission or designee shall cause a municipal court
complaint to be signed and issued against the property owner. In the event the
Commission determines that the within activity does not constitute a demolition or
partial demolition, the Commission shall notify the Construction Official or designee
of such determination Thereafter, the Commission may request the Construction
Official to maintain any “stop work order” issued until the Applicant secures the
required Certificate of Appropriateness for any exterior work. Should the
Commission determine that the activity does not require the issuance of a Certificate
of Appropriateness, it shall request the Construction Official to consider rescinding
the “stop work order” as soon as practical thereafter as the Construction Official may
determine in accordance with local and state regulations and/or building codes.
(6) Once a “stop work order” is issued pursuant to this Section 17, and any such
applicable local or state regulations and/or building code governing such issuance,
the “stop work order” shall remain in effect until such time as the Construction
Official shall determine to rescind such “stop work order”. The Construction Official
shall consider any resolution or decision issued by the Historic Preservation
Commission as set forth herein. Upon issuance of the “stop work order’ all work
shall cease on the subject property until the matter is resolved with the Historic
Preservation Commission and satisfies the Construction Official in accordance with
local and state regulations and/or building codes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Construction Official may authorize the Applicant to complete such necessary work
to any structure in order to properly secure the structure or to address any
conditions which the Construction Official deems a risk to the health or safety of the
general public.
(7) Failure of the Applicant to satisfactorily address the issue of an illegal demolition or
partial demolition may result in the “stop work order” continuing in full force and
effect until such time as the Construction Official shall so determine in accordance
with local or state regulations and/or building codes. Nothing herein shall further limit
the Construction Official or designee from issuing such other violations or sanctions
to the Owner as the Construction Official may deem appropriate in accordance with
such applicable local or state regulations or building codes.
(8) Nothing herein shall further prevent or limit the ability of the Historic Preservation
Commission from seeking the imposition of any such penalties as provided in
Section 20 herein or from seeking such injunctive relief or restraints from the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Monmouth County, to protect any structure from any
illegal demolition or partial demolition.
(c) Failure to obtain Demolition Permit: An Applicant who commences a demolition or
partial demolition and who thereafter fails to obtain the necessary permit in accordance with the
procedure set forth herein, the Applicant shall be barred from making a new application for
demolition or partial demolition affecting the subject property for a period of two (2) years from
the final decision of the Historic Preservation Commission or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
whichever is later. Any transfer, assignment or change in ownership shall not abrogate or
shorten the within periods.
Section 18. Demolition By Neglect: All structures located in the Historic District shall
be preserved by their owner(s) against decay, rot, deterioration and kept free of certain
structural defects to prevent demolition or partial demolition caused solely by the neglect of said
structure. Such owner(s) shall be required to repair and maintain such structure from the
following defects, unless otherwise prohibited by the Construction Official in those cases where
the structure may be deemed unsafe: 
14
(1) Deteriorated or inadequate foundations;
(2) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry
imposed loads with safety;
(3) Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, tilt or buckle due to
defective material, workmanship or deterioration;
(4) Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed
loads with safety;
(5) Members of ceilings, roofs and their support system, or other horizontal members
which sag, split or buckle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration;
(6) Members of ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are
insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety;
(7) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, tilt, bulge or settle due to defective materials,
workmanship or deterioration;
(8) Deterioration or defects in paints, coating systems, sheathing or flashing resulting in
destructive moisture or water penetration or rot;
(9) Any fault, defect or condition in the structure which renders the same structurally
unsafe or not properly watertight.
(a) Determination of Neglect: Upon notification to the Commission by a Commission
Member, Construction Official, Code Enforcement Employee or any citizen, the Commission
may request the Administrative Official or designee to investigate any claim that a structure is
being demolished or partially demolished by neglect. Upon such notification, the Administrative
Official or designee shall contact the Owner(s) and arrange for an immediate inspection of the
structure. In the event such inspection shall reveal the presence of any of the conditions set
forth herein, the Administrative Official shall report the nature and extent of said conditions to
the Secretary, Historic Preservation Commission and to the Construction Official. The Secretary
shall cause notice to be sent to the Owner(s) setting forth the within conditions found in the
structure and affording the Owner(s) thirty (30) days from the date of said notice to correct the
defects or present a plan to the Commission for remediation if the defects can not be rectified
within the thirty (30) day period. Nothing herein shall restrict or otherwise prohibit the
Construction Official from acting in accordance with applicable state regulations, building codes
or municipal building codes.
Should the Owner(s) failed to correct the deficiencies within the thirty (30) day period
specified herein or fail to present a plan to the Commission to correct said deficiencies or having
submitted a plan, fail to carry out the remediation as proposed, the Commission may either (a)
direct the issuance of a municipal court summons; (b) request the Administrative Official or
Construction Official to take such appropriate action within his jurisdiction or (c) both. Nothing
herein shall prevent the Commission from granting any reasonable extension requested by the
Owner(s) by which to undertake or complete the necessary repairs. The issuance of a municipal
court summons shall be deemed to continue and for each and every day that such violation
thereof continues, the Owner(s) shall be subject to the maximum fine and/ or period of
imprisonment or both as provided and/or be required to correct, abate and/restore said structure
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
(b) Municipal Lien: In the event the Owner(s) shall refuse to undertake remediation,
the Commission may request the Township of Neptune undertake such repairs as may be
necessary to stabilize and protect the structure. The cost of repairs shall be paid by the
Township who will thereafter charge all related costs and expenses for all such repairs and
improvements to the record owner(s). Any such cost or expense so charged shall be assessed 
15
and filed as a lien against the subject property including all costs associated with the
preparation and filing of the lien documents. The Township, and its authorized agents,
employees or contractors are hereby expressly authorized to enter the subject property at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of completing those repairs necessary for the stabilization and
repair of the structure. Neither the Township, its authorized agents, employees nor contractors
shall be answerable for damage to the subject property due to the enforcement of this section.
Section 19. Time for Issuance of Demolition Permit: An Applicant shall have two
(2) years from the adoption of the Findings of Fact to secure the necessary permit to demolish
or partially demolish a structure from the Construction Official At the request of the Applicant,
upon a showing of good cause, and prior to the expiration of the initial two (2) year period set
forth herein, the Commission may extend this period for an additional one (1) year period. In the
event the Applicant fails to secure the necessary demolition permit and commence the
demolition or partial demolition, this approval shall expire and the Applicant shall be required to
submit a new application for demolition or partial demolition.
Section 20. Penalties Upon Violation: In the event an owner shall fail to comply with
the procedures set forth herein relative to the demolition or partial demolition as specified
herein, in addition to any other penalties imposed by any other official of the Township of
Neptune, the owner(s):
(a) Shall be subject to the issuance of a summons and complaint, returnable in the
Municipal Court, charging a violation related to this chapter. Each separate day the
violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation of this Chapter.
(b) Penalties Designated: Any owner or persons who violate or who
permit, take part or assist in any violation of this Chapter, shall for each and every
violation thereof, and for each and every day that such violation thereof continues to be
subject to the maximum fine and/ or period of imprisonment or both as provided and/or
be required to correct, abate and/restore said structure in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge or complete and file the requisite application as required pursuant to this
Chapter.
(b) Injunctive Relief: In the event that any demolition or partial demolition
would permanently and/or adversely effect or change any structure or structures within
the Historic District or an historic site or any other structure of historical/architectural
significance without the issuance of a demolition permit by the Historic Preservation
Commission, the Commission may authorize an application to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, Monmouth County, for such injunctive relief or restraint as is required to prevent
the unauthorized or illegal demolition of a structure within the Historic District.
Section 21. Effective Date: This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and
publication as required by law.
 Section 22. Inconsistent Ordinances: All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with
the provisions of this ordinance section are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 23. Severability: If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of
this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication
shall apply only to that section, paragraph, clause or provision and the remainder of this
ordinance shall be deemed to be valid and enforceable. 
16
APPROVED ON FIRST READING:
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED:
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, James W. Manning, Jr.,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 07-53
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE, COUNTY OF MONMOUTH, STATE OF NEW
JERSEY BY AMENDING THE REAR YARD SETBACK IN
CERTAIN HISTORIC DISTRICT ZONES
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended as
follows:
SECTION 1
Schedule B – Zoning District Bulk Regulations - shall be amended pursuant to the attached
revised schedule to reflect amended Rear Yard Setback for HD-R-1, HD-O and HD-B-1 from
zero feet to 3.1 feet.
SECTION 2
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be and the
same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 3
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted by a
Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair the
remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and upon the
filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
Attachments:
Schedule B: Zoning District Bulk Regulations
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: September 24, 2007
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: October 9, 2007
ATTEST:
____________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell James W. Manning, Jr.
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO 07-54
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE, COUNTY OF MONMOUTH,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY BY AMENDING SECTION 418
PERTAINING TO HEIGHT EXEMPTIONS AND
PERMITTED PROJECTIONS

BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby
amended as follows:
Section 1
Section 418(B) (Height Exemptions and Permitted Projections) is hereby amended and
supplemented as follows: (Additions indicated in boldface thus; deletions indicated in
brackets with strikethrough [thus]:
“1. Fire escapes, provided they do not project more than four (4) feet into a
required yard and they are no closer than two (2) feet to a property line; Fire
escapes are not permitted in a front yard. Existing fire escapes may be
replaced in their existing location and to their exact size.”
“3. Bay windows, provided they project no more than two (2) feet into the
required yard; Cornices, eaves, cantilevered roofs, gutters, bay windows,
and chimneys, provided they do not project more than twenty-four (24)
inches from an exterior building wall into any required yard setback, and
provided they remain at least two (2) feet from all yard lines;”
“4. Cornices, eaves, cantilevered roofs, gutters and chimneys, provided they do
not project more than twenty-four (24) inches from an exterior building wall into
any required yard setback, and provided they remain at least two (2) feet from all
yard lines;”
“5. Entrance platforms and steps leading to a basement or first floor, provided
they do not project more than four (4’) feet into a required side or rear yard
setback. Front yard steps and entry platforms may project no more than six (6’)
feet into the required front yard setback.”
Section 2
All Ordinances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be
and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 3
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted 
by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair
the remainder of this Ordinance.
Section 4
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and
upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
Richard J. Cuttrell
Municipal Clerk 

ORDINANCE NO. 08-03
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE, COUNTY OF MONMOUTH, STATE OF NEW
JERSEY BY AMENDING THE SECTION CONCERNING
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS

BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey, that Section 422 of the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is
hereby amended as follows (deletions are indicated with strike-through, additions are bolded):
SECTION 1
D. A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged, extended, increased in height,
width or depth, moved or relocated, modified in such a way so as to increase
habitable or useable space, number of dwelling units or number of bedrooms;
unless such structure is changed to a structure conforming to the requirements of
this Chapter except that an existing one family structure may be rebuilt, enlarged,
extended or added to provided:
1. The enlargement, extension or addition conforms to all zone
requirements; or
2. The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which does not
conform to zone requirements consists entirely of the enclosure of
existing side or rear porches.
3. The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition that does not
conform to the requirements does not increase the degree of nonconformity with setback requirements.
3. Where a structure is nonconforming solely because it intrudes on
the current required yard area.
a.) If the proposed horizontal addition to that building
would not protrude further than the furthest point of the
existing building line into that required yard area, then the
Zoning Official can issue the permit and no application to the
Board of Adjustment is necessary. The proposed addition
must be equal to the existing building line, but cannot exceed
the same if it violates the setbacks.
b.) If a proposed vertical addition would be located within
the building envelope or existing building footprint (and
assuming no violation of height restriction or other ordinance
provision), the Zoning Official may also issue a permit for
such vertical expansion provided that the addition would not
exacerbate the nonconformity. 
4. An existing one-family structure located in a residential district destroyed
by fire or other natural calamity may be rebuilt provided the new structure
complies with all zone requirements relating to setbacks and height;
however, the existing lot need not comply with minimum lot width, depth
and area requirements where the existing condition is non-conforming.
E. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists
may apply for, in writing, the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use
or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered
the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant shall have the
responsibility of affirmatively proving the preexisting nonconforming use
or structure. Application pursuant hereto may be made to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Administrative Officer within one year of the adoption
of the ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at
any time to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that prescribed for a lot
in the zone in which the lot is located may be used as a lot for any purpose
permitted in the zone, if:
1. at the time of and since the adoption of the zoning ordinance making
such lot nonconforming, the owner of the lot did not own adjoining
property.

2. all other regulations prescribed for the zone are or can be complied
with.
SECTION 2. All Ordinances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance,
be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 3. Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be
adjusted by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or
impair the remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law
and upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 14, 2008
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 11, 2008
ATTEST:
____________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, J. Randy Bishop,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO 08-38
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP OF
THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE, COUNTY OF MONMOUTH,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY TO REZONE LOTS 13 AND 13.01,
BLOCK 1405 FROM BOTH R-2 AND B-1 TO R-2 RESIDENTIAL
WHEREAS, it has come to the Township Committee’s attention that Lots 13 and 13.01
of Block 1405 are situated within both the R-2 Residential and B-1 Business Zones; and,
WHEREAS, the property owner has requested that the Township Committee adjust the
zoning as follows in order to remove the split zone condition on Lots 13 and 13.01 and therefore
these lots once subdivided and consolidated will lie entirely within the Residential R-2 Zone;
WHEREAS, specifically the owner will also be completing a minor subdivision and a lot
consolidation redistributing the properties to add a portion of Lots 13 and 13.01 to Lots 12,14 &
15 of Block 1405 to allow for parking, fencing and additional landscaping improvements on the
subject commercial site, completely within the B-1 Business Zone;
WHEREAS, specifically that the line between the R-2 Zone and B-1 Zone shall be
relocated further toward the North to be coincident with the new rear property line of Block 1405,
Lots 12,14 & 15. Historically the zone line split is due to the subdivisions and redistribution of
property in this area. The Zone line between R-2 and B-1 had run with the parcels due to
subdivisions and consolidations; which is a split-zone which and is contrary to planning and not
consistent with the 2000 Neptune Township Master Plan.
WHEREAS, the Township Committee acknowledges that the proposed change is not
strictly consistent with the boundary line between the R-2 Residential Zone and the B-1 Town
Commercial Zone, as identified in the 2000 Neptune Township Master Plan and the current
Neptune Township Zoning Map, the Committee believes the this dimenimus change advances
the interests of Neptune Township for the following reasons:
1. The Zoning Map change will remove the current split lot zoning of both residential
lots 13 and 13.01 and Block 1405;
2. The Zoning revision will increase the Residential Zone in this area and remove an
existing split zone lot;
3. As a result of the minor subdivision lot line change and lot consolidation, the current
flag lot configuration for existing lot 13.01 will be removed. Flag lots are a
discouraged lot configuration in the Neptune Township Land Development
Ordinance;
4. As a result of the Zoning Map change, additional off-street parking fencing and
landscaping will be provided for on the adjacent medical office use completely within
the B-1 Zone. Appropriate utilization of a medical office use advances the land use
and economic development objectives of the commercial corridor of Route 33;
5. The additional off-street parking will reduce the potential for traffic impacts and
congestion on the surrounding residential streets; 
6. The additional lot area, fencing and landscaping for the medical office use will
increase the separation between the existing medical office building and the current
residential R-2 zone boundary which advances the general planning objectives of the
Master Plan; and,
7. This will allow circulation around the Medical Office Building which in turn promotes
safety and traffic issues. The proposed change is deminimus in terms of the overall
R-2 and B-1 Zones.
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune that the Land Development Ordinance and Zoning Map of the Township of Neptune be
and are hereby amended as follow:
SECTION 1
1. Upon completion of the minor subdivision and lot consolidation, Lots 13 and 13.01 of
Block 1405 will be removed from the current Town Commercial Zone designation
and rezoned in their entirety to R-2 Residential Zone.
2. The Neptune Township Zoning Map shall be revised accordingly.
3. Section 301 (Zoning Map) is amended and supplemented to add the following
paragraph:
“A. Lots 13 and 13.01 of Block 1405 are rezoned from the split lot zoning (R-2 and B1) to R-2 Residential Zone.”
SECTION 2
If any subsection, paragraph or provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 3
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4
This ordinance shall take effect following adoption and approval and shall be published as
required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: 09/22/08
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: 10/27/08
ATTEST:
______________________________ ____________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, J. Randy Bishop
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 08-39
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE, BY AMENDING SECTION 1001 ENTITLED
AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTRIBUTION TO CONFORM WITH
RECENT LEGISLATION FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
 WHEREAS, the New Jersey State Legislature has passed A-500 and S-1783 which
establishes a statewide non-residential development fee of 2.5% to be charged by all
municipalities for non-residential construction or improvements; and,
 WHEREAS, by adoption of Ordinance 04-22 on June 14, 2004, the Township of
Neptune had established a fee of 0.5% for this purpose; and,
 WHEREAS, in accordance with the new legislation, the Township desires to amend its
Affordable Housing Contribution ordinance to reflect the 2.5% fee, said fee to be retained by the
Township as a municipality under the Council of Affordable Housing’s jurisdiction pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act,
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE, IN THE COUNTY OF MONMOUTH THAT:
SECTION 1.
The Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune and specifically Section
1001 entitled Affordable Housing Contribution shall be amended and supplemented as follows:

1001 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTRIBUTION
C. Nonresidential development fees. All developers of non-residential uses, shall
pay a development fee of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the equalized assessed
value for new construction of and additions to non-residential development.
 SECTION 2 This ordinance shall take effect after publication and passage according
to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: 10/09/08
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: 10/27/08
ATTEST:
_________________________ __________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, J. Randy Bishop,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE 08-44
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE LAND DEVELOPMENT
 ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE AS IT RELATES TO THE DEFINITIONS
 SET FORTH IN §201 AND SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS OF § 416 PERTAINING TO SIGNS
 BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey
that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1
Section 201 of the Land Development Ordinance (Definitions) is hereby amended and supplemented
to modify the definitions pertaining to signage as indicated below
Abandoned sign – A sign shall be considered abandoned when the business activity or firm which
such sign advertises is no longer in operation.
Advertising Billboard Sign – Any structure or portion thereof, situated on private property on which
lettered, figured, or pictoral matter is displayed for advertising purposes, except for the name and
occupation of the user of the premises or the products primarily sold or manufactured on the premises
or non-commercial messages, and having an area of 100 square feet or more. Any signboard
carrying a message excepted in this definition that also carries extraneous advertising of 100 square
feet or more shall be considered a billboard.
Billboard – delete the definition of “Billboard”.
Sign, non-conforming – A non-conforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior
to the adoption of the existing ordinance provisions and which by reason of such adoption fails to
conform to all applicable regulations and standards set forth in the ordinance adopted.
Section 2
Section 416.01 of the Land Development Ordinance pertaining to Signs is hereby amended and
supplemented to add new subsections as follows:
(E) To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrian, bicyclists and motorists from injury
and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributable to cluttered,
distracting, or illegible signs.
(F) To promote the use of signs that are asthetically pleasing and of appropriate scale to the
zoning district.
(G) To promote the use of signs that are compatible with the Township’s character. 
Section 3
Section 416.04. pertaining to exempt signs is revised as follows.
Add § 416.04.K. Warning Signs. Limited to no more than two façade or ground-mounted sign per
occupancy, are no more than three square feet in area, are non-illuminated, and if ground mounted,
are no higher than three feet in height.
Add § 416.04.L. Special Events Signs. No more than three non-illuminated signs placed in any
business during the special event or sale which sign shall not be erected and maintained for more
than 45 days prior to the special event or more than 3 days after the special event.
Add § 416.04.M. Public Transportation Signs. Signs indicating public transportation stops provided
that they are installed or authorized by the Township or Public Transportation Authority or agency.
Add § 416.04.N. Interior Signs. Signs which are located within buildings and are not visible from a
public street or public parking facility.
Section 4
Section 416.05. pertaining to temporary signs is revised as follows.
All temporary signs shall require a zoning permit. The following temporary signs may be installed in
all zone districts:
§ 416.05.A. Delete in entirety.
§ 416.05.B. Renumber as § 416.05.A. Add title “Project sings”. Delete “Project signs may be
permitted for new major residential and non residential development pursuant. Insert- Temporary
non-illuminated project signs shall be permitted for residential and new major non-residential
development pursuant to final approval… Delete “Such signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet
from all property lines, and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in
height.
Add § 416.05.B.1. Residential projects. Such signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all
property lines, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area.
Add § 416.05.B.2 New major non-residential development. Such signs shall be set back at least ten
(10) feet from all property lines, and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or 12 (12) feet in
height.
§ 416.05.D. Delete in entirety.
Section 5.
Section 416.06. pertaining to prohibited signs is revised as follows.
§ 416.06.D. Insert “Signs which use the words stop, look, caution, danger or any similar wording
which may confuse or mislead the public. 
§ 416.06.G. Insert final sentence “No advertising flags, banners, pinwheels, portable signs, or similar
advertising devices shall be permitted.
§ 416.06.H Delete “Roof Signs”. Add “Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on or above the
roof of a building.
§ 416.06.S. Delete “Signs for a commercial purpose on a wall” Add “Painted signs. No sign may be
painted directly on the surface of any building façade, wall, fence or similar structure.
§ 416.06.T. Delete in entirety
Add § 416.06.T Signs placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which
extends above the eave of the roof of any building.
Add § 416.06.U. Signs painted on or attached to any trees, rocks, fence posts, utility poles or similar
structures or objects.
Add § 416.06.V. Commercial advertising billboard signs.

(1) The further erection, construction or enlargement of signs known as commercial
advertising billboards is prohibited.
(2) Existing commercial advertising billboards may be repaired or maintained in the same
location, but may not be enlarged, relocated to another lot, or replaced in the event of the
total destruction thereof.
Add § 416.06.W. Strings of lights outlining rooflines, doors, windows, or wall edges of any building
except seasonal decorations.
Add. § 416.06.X Any sign not expressly permitted by this ordinance is prohibited.
Section 6.
Section 416.07. Pertaining to permitted signs is revised as follows.
§ 416.07.A is deleted in its entirety.
Add new § 416.07.A.
 In commercial, industrial and mixed use zones one freestanding sign in accordance
with the following standards shall be permitted.
1. Where a lot has multiple street frontages, then 2 freestanding signs subject to the
following standards shall be permitted. Where two (2) freestanding signs are permitted by virtue of
multiple street frontage, each permitted sign shall be allowed to have the maximum square footage
allowed based on the formulas shown below. In addition, the sign area allowed may be transferred
from one (1) sign to another; provided, that no freestanding sign shall exceed four hundred (400)
square feet in area.
2. Where multiple signs are permitted because of multiple street frontages, the signs may
be erected on the same street frontage. 
3. For double-faced signs, each sign face can have the maximum square footage
allowed.
 4. Landscaping. all freestanding signs shall be placed within landscaped areas.
 5. Permitted Area.
Floor Area of Building Single Use Development Multiple Use
 Development

0--1,500 s.f. 35 s.f. 60 s.f.
1,501--5,000 s.f. 35 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 60 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
additional 50 s.f. of each additional 40 s.f.
floor area over 1,501. of floor area over 1,501.
5,001--50,000 s.f. 100 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 50 s.f. of
additional 500 s.f. of 150 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
floor area over 5,001. each 300 s.f. of floor area over
5,001.
Over 50,001 s.f. 190 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 300 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
additional 1,000 s.f. of each additional 1,000
floor area over 50,001 s.f. of floor area over
up to a maximum size of 300 s.f. 50,001 up to a maximum size of
400 s.f.
*In computing allowable sign size, only the footprint of the structure can be used. The floor area of
gas station and drive-thru canopies cannot be applied toward the freestanding sign allowance.
The allowable sign size is related to building size.
Step 1: Determine the square footage of the building:
Building size (in square feet): ________________ (This will be inserted in the formula below)

Step 2: Complete the appropriate allowable signage formula:
SINGLE USE DEVELOPMENT:
If the building is 0 – 1,500 square feet in size, you are allowed a 35 square foot sign.
If the building is 1,501 – 5,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 1,501 = ÷ 50 = + 35 =
Building size Allowed sign size 
If the building is 5,001 – 50,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 5,001 = ÷ 500 = + 100 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 50,000 + square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 50,001 = ÷ 1,000 = + 190 =
Building size Allowed sign size
MULTIPLE USE DEVELOPMENT:
If the building is 0 – 1,500 square feet in size, you are allowed a 60 square foot sign.
If the building is 1,501 – 5,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 1,501 = ÷ 40 = + 60 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 5,001 – 50,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 5,001 = ÷ 500 = + 100 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 50,000 + square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 50,001 = ÷ 1,000 = + 300 =
Building size Allowed sign size
The “allowed sign size” may be placed on each side of the freestanding sign.
6. Setback. Freestanding signs shall be set back from the property line ¾ of the
height of the sign 
7. Height. 15 feet for signs 150 sf and less. 20’ for signs over 150 sf in area but not
exceeding 190 sf in area. 40’ for signs in excess of 190 sf in area up to 400 sf in
area.
Section 7
Add new § 416.07.G. Window Stencil Signs. For all non-residential property where one or more
businesses or uses occupy a single building, side and rear entrances may contain a sign indicating
the occupant of that space. Such signs shall be stenciled or professionally lettered. Each letter shall
be three (3) inches to five (5) inches in height. No information other than the name of the occupant
may be included in the sign. Upon the change of the occupant, the sign must be removed or relettered with the name of the new occupant.
Section 8. The Clerk of the Township shall file a copy of this ordinance with the Monmouth County
Planning Board.

Section 9
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be and
the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 10
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted
by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair
the remainder of this Ordinance.
Section 11
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and
upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: October 9, 2008
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: October 27, 2008
ATTEST:
____________________________ ______
Richard J. Cuttrell J. Randy Bishop,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

Page 1 of 27
ORDINANCE NO. 09-39
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY AMENDING SECTION 528 ENTITLED
“STORMWATER MANAGEMENT” TO INCORPORATE
MODIFICATIONS RECOMMENDED BY THE MONMOUTH
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune adopted Ordinance
No. 04-23 on June 14, 2004 which added a comprehensive Stormwater Management section
and an Environmental Impact Statement section to the Land Development Ordinance; and,
 WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Planning Board subsequently adopted a Stormwater
Management Element of the Township’s Master Plan; and,
 WHEREAS, said ordinance was reviewed by the Monmouth County Planning Board
Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee who recommended that certain clarifications and
minor modifications be made to said ordinance,
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey, as follows:
 SECTION 1 – The Neptune Township Land Development Ordinance, Article V, Section
528, Stormwater Management, is amended as follows (bolded items represent amendments):
528.1: Purpose
A. Policy Statement
Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through nonstructural or
low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMP’s. Structural
BMP’s should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management measures and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural measures include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site conditions
and the origin, nature, and the anticipated loading of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMP’s may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for major development.
C. Applicability
This ordinance shall be applicable to any site plan or subdivision application that
requires preliminary or final review after the effective date of the adoption of this
ordinance.
Major development that has received one of the following approvals pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law: preliminary or final site plan approval; final municipal building
or construction permit; minor subdivision, preliminary or final subdivision approval, prior 
Page 2 of 27
to the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance, is exempt from the rules of this
ordinance.
If any of the above approvals is amended, revised or expires, exemption shall be
deemed void, and the project in its entirety shall comply with the rules of this ordinance.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements
Development approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered an
integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances,
rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
E. Definitions for this Section are found in 528.10 “Definitions.”
F. This Neptune Township ordinance was based on the NJDEP Model Ordinance
called “Model Stormwater Control Ordinance for Municipalities” proposed by the
NJ DEP in “NJDEP-NJ Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual-Feb 2004-
Appendix D” at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/watershedmgt/bmpmanualfeb2004.htm .
528.2. General Standards
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed
to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity,
and stormwater runoff quality standards in this section. To the maximum extent
feasible, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water
quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The
standards do not apply to new major development to the extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance
with Department rules. Such alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater 
Page 3 of 27
quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects as would be
provided under the standards in this subchapter.
3. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) at
N.J.A.C.5: 21, the RSIS shall apply in addition to this section except to the extent
the RSIS are superseded by this section or alternative standards applicable
under a regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management
Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules.
528.3: Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow
on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the Department's
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13: 1B15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/ or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements at Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed
areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an above ground utility line provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with
a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of permeable
material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements at Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G
may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met: 
Page 4 of 27
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the
use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and
measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements at Sections
528.3.F and 528.3.G, existing structures currently in use, such as homes and
buildings would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas,
including the potential to obtain through purchase or condemnation lands not
falling under 528.D.3 above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving
stream, that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate for requirements of
Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in 528.3.F and 528.3.G
shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies at
528.3.E into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any
nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in 528.3.E.2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management measures incorporated into site design
shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of
runoff over impervious surfaces and lawns in excess of one (1) acre;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as
the time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant
point of the watershed to the point of interest within a watershed; 
Page 5 of 27
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and
planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers
and pesticides.
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into
and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or minimize the
release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. These source controls
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash
and debris in drainage systems;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills
or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or
commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying
fertilizer in accordance with the requirements established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm
drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, “solid and floatable
materials” means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Section c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement of another ground surface to
collect stormwater from the surface into a storm drain or surface
water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the 
Page 6 of 27
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches,
or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces included surfaces of
roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawn, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0)
inches across the smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
 (1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Section 4.G.1 are conveyed through any device
(e.g. end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
a. A rectangular space four and five-eights inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
 b. A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1”) space between the bars, to the
elevation of the water quality design storm as specified in
Section ; or 
Page 7 of 27
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register
of Historic Places Rules at N.J. A.C. 7:4-7.2©, that action to
meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to
meet the performance standards in Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G shall be
dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed
with the Monmouth County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent
restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management measures is available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The manual is
available on the Department of Environmental Protection's stormwater web page
at http:// www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Standards
1. This section contains minimum design and performance standards to control
erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control
are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at
Section 528.4, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100% of the average annual pre-construction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction to post-construction for the 2-year storm is
infiltrated. 
Page 8 of 27
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement applies to all project
areas within the Township of Neptune, as defined by this
ordinance.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(a) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/ or
petroleum products are loaded/ unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/ unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than 'reportable quantities' as defined
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with Department approved remedial action
work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(b) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material".
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery,
located at an industrial facility that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other industrial
activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants,
solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include,
but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high
water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity or down gradient of the groundwater
recharge area.
c. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff
calculations at Section 528.4, complete one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff 
Page 9 of 27
hydrographs for the 2, 10, and 100 year storm events do not
exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the
site for the 2, 10, and 100 year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full development
under existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction peak runoff rates for the 2, 10 and 100 year storm
events are 50, 75 and 80 percent, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the
post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to the
portion of the site on which the proposed development or project
is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if
the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood
damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis
in accordance with 1, 2 and 3 above shall only be applied if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of
major development at Section 12 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally associated
with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include
the development of land for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing
of agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80
percent of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual
average. Stormwater management measures shall only be required for water
quality control if an additional (one-quarter) 1/4 acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not 
Page 10 of 27
apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C.7: 14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt
under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design storm is
1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in
Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account the
implementation of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMP’s designed in accordance with the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 528.6, or found on the
Department's website at www. njstormwater. org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 528.6. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMP’s in Table 2 below.
Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used
if the design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418. 
Page 11 of 27
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required 80% TSS
reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/ 100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMP’s, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMP’s
Best Management Practice TSS % Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See Section 528.5.C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80% TSS removal rate shall
apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on
site in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation
using a weighted average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the
maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated
load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water
quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent
feasible, the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
performance standards in Sections 528.3.F and 528.3.G.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from
the address identified in Section 528.6.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C.7: 9B-1.4, stormwater
management measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater
runoff to waters classified as FW1. 
Page 12 of 27
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C.7: 9B and perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14
drainage. These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These areas shall be
designated and protected as follows:
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under Subsection (1) above shall only be allowed
where previous development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn
area). The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the
special water resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the remaining
special water resource protection area be reduced to less than
150 feet as measured in accordance with one of the following:
(a). perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway, or
(b). from the 100 year flood line where the bank is
undefined, or
(c). from the centerline of the waterway where the bank
flood lines are undefined.
(3) All encroachments proposed under subparagraph (2) above
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey", established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq. 
Page 13 of 27
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special
water resource protection area cannot comply with the Standard For OffSite Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey", established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4: 24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in
accordance with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of
the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section
shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the
special water resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District staff
to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
d. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional
stormwater management planning committee as an element of a regional
stormwater management plan, or by a municipality through an adopted
municipal stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor protection
plan for a waterway subject to Section 528.2.G (8) has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the
plan shall be the applicable special water resource protection area
requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to 528.G.8 shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in 528.G.8.a.(1) above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water
Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
e. This subsection does not apply to the construction of one individual
single family dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a lot
receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on or before February 
Page 14 of 27
2, 2004, provided that the construction begins on or before February 2,
2009.
528.4: Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless
Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 4—Hydrology, and Technical Release 55—Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
b. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method
for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge,
there is a presumption that the pre-construction condition of a site or portion
thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff
coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at Section 528.4.A.1.a and
the Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Section 528.4.A.1.b. A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be
used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the
hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five
years without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time
of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
3. In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall
account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, or culverts that may reduce pre-construction
stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer
shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious
and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume
of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected
impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS
Technical Release—55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, and other
methods may be employed. 
Page 15 of 27
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is
below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C.7: 13, the
design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New
Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P. O. Box 427 Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
528.5: Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into
account the existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally
critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns;
and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize
maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning.
Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third
(1/3) the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch (1”)
and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches (6”). In addition, the design
of trash racks must comply with the requirements of Section 528.7.D.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed,
and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are
consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C.5: 21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this
requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice
size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches (2 1/2”)in diameter. 
Page 16 of 27
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum
safety standards for stormwater management basins at Section 528.7.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the proposed
measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards established by this
subchapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of 528.1
et.seq. provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
528.6: Sources for Technical Guidance
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from Maps and Publications,
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P. O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended.
Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells, extended
detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious
paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be obtained
from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into
N.J.A.C.2: 90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by contacting the
State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed
in N.J.A.C.2: 90-1.3(a) 4. The location, address, and telephone number of each
Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P. O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and 
Page 17 of 27
3. The Freehold Soil Conservation District located at 4000 Kozloski Road,
P.O. Box 5033, Freehold, New Jersey 07728; (732)683-8500;
4. The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P. O. Box
330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.

528-7: Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design
and operation of stormwater management basins. This subchapter applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
B. The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater management basins.
C. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the
outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the
basin outlets in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six inch
(6”) spacing between the bars.
b. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
c. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed
two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of
opening through the rack.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable,
and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ ft sq. 
Page 18 of 27
e. The trash rack shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable
for emergencies and maintenance.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure.
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches (2”) across
the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ ft sq.
3. For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the permanent
installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily
accessible means of egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
a. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape
provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior
approval of the reviewing agency identified in Section 528.7.D a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this requirement.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater
management basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than two
and one-half feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps.
Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be located
approximately two and one-half (2-1/2) feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and one-half
feet above the permanent water surface. See Section 528.7.E for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for
an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than 3
horizontal to 1 vertical.
D. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency of the Township of Neptune, that the variance
or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety. 
Page 19 of 27
Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin
528.8: Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to
this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the
Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at 528.8.C below as part of
the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth
in this ordinance.
3. The applicant shall submit eight (8) copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with Section
528.8.C of this ordinance.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval 
Page 20 of 27
The applicant's Site Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal engineer and the
municipal board or official from which municipal approval is sought. That
municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning
and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
C. Checklist Requirements
The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map
The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of
the site be submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of
the proposed development, at a scale of 1"= 200' or greater, showing 2-foot
contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category 1 waters,
wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands
and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural
and manmade features not otherwise shown.
Additionally, a Drainage System Map shall be submitted showing all areas which
extend a minimum of 2000 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development,
at a scale of 1”=200’, showing all wetland areas, rivers, and streams, based on
Geographic Information System (GIS) data from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJ DEP), the New Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS),
or both.
2. Environmental Site Analysis
A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made features of the
site and its environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s)
A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the
location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and other
landscaping, and seasonal high ground water elevations. The map(s) shall also
show the location of streams and rivers, and each type of wetlands, based on 
Page 21 of 27
Geographic Information System (GIS) data from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJ DEP), the New Jersey Geologic Survey (NJGS), or
both. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes
in natural conditions shall also be provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan
This plan shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Sections 528.2 through 528.5 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at
the source by land management and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map
The following information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land
area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the
type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and
dispose of stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each
outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms
specified in Section 528.3 of this ordinance.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e. g.
infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a
soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to
determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the
location of the control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan
The design and planning of the stormwater management facility shall meet the
maintenance requirements of Section 528.9. 
Page 22 of 27
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements
The municipal official or board reviewing an application under this ordinance
may, in agreement with the Township Engineer, waive submission of any of the
requirements in Sections 528.8.C.1 through 528.8.C.6 of this ordinance when it
can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it
would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
528.9: Maintenance and Repair
A. Applicability
1. Projects subject to review as in Section 528.1.C of this ordinance shall comply
with the requirements of Section 528.9.B and 528.9.C.
B. General Maintenance
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
Guidelines for developing a maintenance and inspection program are provided in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual and the NJDEP
Ocean County Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual, dated June 1989 available from the NJDEP, Watershed
Management Program.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks
and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, and
trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures
are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation
to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person under an applicable
ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the
owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or project,
unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions
based on Section 528.9.B.7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for 
Page 23 of 27
each property on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must
be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the
function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or
replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, and trash; restoration
of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration
of vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective
maintenance for the structural stormwater management measures incorporated
into the design of the development, including a record of all inspections and
copies of all maintenance-related work orders. The maintenance plan and all
logs shall be sent to both Neptune Township Public Works Superintendent
and Neptune Township Department of Engineering.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per
year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 528.9.B.2
above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by Sections 528.9.B.6 and
528.9.B.7 above.
9. The requirements of Sections 528.9. B. 3 and 528.9. B. 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the
municipality or another governmental agency. All records to be sent annually
to the Neptune Township Public Works Superintendent and Department of
Engineering.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to
public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance, the municipality
shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to affect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal engineer or his
designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair, the municipality or County may immediately proceed to do so and
shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major development
is located from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-53. 
Page 24 of 27
D. Penalties
Any person who violates any portion or section of this ordinance shall be subject to the
penalties, as outlined in the Neptune Township General Code Section 1-5 General
Penalties.
528.10: Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
ordinance it’s most reasonable application.
"CAFRA Planning Map" means the geographic depiction of the boundaries for Coastal
Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to
N.J.A.C.7: 7E-5B. 3.
"CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes" means those areas within boundaries accepted by
the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C.7: 8E-5B. "Compaction" means the increase in soil
bulk density.
"Core" means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the
surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
"County review agency" means an agency designated by the County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N. J. S. A 58: 16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinances.
"Department" means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
"Designated Center" means a State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as
designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet.
"Design engineer" means a person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
"Development" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in
the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-1 et seq. In
the case of development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that
requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) 
Page 25 of 27
and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N. J. S. A 4: 1C-1 et seq.
"Drainage area" means a geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point along
a receiving waterbody.
"Environmentally constrained area" means the following areas where the physical
alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through regulation, easement,
deed restriction or ownership such as: wetlands, floodplains, threatened and
endangered species sites or designated habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of
endangered or threatened species are identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
"Environmentally critical areas" means an area or feature which is of significant
environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage
priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous
open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and
Nongame Species Program.
"Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood designated by the Urban
Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N. J. S. A 55: 19-69.
"Erosion" means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
"Impervious surface" means a surface that has been covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
"Infiltration" is the process by which water that seeps into the soil from precipitation.
"Major development" means any "development" that provides for ultimately disturbing
one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or
exposure and/ or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation. Projects undertaken by any government agency which otherwise meet the
definition of "major development" but which do not require approval under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-1 et seq. are also considered "major development."
"Municipality" means any city, borough, town, township, or village.
"Node" means an area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating
facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
"Nutrient" means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this State and any state, interstate or federal agency.
"Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated
under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended ( 42 U. S. C. 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants. 
Page 26 of 27
"Recharge" means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
"Sediment" means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a
product of erosion.
"Site" means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
"Soil" means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
"State Development and Redevelopment Plan Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1)" means
an area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning
Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment
and revitalization efforts.
"State Plan Policy Map" is defined as the geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official
map of these goals and policies.
"Stormwater" means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities.
"Stormwater management basin" means an excavation or embankment and related
areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may either
be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a
permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
"Stormwater management measure" means any structural or nonstructural strategy,
practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or reduce
stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or
groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
"Stormwater runoff" means water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm sewers,
resulting from precipitation.
"Tidal Flood Hazard Area" means a flood hazard area, which may be influenced by
stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
"Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood
given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment
Authority.
"Urban Enterprise Zones" means a zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone
Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52: 27H-60
et. seq.
"Urban Redevelopment Area" is defined as previously developed portions of areas:
(1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes,
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
(4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods. 
Page 27 of 27
"Waters of the State" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands,
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries
of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
"Wetlands" or "wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
SECTION 2 - Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect after final passage, adoption, and publication by the
Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, in the manner prescribed by law.
SECTION 3 - Severability
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this ordinance.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING:
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED:
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 09-42
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY AMENDING SECTION 907 ENTITLED
“DEMOLITION WITHIN A HISTORIC DISTRICT” BY AMENDING
AND ADDING DEFINITIONS
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee previously adopted significant revisions to Section
907 of the Land Development Ordinance related to demolition within an Historic District through
Ordinance 07-46; and,
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee has been advised that certain technical changes
are required to further advance the objectives of that Ordinance; and,
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee is resolved to enact those technical changes
required within the Historic District,
 THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune that the Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune is hereby amended
as follows:
 SECTION 1.
 Section 907, Demolition Within An Historic District, Section 2 is hereby amended and
supplemented as follows to repeal and replace the “Definitions” contained in Section 2 (a)
Demolition and (b) Partial Demolition with the revised Definitions contained herein:
(a) Demolition: shall mean the total demolition of fifty (50%) per-cent or more of the exterior
walls, visible pier foundations and, as applicable, alterations, refinements or removal to the roof
assembly (as defined herein) including any ornamentation, eyelids, soffits, overhangs, dormers,
turrets, towers or roof form of any structure, as determined by a qualified professional, situate
within the Historic District and which shall consist of the razing or removal of said structure
and/or the removal of such of the distinguishing or defining characteristics (as applicable) to the
style of such structure or the removal of any architecturally or historically significant exterior
elements from the structure which define or contribute to its classification within the Historic
District. Demolition, as defined herein, shall require any owner to obtain a demolition permit in
accordance with the requirements established herein and any such additional requirements as
established by the Construction Department. Any such Demolition Permit shall be issued by the
Construction Official. Nothing herein shall excuse compliance with all applicable ordinances of
the Township of Neptune related to Land Use.

 (b) Partial Demolition: shall mean the removal or demolition of not less than fifteen
(15%) per-cent nor more than fifty (50%) per-cent of the exterior walls visible pier foundations
and, as applicable, alterations, refinements or removal to the roof assembly (as defined herein)
including any ornamentation, eyelids, soffits, overhangs, dormers, turret, towers or roof form of
any Key, Supporting or Contributing Structure located within the Historic District, as determined
by a qualified professional and approved or confirmed by the Commission and/or the removal of 
such architecturally or historically significant features which would compromise the classification
of a structure within the Historic District as determined by the Commission. An Owner seeking to
partially demolish a portion of a Key, Supporting or Contributing Structure shall obtain a
demolition permit in accordance with the requirements established herein and any such
additional requirements established by the Construction Department. Any such Demolition
Permit will be issued by the Construction Official. Partial Demolition shall not include those
structures classified as “Other Structures”, by the Commission, which shall not require a formal
demolition application for a partial demolition. However, an Applicant shall be required to obtain
a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission upon application and approval. Nothing
herein shall excuse compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Township of Neptune
related to Land Use.
 SECTION 2
 Neptune Township Ordinance Section 907, Demolition Within A Historic District, Section
2 is hereby amended and supplemented to insert the following additional terms as “Definitions”
as listed herein:
 (s) Pier Foundations: shall mean and consist of any isolated masonry or cast-in-place
concrete structural elements extending into firm materials which are visible on the structure.
 (t) Roof Assembly: shall mean a system designed to provide weather protection and
resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single
component serving as both the roof covering and roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof
deck, vapor retarder, substrate or thermal barrier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering.
SECTION 3
Effective Date: This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and publication as
required by law.
SECTION 4
 Inconsistent Ordinances: All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions
of this ordinance section are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
 SECTION 5
 Severability: If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall apply only
to that section, paragraph, clause or provision and the remainder of this ordinance shall be
deemed to be valid and enforceable.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: November 9, 2009
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: December 14, 209
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE #10-04
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING SECTION 525 OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
ENTITLED “TREE REMOVAL AND TREE CUTTING” AND ADOPTING ORDINANCE UNDER
THE NEPTUNE TOWNSHIP CODE CHAPTER XII ENTITLED “PROPERTY MAINTENANCE”
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune of the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that Section 525 of the Land Development
Ordinance entitled “Tree Removal and Tree Cutting” shall be repealed and Chapter XII entitled
“Property Maintenance” under the Neptune Township Code shall be amended to provide for
Section 12 – 3 entitled “Tree Removal and Tree Cutting” as follows:
 WHEREAS, the Township of Neptune may make, amend, repeal and enforce
such ordinances, regulations, rules and by-laws not contrary to the laws of the State of
New Jersey or the United States as it may deem necessary and proper for the good
government, order and protection of persons and property and for the preservation,
public health, safety and welfare of the Township of Neptune and its inhabitants and as
may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the powers and duties conferred and
imposed by the laws of Neptune Township in the County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey, pursuant to its police powers under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2; and
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune considered a
Tree Removal and Tree Cutting Ordinance as not appropriate under the Land
Development Ordinance but rather under its Township Code of Ordinances, for general
enforcement under its police powers.
 NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED that the Township
Committee of the Township of Neptune, County of Monmouth, in the State of New
Jersey, that Section 525 of the Land Development Ordinance entitled “Tree Removal
and Tree Cutting” shall hereby be repealed and the Neptune Township Code under
Chapter XII entitled “Property Maintenance” shall be amended to provide for Section 12
– 3 entitled “Tree Removal and Tree Cutting” and shall provide as follows:
 §12-3 – Tree Removal and Tree Cutting
12-3.1 Purpose. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled, and excessive destruction, as well
as the removal and cutting of trees on lots and tracts of land within the
Township, may cause:
a. Increased drainage control cost;
b. Increased soil erosion and sedimentation;
c. Decreased fertility of the soil;
d. Degradation of water resources;
e. Decreased groundwater-recharge; 
f. Increased buildup of atmospheric carbon;
g. The establishment of a heat island effect;
h. Increased dust and pollution;
The singular or cumulative effect of any of the foregoing could adversely
impact the character of the Township, decrease property values, render
the land unfit and unsuitable for its most appropriate use and negatively
affect the health, safety and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township. The Township desires to regulate and control indiscriminate
and excessive cutting of trees within the Township. The Township strives
to preserve the maximum possible number of trees in the course of
development of a site as well as protect larger, older specimens of trees.
Additionally, the Township seeks to encourage innovative design and
grading, promote the preservation of existing trees and provide a plan for
replacement of trees. It is recognized that there is a strong relationship
between the integrity of the Township’s water resources, development on
steep slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management
and the general use of the land resources. Therefore, the Township finds
that the appropriate management of these resources is an important
health, safety and general welfare concern.
Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A management program is
intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting, enhancing and
maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the continued use of
forest resources and are compatible with the maintenance of the
environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring management of
forest and trees through the application of sound management practices.
12-3.2 Establishment of Conservation Officer. There shall be appointed and
designated, an official whose formal title shall be that of Conservation
Officer or Designee of the Township of Neptune. This official shall be
charged with the inspection of sites upon which there is an application for
site plan approval or for subdivision approval in regard to the provisions of
this Section, and with the inspection and enforcement of the tree removal
and protection requirements of this Ordinance.
12-3.3 Cutting or removal restricted. Subject to the exemptions set forth, no
person shall cut or remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any tree with a
diameter at point of measurement (DPM) of four (4) inches or greater
upon any lands within the Township, unless the cutting or removal is
accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
12-3.4 Tree removal.
a. Permit required.
2
(1) No person shall remove or destroy or cause to be or allow to be
removed or destroyed any tree without first obtaining a tree
removal permit. Tree removal permits shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer or designee after appropriate inspection by the
Conservation Officer. A permit is required for the removal of all
trees of four (4) inch caliper or larger.
(2) Existing single family residential property shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Ordinance, provided that said homeowner is
clearing one acre or less of area.
b. Permit application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning
Officer and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property from which
the tree(s) are to be removed.
(3) Location on the property of the tree(s) to be removed, indicated on
a plan as follows:
(4) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to be removed, specifically by an
assigned number, and the caliper of each tree.
(5) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to remain, specifically by an
assigned number.
(6) The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line (i.e., where the
four foot high standard wood snow fence will be erected if required
by the Conservation Officer).
(7) For any clearing greater than (3) three acres, a representative five
(5%) percent of the wooded areas proposed to be cleared shall be
inventoried. The representative 5% shall be determined by
agreement between the Conservation Officer and the applicant.
Where less than (3) three acres is proposed to be cleared, all
trees to be removed shall be inventoried.
(8) All trees greater than twenty (20) inches in caliper or any
specimen trees (i.e. any unique or remarkable tree or species) to
be removed shall be indicated on the plan. All reasonable efforts
shall be made to preserve such trees, including but not limited to,
if feasible, relocation of infrastructure, roadways, and buildings.
Removal of such trees shall require the specific written approval of
the Conservation Officer.

(9) Any other information which may reasonably be required to enable
the application to be properly evaluated.
3
12-3.5 Inspection required. The Conservation Officer or designee shall inspect
the trees which are the subject of the application, the drainage incidental
thereto, other physical conditions existing on the property, and the impact
upon adjacent properties.
12-3.6 Zoning permit requirements. Where an application is made in connection
with the construction of a building or other land use improvement, no
zoning permit shall be issued until the tree removal permit has been
granted, or an exemption granted.
12-3.7 Replacement tree requirements.
a. Existing residential property. If the application is on behalf of an existing
homeowners association and it is disclosed that the total number of trees
to be removed or destroyed on the property or open space area in
question, which are the subject of the application, is ten (10) or less, the
permit shall be issued without replacement trees required. Within a one
year period, permits may be used for removal of no more than ten (10)
trees on the same property without replacement trees being required.
Any tree removal occurring where a homeowners association exists must
obtain formal approval by the ruling body of the association prior to
obtaining a tree removal permit.
b. New residential development.
(1) If the application is for a new residential development
(subdivisions or site plans), up to fifty (50%) percent of the trees
may be removed for the sole purpose of clearing for the building
envelope, driveways and yard space for said building lots only
without replacement trees required.
(2) For new residential development where tree removal is to occur
within public or private roadways or right-of-ways, drainage
facilities, parking areas or proposed open space, all trees are not
subject to replacement in accordance with this Ordinance.
c. Agricultural operations. Agricultural operations are exempt from
replacement requirements providing the property in question is farmed for
a minimum of five (5) years after the date of clearing. An application must
be submitted prior to clearing. If the property is developed for any other
use before the five (5) years expire, the replacement obligation shall be
enforced according to the new use of the property.
d. Nonresidential development. All commercial and industrial developments
are required to replace all trees removed in accordance with this
Ordinance.
e. Sparse land/major subdivisions and site plans. In regard to major
subdivisions and site plans, lots with tree cover less than thirty percent
(30%) shall be required to plant a minimum of 1.5 trees per 10,000
square feet or less of open field. The owner/applicant shall have a
4
qualified professional calculate the total required trees to be distributed in
accordance with a landscape plan of the entire project, which shall be
approved by the Conservation Officer.
f. Tree escrow fund established. Tree Escrow Fund shall be established by
the Township to promote environmental enhancement programs such as
tree planting, tree preservation, park development, landscaping and/or
other related projects on or within municipality owned properties or
facilities. A separate trust account shall be established for this purpose
under the supervision of the Township Treasurer. Appropriations from
the Tree Escrow Fund shall be authorized by the Mayor and Township
Committee and shall be used for a municipal purpose pursuant to the
recommendations of the Zoning Officer, the Conservation Officer, the
Township Planner and/or the Shade Tree Commission.
 g. Replacement tree value calculations.
(1) The replacement value of all trees to be removed where
replacement trees are required by this Ordinance shall be
calculated as follows:
TABLE 5.11: REPLACEMENT TREE CALCULATIONS
 R e p l a c e m e n t T r e e s
Trees to be
Removed: Caliper
Number Caliper Dollar
Amount
Greater than 6” & up
to 12”
1 2-2-1/2” $240.00
Greater than 12” & up
to 18”
3 2-2-1/2” $660.00
Greater than 18” & up
to 24”
6 3” $2,440.00
Greater than 24” 8 3” $3,680.00
(2) Dead and diseased trees are not counted as trees to be replaced.
 (3) The applicant will receive a one and one-half for one replacement
tree
5
credit should stands of eight (8) or more trees greater than 4
inches in
caliper be preserved within tree removal areas.
(4) All replacement trees shall be planted onsite unless one or more of
the
following conditions exist: (A) The site in question cannot
physically accommodate the total replacement amount of trees.
The applicant shall contribute an amount equal to the calculated
monetary value of the removed trees minus the value of the
proposed landscaping to the Township Tree Escrow Funds, as
required herein; (B) Due to unique site conditions, the
Conservation Officer and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall make payment to the Township Tree Escrow Fund
based upon the above chart.
h. Trees replaced according to the foregoing calculations shall not be
construed to satisfy other street tree and landscaping quantity
requirements contained elsewhere in this Chapter.
12-3.8 Fees. Upon application for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall be
charged the following fees:
a. For new resident building lots: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree up
to a maximum of three hundred ($300.00) dollars per lot.
b. For all other properties: fifteen ($15.00) dollars per tree up to a
maximum of six hundred ($600.00) dollars for each acre.
12-3.9 Time Limit. All tree removal permits shall be limited to one (1) year from
the date of issuance. If the approved tree removal has not occurred within
one (1) year, a new permit must be applied for and is subject to the
payment of new fees.
12-3.10 Criteria for tree removal. The Conservation Officer may approve the
removal of a tree if any of the following criteria apply:
a. The tree is located in a parcel for which preliminary or final
subdivision approval has been obtained, and it unreasonably
restricts the economic enjoyment of the property and cannot be
relocated on the site because of its age, type or size.
b. The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, interferes
with existing utility service, created an unsafe condition, or
conflicts with any other ordinances or regulations.
12-3.11 Enforcement. The requirements of this Ordinance shall be enforced by
the Conservation Officer, who shall inspect or require adequate inspection
of all sites upon which there is an application for site plan or subdivision,
all applicable tree removal or destruction and soil removal incidental
thereto, and for compliance with other pertinent conditions of approval
6
7
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that this ordinance shall take effect upon advertisement
and final adoption in accordance with the law.

APPROVED ON FIRST READING: February 8, 2010

APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: March 8, 2010
ATTEST:
______________________________ ____________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Mary Beth Jahn,
Municipal Clerk Mayor
 
ORDINANCE NO. 11-11
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION 528 OF THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY REQUIRING THE RETROFITTING OF EXISTING
STORM DRAIN INLETS IN DIRECT CONTACT WITH PRIVATE
PROPERTY UNDERGOING AN INFRASTRUCTURE CHANGE
OR ALTERATION
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune that the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1
Section 528 – Stormwater Management, is hereby amended by adding the following:
528.11 – RETROFITTING OF EXISTING STORM DRAIN INLETS
I. Purpose:
An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact
with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Neptune so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
II. Definitions:
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
a. Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)– a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by [insert name of
municipality] or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
b. Person – any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
c. Storm drain inlet- an opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater runoff and
includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination
inlet. 
d. Waters of the State – means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of
surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of
New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
III. Prohibited Conduct:
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one single family house)
shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing
(including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet
on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section V below prior to the completion
of the project.
IV. Design Standard:
Storm drain inlets identified in Section IV above shall comply with the following standard to
control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, “solid and floatable materials” means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settle able solids. For exemptions to this standard see Section V.3 below.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate
in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
a. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways
and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
b. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no
more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the
grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including
bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater
than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply: 
a. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by
using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
b. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
i. A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one and
one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
ii. A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
c. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with
one-inch (1”) spacing between the bars; or
d. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-
7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
V. Enforcement:
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Neptune Township Police Department and/or Code
Enforcement of the Township of Neptune.
VI. Penalties:
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed that is in accordance with Chapter 1 Section 1-5 entitled “General
Penalty of the general code of the Township of Neptune, for each storm drain inlet that is not
retrofitted to meet the design standard.
 SECTION 2
 Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to
be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding
of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or
reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance. 
 SECTION 3
 This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and any
publication as may be required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 24, 2011
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: February 14, 2011
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 11-17
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING SECTION
411.09 OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE AS IT RELATES TO THE STORAGE
OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND BOATS
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune that the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 411.09 is hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows:
§ 411.09 Recreational Vehicle Storage
 The following requirements apply to the storage of recreational vehicles and boats on
single family residential property and are designed to have the most flexibility to allow for the
least impact to neighbor and community for storage of said vehicles, but is not to interpreted as
an encouragement for storage of said vehicles on residential property.
A. The term “Recreational Vehicle” shall include Mobile Homes, Campers, Popup
Trailers, Boats, Watercraft, and any Trailer used for storing, parking or moving any recreation
vehicle as defined herein. “Recreation Vehicle” shall not include kayaks, canoes, rowboats or
other similar non-motorized watercraft. A recreational vehicle shall be used for
recreational/non-commercial purposes only.
B. Each occupied single-family residential property may have outside parking or storage
upon it for up to a total of two recreational vehicles (on trailers only), maintained in safe and
effective operating condition. All recreational vehicles and boats must be stored in a safe and
secure manner and shall display thereon a current State license and/or registration that must
indicate the property owner or tenant as the registered owner of the recreation vehicle.
C. Recreational Vehicles shall be permitted in the following yard areas:
 1. FRONT YARD STORAGE: No recreational vehicle shall be parked in the
front yard of such lot, except in a driveway subject to the following conditions:
 a. Recreational Vehicle shall not exceed the confines of existing approved
 driveway and shall remain wholly on private property.
 b. Recreational Vehicle shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the
 street with a maximum distance to be achieved from street to Recreational Vehicle.

 c. Recreational Vehicle shall not impede or obstruct any existing sidewalk.

 d. The setback shall be measured from street/sidewalk to the first point on a
 Recreational Vehicle.
 
 2. SIDE AND REAR YARD STORAGE: Side and rear yard storage location shall
 be flexible to allow for the best storage possible within confines of side and rear yard
 property with the least impact to neighbor and community. All attempts must be made to
 obscure the recreational vehicle from public view to the maximum extent possible. A
 buffer of some kind is encouraged such as evergreen planting/fencing as examples.
D. Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this section shall not be occupied and
shall not be provided with utility connections. Permanent or temporary overnight occupancy of
recreational vehicles/boats is not permitted.
E. No storage shall be permitted on a public road.
F. Repair work on a recreational vehicle or boat stored in conformance with this Chapter
shall be permitted during the same hours that Heavy Equipment and Power Equipment are
permitted as defined by Chapter 3-2.3 of the Township Municipal Code.
G. In the historic district zones, all of the provisions of this section shall apply with the
additional requirement that the recreational vehicle or boat shall not cover in excess of 50% of
the surface of the driveway.
SECTION 2. Section 411.04 is hereby amended as follows:
 Section 411.04(D) is deleted in its entirety because of redundancy with the provisions of
this ordinance.
 Section 411.04(E) is hereby renumbered as Section 411.04(D)
 Section 411.04(F) is hereby renumbered as Section 411.04(E)
 SECTION 3. Any Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance, be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
 SECTION 4. Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this
Ordinance be adjusted by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect or impair the remainder of this Ordinance.
 SECTION 5. This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication
according to law and upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County
Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: March 14, 2011
REINTRODUCED WITH AMENDMENTS: March 28, 2011
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: April 11, 2011
ATTEST:
____________________________ ______
Richard J. Cuttrell Kevin B. McMillan
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 11-35
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING SECTION
411.07 OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE AS IT RELATES TO PORCHES AND
DECKS

WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Planning Board adopted Resolution #11-12
requesting that the Township Committee amend Section 411.07 of the Land Development
Ordinance with respect to porches and decks,
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune that the Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby
amended as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 411.07 – Porches and Decks – is hereby amended in its entirety
as follows:
Section 411.07 PORCHES AND DECKS
 § 411.07A Porches and Decks (in all areas of Neptune Township other than the
 Historic District)
1. Applicability. This Subsection includes regulations for attached, accessory
porches and decks located on properties used for residential purposes
outside the historic zone districts.
2. Deck setbacks. For one and two family residential structures, a deck may
extend no further than fifteen (15) feet into a required rear yard setback area,
provided the principal structure conforms to minimum
rear yard setback requirements. In no instance shall a deck be closer than
ten (10) feet to a rear or side lot line. No deck for a residential structure may
extend into a side setback area. No deck shall be located in a front yard
area. No deck associated with a multi-family residential use may extend into
any required setback area.
3. Porch setbacks: For one and two family residential structures, a porch may
extend no more than eight (8) feet into the required front and/or rear setback
area. No porch for a residential structure may extend into a side setback
area. No porch associated with any multi-family residential use may extend
into any setback area. The front yard setback of a porch shall not be
considered the front yard setback of the principal building to which it is
attached.
4. Enclosure: A porch shall not be heated or air-conditioned and at least fifty
(50) percent of the exterior wall area shall be open and non-glazed. 
5. Entry platforms: Any entry platform not more than six (6) feet in height above
the average finish grade, nor greater than fifty (50) square feet in area, may
project six (6) feet into a required front yard and not more than four (4) feet
into any required side yard.
§411.07B Porches and Decks and yard requirements in the Historic Zone District:
1. Applicability: This Subsection includes regulations for attached, accessory
porches and decks located on properties used for residential purposes within
the Historic Zone districts.
2. Deck setbacks: For one and two family residential structures, a deck may not
encroach into any setback/yard area. No deck for a residential structure may
encroach into a side, rear or front yard/setback area. No deck associated
with a multi-family residential use may extend into any required setback area.
3. Porch setbacks: For one and two family residential structures, unless
superseded by Paragraphs 5 through 12 of this section, a porch may not
encroach into any setback/yard areas. No porch for a residential structure
may encroach into a side, rear or front yard/setback area. No porch
associated with any multi-family residential use may extend into any setback
area.
4. Entry platforms:. An entry platform not more than six (6) feet in height above
the average finish grade, nor greater than fifty (50) square feet in area, may
not project into any required yard/setback area.
5. For lots in the HD-R-1 Zone District, west of Central Avenue, the front
building line shall have a minimum front yard setback of ten (10) feet from the
street line and the front porch line shall be set back at a minimum distance of
four (4) feet from the street line, except as modified by Paragraph 8
hereunder.
6. For lots east of Central Avenue except those fronting Olin and McClintock
Streets, the front building line shall have a minimum front yard setback that is
created by a line running directly from a point ten (10) feet back from the
property line at the corner of Central Avenue to a point two (2) feet back from
the property line at the corner of Ocean Avenue, except as modified by
Paragraph 8 hereunder.
7. For lots fronting Olin and McClintock Streets, the front building line shall have
a minimum front yard setback that is created by a line running directly from a
point ten (10) feet back from the property line at the corner of Central Avenue
to a point six (6) feet back from the property line at the corner of Ocean
Avenue, except as modified by Paragraph 8 hereunder.
2
8. No building line or front porch line need be set back farther than the average
alignment of those front building and front porch lines of existing buildings
within 200 feet on each side of the lot and within the same block front and
within the same Zone District. This provision does not permit the
encroachment of buildings or porches into the flared open space area. 
3
9. For lots east of Central Avenue, except those fronting Olin and McClintock
Streets, the lot area and lot depth requirement shall be measured from the
curb line rather than the property line. A calculation of building and lot
coverage requirements shall be based on the resultant lot area. These
provisions shall not affect any of the required yard setbacks.
10. All buildings and porches shall be so located that the roofs, steps or
extensions of the same shall not extend upon or overhang any public street,
public avenue, public sidewalk, or any other lot unless permission is granted
by that lot owner.
11. Original open air balconies where being reconstituted by the renovation are
not restricted. New open air balconies may not exceed 150 square feet and
shall be setback a minimum of one (1) foot, six inches (1’6”) from the
applicable front or side yard setback line. In the event the covered porch
directly below it has projecting steps or stairs, such steps or stairs shall be
excluded from the area footprint in the calculation.
 SECTION 2. Section 413.06 – Yard Requirements - is hereby deleted in its entirety.
 SECTION 3. ZONING SCHEDULE B – ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS is
hereby amended to read “Section 411.07B relating to supplementary yard regulations in Ocean
Grove” and all references to Section 413.06 are hereby deleted.
 SECTION 4. Any Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance, be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
 SECTION 5. Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this
Ordinance be adjusted by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect or impair the remainder of this Ordinance.
 SECTION 6. This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication
according to law and upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County
Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 27, 2011
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: July 11, 2011
ATTEST:
____________________________ ______
Richard J. Cuttrell Kevin B. McMillan
Municipal Clerk Mayor

1
ORDINANCE # 11-47
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY
PROVING CLARIFICATION AND UPDATES TO VARIOUS
APPLICATION COMPLETENESS CHECKLIST SECTIONS
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township of Committee, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended
as follows:
 SECTION 1.
Section 802A. Development Application Completeness Checklist
 Section §802: (submission required for all development applications, excluding Use Variances
and Bulk Variances) is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
 All applications for development (except Use & Bulk Variances] shall contain the
following information in addition to the submission checklist information contained
herein (Sec. §812.02 thru §812.05 located at the end of this Article) specific to the
type of submission:
1. Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form,
containing the following information:
2. Applicant’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and e-mail address (if applicable);

3. Owner’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number,
 and e-mail address (if applicable);
4. Interest of applicant in property;
5. Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail address
(if applicable) of applicant’s attorney (if represented) and
 professional representatives;
6. Street address of property;
7. Tax lot and block numbers of property;
8. Zoning district in which the property situated;
9. Description of property;
10. Description of proposed development;
11. Type of application and submission level; 
2
12. Sixteen (16) copies of the required plan folded, no larger than 30”x42”.
One (1) additional copy of the plans no larger than 11”x17”.

13. Sixteen (16) copies of current signed & sealed survey, prepared by a licensed
New Jersey Professional Land Surveyor. One (1) additional copy of the
no larger than 11”x17”.
14. Sixteen (16) copies of the property deed(s)
15. Five (5) copies of Stormwater Management Report.
16. Five (5) copies of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
17. Sixteen (16) copies of Zoning Permit denial (not required for
subdivisions).
18. Five (5) Circulation Impact Study (Per Ordinance Section 811)
if required.
19. Executed copy of “Authorization & Consent Form” part “C”
20. Certificate of Corporation/Partnership, if applicable, “D”
21. Executed copy of Escrow Agreement, Part “E”
22. Verification of taxes paid (this will be verified by the Administrative
Officer).
23. Application Fee and Escrow Fee as determined by Board Secretary, ( or in
accordance with fee schedule).
Section 802B: Completeness Checklist for Use Variance and Bulk Variances
 All applications for Use Variance and or Bulk Variances shall contain the following
 information:

1. Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form,
containing the following information:
2. Applicant’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and e-mail address (if applicable);

3. Owner’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number,
 and e-mail address (if applicable);
4. Interest of applicant in property;
5. Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail address 
3
(if applicable) of applicant’s attorney (if represented) and
 professional representatives;
6. Street address of property;
7. Tax lot and block numbers of property;
8. Zoning district in which the property situated;
9. Description of property;
10. Description of proposed development;
11. Type of application and submission level;
12. Sixteen (16) copies of the property deed(s)
13. Sixteen (16) copies of Zoning Permit denial ( not required for
 sub-divisions)

14. Executed copy of “Authorization & Consent Form” part “C’
15. Certificate of Corporation/Partnership, if applicable, "D”
16. Executed copy of Escrow Agreement, part “E”
17. Verification of taxes paid (this will be verified by the Administrative
 Officer)

 18. Application Fee and Escrow Fee as determined by Board Secretary, (or
 in accordance with fee schedule)
 SECTION 2

 Subsection §812.02 through 812.06 are hereby deleted and replaced by the
 following subsections 812.02 through 812.05.
 § 812.01 – Table (See attached)
 § 812.02 Major Site Plan and Major Subdivision Checklist
 Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form, containing the following
information:
 A. Submission Documents: Prior to issuance of a Certificate of
 Completeness, the Administrative Officer shall determine that the
 documents listed in Section §802 of this Ordinance have been submitted.
B. Plan Requirements: Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness,
the Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have
been shown on, or included with, 
4
1. General Requirements. The plans shall be signed and sealed by
 an architect, professional engineer land surveyor and/or professional
 planner licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, provided
 however, that the sanitary sewer water distribution and storm
 drainage plans and water and sewage treatment facility plans may
 only be signed and sealed by a professional engineer. In addition,
 the following must be submitted.
 (a) Plan shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one (1”) inch
 equals (50’) feet nor larger than one (1”) inch equals ten
 (10’) feet.
 (b) The plan shall be based on monumented, current certified
 boundary survey, prepared in accordance with New Jersey
 Administrative Code 13:40-5.1, “Preparation of Land
 Surveys” dated September 1984 and as amended. The date
 of the survey, shall be shown on the plan.
2. Title Block: The title block shall appear on all sheets in
conformance with N.J.S.A.45:8-27 et seq. (Map Filing Law)
and include:
(a) Title to read “Site Plan” or Major Subdivision”.
(b) Name of development, if any;
 (c) Tax map sheet, block and lot number (s) of the site,
 as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date
 of which shall also be shown;
 (d) Date of original and all revisions;
 (e) Name and addresses of owner and developer, so
 designated;
 (f) Name, signature, address and license number of the
 engineer, architect, land surveyor or planner who
 prepared the plan, and their embossed seal;
3. Zoning data table in accordance with §812.01
4. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and
flood hazard areas of all existing water courses, where such have
been delineated or the limit of alluvial soils, where the boundaries
of floodways and flood hazard areas have not been determined,
and/or such other information as may assist the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment in the determination of floodways
and flood hazard area limits. 
5
5. North arrow and written and graphic scale;
6. Paving and right of way widths of existing street within
two hundred (200’) feet of the site;

 7. The boundary, nature and extend of wooded areas, swamps, bogs
and ponds within the site and within two hundred (200’) feet
thereof and delineation of all wetlands areas soils as required by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
 8. Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants, water
 lines, utility poles and all other topographic features of a physical
 or engineering nature with the site and within two hundred (200’)
 feet thereof.
 9. All existing structures on the site and within two hundred (200’)
 feet thereof, including their use, indicating those to be destroyed
 or removed and those to remain.
 10. Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor
 and basement elevations, front, rear and side setback of all buildings
 and other pertinent improvements.
 11. Existing and proposed public and private easement or rights-of-
 way and the purposes thereof, including conservation easements.
 12. A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at
 one (1’) foot intervals throughout the tract, except if slopes exceed
 five (5%) percent, a two (2’) foot interval may be used, and if they
 exceed ten (10%) percent, at five (5’) interval is permissible.
 Datum shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum (MSL=O)
 and source of datum and benchmarks shall be noted. In addition
 to proposed grading contours, sufficient additional spot elevations shall
be drawn to clearly delineate proposed grading.

13. On site drainage plan:
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which
 shall clearly show the street and site layout and those terms
 which are pertinent to drainage including existing and proposed
 contours as previously required.
 (b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.

 (c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and
 size, invert and grade or rim elevations, grades and all 
6
 direction of flow. The direction of flow of all surface
 waters and all streams shall be shown.
 (d) The drainage shall be designed and accompanied by
 complete drainage calculations made in accordance
 with the latest NJDEP Stormwater Management regulations
 (Ord. Sec §528)
i. Soil boring, including logs and water tables.
14. Off site drainage plans. The plan shall also be accompanied by an
offsite drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage
basin in which the site is located. The terminus of the basin
and existing ground contours or other basis for determining
basin limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off site existing drainage shall be shown with
elevations of inverts and grates to the nearest one tenth of a
foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and maybe
obtained from the County or Township Engineer, any
existing plans for drainage improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event a temporary drainage system is proposed, full
plans of that system shall be shown.

(e) The off site drainage plans shall be accompanied by
profiles of all proposed drainage, showing existing details
pipe sizes, type inverts, crowns, slopes all proposed
structured and connections and design hydraulic grade lines
for all conduits designed to carry forty (40) or more cubic
feet per second. Cross section at intervals not exceeding
one hundred (100)’) feet shall be shown for all open
channels.
15. If required by the Township Engineer, centerline profiles of street
bordering the site, internal roadways, and major circulation aisles
showing existing and final grads and slopes, and pipe sized, type,
invents and grate or rim elevations of drainage and sanitary sewage
facilities.

16. Signature blocks and dates for Chairperson, Administrative Officer
and Board Engineer.
17. Signature blocks required by the map filing law (final plat only) 
7
18. Monumentations as required by map filing law and Ordinance
Section §512.
19. Zone boundaries and the tax map sheet, lot and block numbers and
the names of owners of all properties within two hundred (200’)
 feet of the site.
20. A key map, at a scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals 1,000
feet, showing the location of the site with referenced to surrounding
areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets and any zone
boundary or municipal boundary which is within two hundred (200’)
of the site.
21. The capacity of off street parking areas, and the location and
dimensions of all access drives, aisles and parking stalls. The
location and treatment of existing and proposed entrances and exists
to the public right-of-way, including the possible utilization of traffic
signals channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional
width and any other device necessary for traffic safety and/or
convenience, and the estimated average number of passenger vehicles, single
unit trucks or buses and semi-trailers that will enter the site each day.
22. The location and size of proposed loading docks. (If applicable)
23. The location of curbs and sidewalks.
24. Cross sections showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs
and sidewalks.
25. Sign plan indicating measurements, content, dimensions and design.
26. Proposed lot and block numbers as assigned by the Township Tax
 Assessor.
27. Exterior of lighting plan, including the location, direction of
illumination, amount of illumination expressed in horizontal foot
candles, wattage and drawn details of all outdoor lighting standards
and features.
 28. Street lighting per Ordinance Section §511.B.
 29. Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type
spacing and number of each type of tree or shrub and the location,
type and size, spacing and number of each type of ground cover to
be utilized and planting details for trees, shrub and/or ground cover.
30. Tree Removal Plan in accordance with Section §525. 
8
31. Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilize for refuse
storage areas, outdoor equipment and bulk storage area.
 32. Floor plans an building elevation drawings of any proposed
structure or structures or exsitng structures to be renovated.
33. Location of facilities for the handicapped, including parking
spaces and ramps (where applicable), including construction details
for ramps for the handicapped.
 34. Sectionalization and staging plan. Developer of large uses such
as shopping centers, multifamily dwellings, industrial parks or other
uses proposed to be developed in stages shall submit a sectionalization and
staging plan showing the following:
(a) The anticipated date of commencing construction of each
section or stage;

(b) Plans for separate construction emergency access for the
project in order to avoid occupancy conflict.
 35. Written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to
 indicate the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion, noise,
 glare, air pollution fire hazards or safety hazards. The written
 description shall also include the hours of operation of the use, the
 number of shifts to be worked, the number of employees in each shift,
 the number of vehicles to be stored or parking on the site and
 provisions to be made for site maintenance.
36. List of all Variances and Waivers required or requested.
37. Posting the required application Fee and Escrow Fees as determined by
 Board Secretary, (or in accordance with fee schedule)
§ 812.03 Minor Site Plan and Minor Subdivision Checklist
 Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form, containing the following information:
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the documents listed in Section §802 of
this Ordinance have been submitted.

 B. Plan requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
 Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been
 shown on, or included with:
1. General Requirements. The plan shall be signed and sealed by an
architect, professional engineer, land surveyor and/or professional planner
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, provided however, that the
sanitary sewer, water distribution and storm drainage plans and water sewage 
9
treatment facility plans may only be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer. In addition, the following must be submitted:
(a) Plans shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one (1”) inch
 equals fifty (50’) feet nor larger than one (1”) inch equals ten
 (10’) feet.

 (b) The plan shall be based on a monumented, current certified
 boundary survey, prepared in accordance with New Jersey
 Administrative Code 13:40-5.1, “Preparation of Land Surveys”
 dated September 1984 and as amended. The date of the survey
 an the name of the person who made the survey shall be shown on the
 plan.
 2. Title Block: The title block shall appear on all sheets in conformance with N.J.S.A.
 45:8-7 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
 (a) Title to read “Minor Site Plan” or “Minor Subdivision”;
 (b) Name of the development, if any.
 (c) Tax map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the site, as shown on
 latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be shown.
 (d) Date of original and all revisions.
 (e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated.
 (f) Name, signature, address and license number of the engineer, architect
 land surveyor or planner who prepared the plan, and their embossed
 seal.

 (g) If the plan contains more than one (1) sheet, each sheet shall be
 numbered and titled.
 3. Zoning Data Table in accordance with §812.01
4. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas
of all existing water courses, where such have been delineated or the limits
of alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and hazard areas have not
been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Planning
Board of Zoning Board of Adjustment in the determination of floodway and
flood hazard area limits.

5. North arrows and written and graphic scale.
6. Tree Removal Plan in accordance with §525.
7. The boundary, nature and extend of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof and delineation
of all wetland soils as defined by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
10
8. Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants, water line
utility poles and all other topographic features of a physical or engineering
nature with the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof.
9. Compliance with Stormwater Management Regulations (Ordinance Section
§528), where applicable.
10. All existing structures on the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof
including their use, indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those to
remain.
11. A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restriction applying to
this project.
12. Proposed lot and block numbers as assigned by the Neptune Tax Assessor.
13. A signage plan indicating type, size, location and method of all illumination
of all signs proposed.
 14. Existing and proposed public and private easements or right-of way and the
 purposes therof, including conservation easements.
 15. Sufficient grading information for the Planning Board Engineer to review
 the proposed changes and impact of the project.
16. Zone boundaries and the tax map sheet, lot and block numbers and the
names of owner of all properties within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.
17. A key map, at a scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals 1,000 feet,
showing the location of the site with reference to surrounding areas,
existing street, the names of all such streets and any zone boundary or
municipal boundary which is within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.
 18. The location and size of proposed and existing loading docks (where
 applicable).
 19. The location of curbs and sidewalks.
20. The location of any proposed exterior lighting.
21. The location of any proposed landscaping and screening.
22. Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage areas,
outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
23. Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure or
structures, or existing structure to be removed. 
11
24. Location of facilities for the handicapped, including parking spaces and
ramps (where applicable).
 25. Signature blocks and dates for Chairperson, Administrative Officer and
Board Engineer.
§ 812.04 Use Variance Checklist:
 Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form, containing the following information:

A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the documents listed in Section §802B of
this Ordinance have been submitted.
B. Plan requirements. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following items have been shown
on or included with:
1. General Requirements. The plan shall be signed and sealed by an architect,
professional engineer, land surveyor and/or professional planner licensed
to practice in the State of New Jersey. In addition, the following must be
submitted:
(a) Plan shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one (1”) inch
 equals fifty (50’) feet nor larger than one(1”) inch equals ten (10”) feet.
(b) The plan shall be based on a monumented, current certified
 boundary survey, prepared in accordance with New Jersey
 Administrative Code 13:40-5.1, “Preparation of Land Surveys”
 dated September 1984 and as amended. The date of the survey
 an the name of the person who made the survey shall be shown on the
 plan.
 2. Title Block: The title bloc shall appear on all sheets in conformance with
N.J.S.A.45:8-7 et seq. (Map Filing Law) and include:
(a) Title to read “Use Variance”
(b) Name of the development, if any
c) Tax map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the site, as shown on
 latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall also be shown.
 (d) Date of original and all revisions.
 (e) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated. 
12
 (f) Name, signature, address and license number of the engineer, architect
 land surveyor or planner who prepared the plan, and their embossed
 seal.

 3. Zoning Data Table in accordance with §812.01
 4. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas
of all existing water courses, where such have been delineated or the limits
of alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and hazard areas have not
been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Planning
Board of Zoning Board of Adjustment in the determination of floodway and
flood hazard area limits.

5. North arrows and written and graphic scale.
6. Tree Removal Plan in accordance with §525.
7. The boundary, nature and extend of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within two hundred (200’) feet thereof and delineation
of all wetland soils as defined by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
 8. Signature blocks and dates for Chairperson, Administrative Officer and
 Board Engineer.
9. All existing structures on the site and within two hundred (200’) feet
thereof, including their use, indicating those to be destroyed or removed
and those to remain.
10. Existing and proposed public and private easements or right-of-way and the
proposes thereof, including conservation easements.
 11. Zone boundaries and the tax map sheet, lot and block numbers and the
names of owner of all properties within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.
12. A key map, at a scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals 1,000 feet,
showing the location of the site with reference to surrounding areas,
existing street, the names of all such streets and any zone boundary or
municipal boundary which is within two hundred (200’) feet of the site.

 13. The capacity of off street parking areas, an the location and
dimensions of al access drives, aisles and parking stalls. The
location and treatment of existing and proposed entrances and exists
to the public right-of-way, including the possible utilization of traffic
signals channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional
width and any other device necessary for traffic safety and/or
convenience, and the estimated average number of passenger vehicles, single
unit trucks or buses and semi-trailers that will enter the site each day. 
13

14. Architectural drawings showing floor plans and building elevation drawings of the
new or proposed converted building changes proposed.
15. The location and size of proposed and existing loading docks (if applicable).
16. The location of curbs and sidewalks.
17. A signage plan indicating type, size, location and method of all of
illumination of all signs proposed.
18. The location of any proposed landscaping and screening.
19. A copy of the “Zoning Permit Denial from the Zoning Officer” if
applicable.

20. Posting the required application fee and escrow fees, as determined by Board
Secretary (or in accordance with fee schedule).
21. Any additional information that may be required at time of filing.
§ 812.05 Bulk Variance Checklist:
 Sixteen (16) copies of completed and signed application form, containing the following information:
A. Submission documents. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that the following documents have been
submitted.
1. Completed, signed and notarized variance application.
2. Current survey of property drawn to scale, showing the block and lot
numbers of the property, dimension of lot, dimension of present and
 proposed structure, and the location of all structures in relation to all
 other structures and to the property lines must be shown.
3. Copy of the “Zoning Permit Denial” from the Zoning Officer, if applicable.
4. Signed and sealed drawing of the proposed structure, detail description of
 the proposed finished project.
5. Recent photos of the structure as it exists, showing front, sides and rear
of the property.
6. Posting the required application and escrow fees, as determined by Board
Secretary (or in accordance with fee schedule).
7. Any additional information that may be required at time of filing. 
14
§ 812.01 Zoning Data Table
The following table shall be included on the first (1st) sheet of all plans submitted to the Planning
Board of Board of Adjustment for Site Plan, Minor Site Plan Subdivision Minor Subdivision, or
Variance approval:

ZONE DISTRICT:
 REQUIRED EXISTING PROPOSED
Minimum lot area

Maximum density
Maximum FAR
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot frontage
Minimum lot depth
Minimum front yard setback
Minimum side yard setback
Minimum combined side yard setback
Minimum rear yard setback
Maximum percent building coverage
Maximum percent lot cover
Maximum number of stories
Maximum building height
Minimum improvable lot area
Minimum improvable area –
Diameter of circle (feet)
Off-street parking spaces

Loading spaces
Signs
Existing use or used_______________________________________________________________________________
Proposed use of uses:_____________________________________________________________________________
Existing floor area:_______________________________________________________________________________
Proposed floor area:______________________________________________________________________________

 NOTE: any items that are not applicable to a particular application shall be marked with a “N/A”
SECTION 3 
15
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provision of this Ordinance, be and the same are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 4
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of the Ordinance be adjusted by a
Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair the remainder of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 5
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and upon the
filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
 APPROVED ON FIRST READING: October 24, 2011
 APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: November 28, 2011
 ATTEST:
 _______________________________ _________________________________
 Richard J. Cuttrell Kevin B. Mc Millian,
 Municipal Clerk Mayor 

1
ORDINANCE NO. 12-13
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION 1001 OF THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY AMENDING THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH COUNCIL ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REGULATIONS
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune that the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1
Section 1001 – Affordable Housing Contribution, is hereby amended in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
1001 – AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTRIBUTION
I. Purpose
a) In Holmdel Builder’s Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the
New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees are
authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq.,
and the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable Housing’s
(COAH’s) adoption of rules.
b) Pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide NonResidential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is
authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable
housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are
under the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from non-residential
development.
c) This ordinance establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH’s regulations and in
accordance P.L.2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to
this ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderateincome housing. This ordinance shall be interpreted within the framework of
COAH’s rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
II. Basic Requirements
a) This ordinance shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1. 
2
b) Neptune Township shall not spend development fees until COAH has approved a
plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C.
5:96-5.3.
III. Definitions
a) The following terms, as used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings:
i. “Affordable housing development” means a development included in the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary
development, a municipal construction project or a 100 percent affordable
development.
ii. “COAH” or the “Council” means the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the administration of
housing obligations in accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the
State.
iii. “Development fee” means money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
iv. “Developer” means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
v. “Equalized assessed value” means the assessed value of a property divided by the
current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the
property is situated, as determined in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of
P.L.1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c).
 The following residential fees shall be determined annually by resolution of the Township
Committee, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3, limited to the following:
IV. Residential Development Fees

a) Imposed fees
i. Within the all zoning districts, residential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee up to
one and a half (1.5%) percent of the equalized assessed value for residential
development provided no increased density is permitted.
ii. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5)
(known as a “d” variance) has been permitted, developers may be required to
pay a development fee of up to six percent (6%) percent of the equalized
assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized. However, if the
zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing
of such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted 
3
by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
zoned for two units, the fees could equal up to one and a half (1.5) percent of
the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to six (6) percent of the equalized assessed value for the two
additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed during the twoyear period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
b) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development
i. Affordable housing developments, developments where the developer is
providing for the construction of affordable units elsewhere in the municipality,
and developments where the developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site
construction of affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
ii. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval prior
to the adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance shall be exempt
from development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
A “substantial change” is a revision to an approved preliminary or final site
plan or subdivision which meets any one (1) of the following limitations:*
(a) Five (5) feet of improvements into any yard setback;
(b) Seven (7) feet in building height;
(c) One (1) percent in floor area ratio;
(d) One (1) percent in impervious coverage;
(e) Five (5) feet in building spacing or location;
(f) Three (3) parking spaces;
(g) Five (5) feet in driveway locations;
(h) One (1) percent in site disturbances;
(i) Five (5) feet in lot line locations;
(j) Any change in residential density;
(k) Any new variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70.c or d;
(l) Any such change encumbered above shall not alter the percentage of
low/moderate income housing in an approved project, if applicable.
* A substitution of similar landscaping material, lighting fixtures and signage is
not a substantial change as long as there is no change in approved quantities
or dimensions.
Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit
shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the building
permit is issued. 
4
iii. Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of
a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development
fee.
iv. Single family structures new or renovated that result in no additional
residential structures;
v. Public government agencies and schools, which are classified by the Tax
Assessor as exempt from payment of property taxes (Property Classes 15A &
15C), shall be exempt from paying development fees.
V. Collection Procedures
a) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval, for a
development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its staff to notify
the construction official responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
b) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all requests for the
scheduling of a final inspection on property which is subject to a development
fee.
c) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection,
the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated
equalized assessed value of the improvements of the development; calculate
the development fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the
fee.
d) Should Neptune Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for
final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that
estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth in subsection
b. of section 37 of P.L.2008, c.46 (C.40:55D-8.6).
The development fee shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. .
e) Appeal of development fees

1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by
filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review
and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest bearing escrow account by Neptune Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance
with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2) A developer may challenge non-residential development fees imposed by
filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45 
5
days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest bearing escrow account by Neptune Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance
with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
VI. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
a) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund to be
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of depositing
development fees collected from residential and non-residential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
b) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
1. payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. developer contributed funds to make ten percent (10%) of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached development
accessible;
3. rental income from municipally operated units;
4. repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. recapture funds;
6. proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with Neptune Township’s affordable
housing program.
c) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, Neptune Township
shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of a three-party
escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank, and COAH to permit
COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-
8.13(b).
d) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible
affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
VII. Use of Funds
a) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by
COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any activity
approved by COAH to address the Neptune Township’s fair share obligation and
may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but
are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction
of affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or state
standards, purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be
used for affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to 
6
increase affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
b) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Neptune Township for past housing
activities.
c) At least 30 percent of all development fees collected and interest earned shall be
used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households
in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the
affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30 percent or less of
median income by region.
i. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance,
security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental assistance,
assistance with homeowners association or condominium fees and
special assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs.
ii. Affordability assistance to households earning 30 percent or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or moderate
income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to
households earning 30 percent or less of median income.
iii. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from
the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the
affordability assistance requirement.
d) Neptune Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer any
part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the requirement for
affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e) No more than 20 percent of all revenues collected from development fees, may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits
for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a
new construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an
affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more
than 20 percent of the revenues collected from development fees shall be
expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used
for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH’s monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees
related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council’s
regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
VIII. Monitoring
a) Neptune Township shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of development fees
from residential and non-residential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing 
7
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with Neptune
Township’s housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be
completed on forms designed by COAH.
IX. Ongoing Collection of Fees
a) The ability for Neptune Township to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless Neptune Township has
filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH’s approval of its
development fee ordinance. If Neptune Township fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New
Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of
P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320). Neptune Township shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance, nor shall Neptune Township retroactively impose a development fee
on such a development. Neptune Township shall not expend development fees
after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
 SECTION 2
 Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to
be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding
of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or
reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance.
 SECTION 3
 This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication
as may be required by law and upon approval by the Council on Affordable Housing.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: May 24, 2012
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: June 11, 2012
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, J. Randy Bishop,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 12-21
AN ORDINANCE TO FURTHER AMEND ORDINANCE #00-56
TO REMOVE THE EXEMPTION FROM DISTURBANCE OF
STEEP SLOPE AREAS FOR MARKET HOUSING DEVELOPED
IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE R-5
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE IN THE HIGH POINTE –
ROUTE 18 REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune on December 26,
2000 adopted Ordinance 00-56 entitled “An Ordinance to Adopt the Hi-Tech Park
Redevelopment Plan” and amend the zoning map of Neptune Township to include the Hi-Tech
Park Redevelopment area, and,
 WHEREAS, the Township Committee, from time to time, has adopted ordinances which
amend the above-captioned matter and allow additional uses in the Redevelopment area of the
LI Light Industrial Zoning District, and,
 WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Committee, following required statutory standards,
amended Ordinance 00-56 by adoption of Ordinance 05-47 to allow, in Section 2, west of New
Jersey State Highway Route 18, as an additional use, the development of planned adult
community consistent with the overall design standards of the planned commercial development
in town of developable area, lot coverage, building coverage, building height, and exemption
from disturbance of steep slope area, allowing further that such planned adult community would
be developed in conformance with the requirements of the R-5 multi-family residential zone,
and,
 WHEREAS, the Township Engineer recommends that the ordinance be further amended
to eliminate the provision that allows an exemption from disturbance of steep slope area in
circumstances as authorized by Ordinance 05-47; and,
 WHEREAS, the Planning Board has recommended amendment of the High Pointe –
Route 18 Redevelopment Plan and the development regulations consistent therewith,
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune that Ordinance 00-56 and subsequent amending Ordinance 05-47 be and is hereby
further amended to remove the exemption from disturbance of steep slope areas for market
housing developed in conformance with the requirements of the R-5 multi-family residential
zone. This section of the Redevelopment Plan therefore now reads and is restated as follows:
The Redevelopment Plan, namely Section 2, West of New Jersey State Highway Route 18,
permits as an additional use, market housing developed in conformance with the
requirements of the R-5 multi-family residential zone provided that the same comply with the
overall design standards of the planned commercial development in terms of developable
area, lot coverage, building coverage and building height. The maximum permitted density
shall be ten (10) units per acre and the minimum tract size for any R-5 multifamily
development use shall be ten (10) acres. 
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 11, 2012
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: July 9, 2012
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, J. Randy Bishop,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 13-11
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE VOLUME II, SECTION 201 ENTITLED
“DEFINITIONS” AND SECTION 419 ENTITLED “FLOOD
HAZARD REGULATIONS”
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State
of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, Volume II, Section 201, entitled
“Definitions” and Section 419 entitled “Flood Hazard Regulations” shall be amended as follows:
§201 DEFINITIONS.

Advisory Base Flood Elevation (ABFE). The elevation shown on a community’s Advisory
Flood Hazard Map that indicates the advisory stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE
= SWEL +wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a 1 percent (1%) or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (100 Year Flood Event)
Advisory 0.2 Percent (0.2%) Annual Chance Flood Elevation (AACFE) (500 Year Flood
Event) . The coastal water service elevation of a flood having a 0.2 percent (0.2%)
annual chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. It is expressed in feet
referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).
Advisory Flood Hazard Area (AFHA)Area of Special Flood Hazard (ASFH). The land in
the floodplain within a community subject to flooding from the 1 percent (1%) annual
chance event,
or 0.2 percent (0.2%) annual chance event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
Advisory Flood Hazard Map. The official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Administration has delineated the areas of advisory flood hazards
applicable to the community.
Advisory Flood Hazard Zone A. Is comprised of the areas subject to storm surge
flooding from the 1 percent (1%) annual chance coastal flood. These areas are not
subject to high velocity wave action, but are still considered high risk flooding areas.
Advisory Flood Hazard Zone V. Is comprised of areas subject to high velocity wave
action (a 3 foot breaking wave) from the 1 percent (1%) annual chance coastal flood.
Zone V is subject to more stringent building requirements that other zones because
these areas are exposed to a higher level of risk.
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the mean height of the roof. In a
Special Flood Hazard Area, the building height shall be measured from the Advisory
Base Flood Elevation or Advisory 0.2 Percent (0.2%) Annual Chance Flood Elevation,
whichever is more restrictive.
Porches in FHA. Porches (as defined elsewhere in §201 of the Township’s Land Use
Ordinance) 
2
are permitted in the FHA, however, after accounting for the requirements of stairs as
defined in this section, no porch shall extend farther than ½ the distance from the
building plane to the front and side lot lines and the actual depth of said porch shall be
no larger than eight (8) feet.
Stairs in Flood Hazard Areas (FHA). In the FHA portions of the Township, stairs from
elevated structures shall be able to project into the front yard setback – as defined
herein. For stairs that provide access from the front of a structure, stairs may project up
to fifty percent (50%) of the required front yard setback to accommodate stair access,
but in no case shall they be closer than ten (10) feet from the front lot line. In the case of
stairways that are accessed from the side of a structure, stairs shall be permitted to
project up to fifty percent (50%) of the side yard setback – as defined herein – but may
not encroach further than three (3) feet from the prevailing side lot line.
Stairway Landings in FHA. To accommodate stairwell access to elevated structures in
the FHA and keeping with the restrictions of stairwell projections as defined in this
section, the use of stairway landings may be necessary to effectuate access to a given
structure. For the purposes of this Code, stairway landing is defined as a level,
uncovered platform installed at the point where stairs change direction, either at the top
of or in between flights.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
State or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” if designated as a key structure and
one that would be adversely affected in terms of historic character as
determined by the Municipal Construction Official/Floodplain
Administrator. Alteration of a “historic structure” shall not be considered a
relocation.
§419 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS.
F. Permit Required. A zoning permit, grading permit, a construction permit and a HPC
permit, if applicable, must be obtained before construction or development begins
within any Area of Special Flood Hazard established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). In addition to the normal information required for a
zoning permit application, the following specific information is required to be
reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of an approved zoning
permit:
1. New construction and the substantial improvement of any principal dwelling
or commercial building, including attached garages, in an Area of Special 
3
Flood Hazard (ASFH) shall follow the Advisory Base Flood Elevation (ABFE)
Standard for the type of construction set forth more fully in Chapter XIX
entitled “Flood Damage Prevention”
2. In the areas the base flood elevation has not been determined, the applicant
must determine the base flood elevation in accordance with the current NJ
DEP Flood Hazard Area regulations and obtain the Township Engineer’s
Approval;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing methods for any non residential structure meet the flood proofing
criteria in Sub-section J.2 below;
4. Description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development;
5. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of any ground areas to be disturbed,
filled, graded or re-graded;
6. Certification that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
Federal, State or County Government agency from which prior approval is
required; and
7. All base flood elevation and floodway data used to determine whether the
proposed development is located in the floodway shall assure that the
encroachment provisions of Sub-section K below are complied with. When
base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance
with Subsection C above, the Township Engineer shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and flood water data available
from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer Sub-section J.
below.
8. The height limitations required in each zone district shall not apply to
Churches.
H. Areas of Special Flood Hazard. In all areas of Special Flood Hazard, compliance
with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
standards set forth under Chapter XIX § 19-5 of the General Ordinances of the
township of Neptune entitled “Flood Damage Prevention” shall be followed.
J. New Construction. In all areas of Special Flood Hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in Subsection F, the standards set
forth more fully under Chapter XIX § 19-5.1, §19-5.2, §19-5.3 and §19-5.4 of the
General Ordinances of the Township of Neptune entitled “Flood Damage
Prevention” shall be followed.
L. Architectural Design. In all cases where elevation of a constructed or
reconstructed improvement is either necessary or desirable, façade treatment
shall be necessary to at least two and one half (2 ½) feet from the finished grade
of the building with regard to all sides of the building.
M. Historic District. Construction and reconstruction of buildings in the Historic
District shall be subject to the same standards of Section 419 of the Land
Development Ordinance and Chapter XIX entitled “Flood Damage Prevention” of 
4
the General Ordinances, except for key structures, as set forth in the Land
Development Ordinance or other designated Ordinances. Applicability to the
aforesaid Ordinance or historic exclusion based on the key structure nature of
the building shall be determined after review by the Municipal Construction
Official/Floodplain Administrator. Should the Municipal Construction
Official/Floodplain Administrator determine that the building is subject to §419 of
the Land Development Ordinance and Chapter XIX of the General Ordinances
entitled “Flood Damage Prevention” and that Substantial Improvements are
needed, the Municipal Construction Official/Floodplain Administrator shall issue a
Notice of Determination with regard to the need for Substantial Improvements.
The determination of the Municipal Construction Official/Floodplain Administrator
shall be appealable to the Historic Preservation Commissions (HPC). An
aggrieved party can appeal the determination of the Municipal Construction
Official/Floodplain Administrator to the HPC within forty-five (45) days of the
determination. Any decision of the HPC may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment in the manner set forth in §706 (Appeals and Application to ZBOA) of
the Land Development Ordinance.
N. Building Coverage, Special Flood Hazard Area. In all Special Flood Hazard
Areas within the Township, and only in those cases where residential dwellings
will be elevated or demolished and elevated as part of reconstruction, the
maximum percentage of building coverage may be increased by ten percent
(10%) above the existing building coverage requirement for the zoning district in
which the property lies. This standard shall apply to both conforming and
nonconforming lots.
 All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
 The Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and
publication as required by law.

APPROVED ON FIRST READING: March 25, 2013
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: April 8, 2013
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Eric J. Houghtaling,
Municipal Clerk Mayor
 

ORDINANCE NO. 13-17
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
VOLUME II, SECTION 411 ENTITLED “SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING
REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES”, SECTION 802A
ENTITLED “DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION COMPLETENESS
CHECKLIST” AND SECTION 802B ENTITLED “COMPLETENESS
CHECKLIST FOR USE VARIANCE AND BULK VARIANCE REQUEST”
 BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State of New
Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance shall be amended as follows:

Section 411.07A Porches and Decks (in all areas of Neptune Township other than the
Historic District).
B. Deck setbacks. For single family residential structures, a deck may extend no more
than eight (8) feet into the required front setback area, provided the principal
structure conforms to the front yard setback requirement. For single family
residential structures, a deck may extend no further than fifteen (15) feet into a required
rear yard setback area, provided the principal structure conforms to the rear yard
setback requirements. In no instance shall a deck be closer than ten (10) feet to a front,
rear or side lot line. No deck for a residential structure may extend into a side setback
area. No deck associated with a multi-family residential use may extend into any
required setback area.
C. Porch setbacks. For residential structures, a porch may extend no more than eight (8)
feet into the required front and/or rear setback area, provided the principal structure
conforms to the front yard setback requirement. No porch for a residential structure
may extend into a side setback area. No porch associated with any multi-family
residential use may extend into any setback area. The front yard setback of a porch shall
not be considered the front yard setback of the principal building to which it is attached.
Section 411.07B Porches and Decks (in the Historic District of Neptune Township)
A. Applicability. This Subsection includes regulations for attached, accessory porches and
decks located on properties used for residential purposes within the historic zone
districts.
B. Deck setbacks. For residential structures a deck may not encroach into any setback/yard
areas. No deck associated with a multi-family residential use may extend into any
required setback/yard areas.
C. Porch setbacks. For residential structures, a porch may not encroach into any
setback/yard areas. No porch associated with any multi-family residential use may
extend into any setback/yard areas. 
2
Section 802A Development Application Completeness Checklist
Section §802 [Submissions required for all development applications, excluding Use Variances and
Bulk Variances]
Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the Administrative Officer shall determine that the
following documents have been submitted:
C N N/A* W* ONLY FOLDED PLANS WILL BE ACCEPTED
 1. Twenty-five (25) copies of completed and signed application form which must include the following:
 Provide identification of subject property/properties’ Special Flood Hazard Area Zone
 Executed copy of “Authorization & Consent Form” part “C”
 Certificate of Ownership, if applicable part “D”
 Executed copy of Escrow Agreement part “E”
 Applicant/Owner to provide verification of taxes paid (this will be further verified by the
Administrative Officer).
 2. Twenty-five (25) copies of the property deed(s)
 3. Twenty-five (25) copies of the Zoning Permit Denial [not required for subdivisions]
 4. Required Plans folded no larger than 30”x42”:
 a. Twenty-five (25) copies of current signed & sealed survey, prepared by a New Jersey
Licensed Professional Land Surveyor.
 b. Six (6) copies of Soil Erosion & Sediment Control Plans and proof of submission to
Freehold Soil Conservation District or letter of exemption from FSCD.
 c. Five (5) copies with initial submission and each subsequent submission for completeness
review.
 d. Once the application is deemed complete, twenty (20) additional full-sized paper sets of the
plans plus one (1) reduced-size paper set of the plans no larger than 11”x17”, and one (1) CD
containing the plans in .pdf format must be submitted to the Board Office for distribution.
 5. Six (6) copies of Tree removal Application package in accordance with Section §525
 6. Six (6) copies of Environmental Impact Statement [EIS]
 7. Six (6) copies of Stormwater Management Report
 8. Proof of submission to Monmouth County Planning Board [if applicable]
 9. Copy of Letter of Interpretation (LOI) or Letter of Exemption or proof of submission to New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection regarding presence of wetlands.
 10. Proof of submission to CAFRA [if applicable]
 11. Six (6) copies of Circulation Impact Study
 12. Community Impact Statement [for Major Site Plan and/or Major Subdivision only]
 13. Application Fee $________________ Escrow Deposit $__________________
 In accordance with fee schedule.

C = Complete N = Incomplete N/A = Not Applicable
* Any request for a “WAIVER” must include a written explanation for the request. 
3
Section 802B. Completeness Checklist for Use Variance and Bulk Variance Request.
Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completeness, the Administrative Officer shall determine that the
following documents have been submitted:
C N N/A* W* ONLY FOLDED PLANS WILL BE ACCEPTED
 1. Twenty-five (25) copies of completed and signed application form which must include the following:
 Applicant’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address (if
applicable).
 Property Owner’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address
(if applicable).
 Applicant’s interest in the property.
 Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of
the Applicant’s attorney (if represented) as well as any and all other professional
representative(s).
 Street address of the property
 Tax lot and block numbers of the property
 Zoning District in which the property is located.
 Description of the property
 Description of the proposed development.
 Type of application
 Provide identification of subject property/properties’ Special Flood Hazard Area Zone
 Executed copy of “Authorization & Consent Form” Part “C”
 Executed copy of “Certificate of Ownership” Part “D”, if applicable
 Executed copy of “Certificate of Corporation/Partnership”, if applicable
 Applicant/Owner to provide verification of taxes paid (this will be further verified by the
Administrative Officer).
 Executed copy of “Escrow Agreement” Part “E”
 2. Twenty-five (25) copies of the property deed(s).
 3. Twenty-five (25) copies of the Zoning Permit Denial [not required for subdivisions]
 4. Required Plans folded, no larger than 30”x42”:
 a. Twenty-five (25) copies of current signed & sealed survey, prepared by a New Jersey Licensed
Professional Land Surveyor.
 b. Five (5) copies with initial submission and each subsequent submission for completeness
review.
 c. Once the application is deemed complete, twenty (20) additional full-sized paper sets of the
plans plus one (1) reduced-size paper set of the plans no larger than 11”x17”, and one (1) CD
containing the plans in .pdf format must be submitted to the Board Office for distribution.
 5. Six (6) copies of Tree Removal Application package in accordance with Section §525 (if
applicable).
 6. Community Impact Statement (for Use Variance only)
 7. Application Fee $_______________ Escrow Deposit $_________________
In accordance with fee schedule.
C = Complete N = Incomplete N/A = Not Applicable
* Any request for a “WAIVER” must include a written explanation for the request.
4
 All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but only to
the extent of such inconsistency.
 The Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and publication as
required by law.

APPROVED ON FIRST READING:
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED:
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Eric J. Houghtaling,
Municipal Clerk Mayor
 
ORDINANCE NO. 14-02
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE,
BY AMENDING SECTION 1006 ENTITLED INSPECTIONS
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE,
IN THE COUNTY OF MONMOUTH THAT:
SECTION 1
Section 1006 – Inspections and Tests is hereby amended as follows:
H. The hourly rate for inspections by the Municipal Engineer shall be in accordance with
the hourly rate as established by the prevailing contract with the Township of
Neptune. The hourly rate for inspections by the Township’s Engineering Department
shall be as follows:
1. Director of Engineering and Planning - $131.00
2. Engineering Technician - $ 84.00
3. Assistant Engineer - $ 56.00
SECTION 2
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Township of Neptune, in conflict or inconsistent
with this ordinance, are hereby repealed, but only, however, to the extent of such conflict or
inconsistency; it being the legislative intent that all other ordinances, or parts of ordinances, now
existing and in effect, unless the same be in conflict or inconsistent with any of the provisions of this
ordinance, shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3
This ordinance shall take effect after publication and passage according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 13, 2014
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 10, 2014
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-04
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE, VOLUME II, SECTION 1000, ENTITLED,
“APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES” AND AMENDING
SECTION 1004, ENTITLED “APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP
ATTORNEY”
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State
of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, Section 1000, entitled, “Application and
Escrow Fees”, and Section 1004, entitled, “Approval by Township Attorney”, shall be amended
as follows:
§1000 – Application and Escrow Fees.
A. Fee Schedule. Every application for development shall be accompanied by a
check payable to the Township of Neptune in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. Developer’s Agreement: Where a Developer’s Agreement is required under
this Ordinance, the developer shall pay $400.00 for the preparation and/or
review of the Developer’s Agreement by the Township Attorney as set forth in
Section 1004(C).
§1004 – Approval by Township Attorney.
C. Developer’s Agreements: In addition to those requirements of the Land
Development Ordinance, there shall be required on all major subdivisions and all
major site plans a Developer’s Agreement prepared by the Township Attorney.
The terms of said agreement shall be by the general development of the tract, the
site plan and/or subdivision approval resolution and the following terms and
procedures:
1. Any of the terms set forth in this section and the Land Development
Ordinance concerning performance;
2. The manner in which the performance guarantee shall be held by the
Township with the additional provision that the cash deposit shall be the last
amount of security released by the Township so that the entire performance
guarantee shall be reduced and released prior to release of any cash deposit
posted therein;
3. That the developer shall maintain or shall be responsible for having others
maintain all roads within the subdivision, which maintenance shall include
snow removal, cleanup and repair until final acceptance by the Township, or
approval of a Municipal Service Agreement;
4. The developer shall be responsible for all garbage and refuse pickup and
disposal, including from any buildings or dwellings that may receive a
Certificate of Occupancy on any new street, until final acceptance by the
Township or approval of a Municipal Service Agreement;
2
5. The developer shall be responsible for the cost and maintenance of all fire
hydrants installed on any new street until final acceptance by the Township or
approval of a Municipal Service Agreement;
6. The developer shall be responsible for all street lighting and the cost of
maintaining the same until the date of final acceptance by the Township or
approval of a Municipal Service Agreement;
7. The developer shall deliver to the Township a Certificate of Insurance for
general liability coverage in the amount of not less than
$1,000,000.00/$2,000,000.00 naming the Township as an additional insured
and in the form acceptable to the Township Attorney, which shall remain in
effect until the date of final acceptance by the Township;
8. The developer, its successors or assigns is required to comply with the
Developer’s Fee Ordinance of Neptune Township pursuant to the Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune to the extent applicable.
The developer shall make any Affordable Housing Contribution relating to
that portion of the development allowed by law and applicable to said
development;
9. The developer, its successors or assigns shall repair and maintain all
decorative lighting fixtures, lighting fixture poles, sidewalks and/or trees
installed and approved by final plan, including those decorative lighting
fixtures installed and trees planted within the public right-of-way, if any, as
required by such plan and not on developer’s property;
10. Said Developer’s Agreement shall be in recordable form and the same shall
be recorded in the Clerk’s Office of Monmouth County, with the recording
fees paid for by the developer;
11. The Mayor and Township Committee shall have the right to waive, under
appropriate circumstances, any and all of the provisions that may be required
by this Section and a Developer’s Agreement.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 27, 2014
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 10, 2014
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-05
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE, VOLUME II, §301, ENTITLED, “ZONING MAP” BY
AMENDING THE ZONING FOR BLOCK 1007, LOTS 32 AND 34
FROM C-4 TO R-2
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune in the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, §301,
entitled, “Zoning Map,” shall be amended as follows:
§301 Zoning Map - The Zoning Map previously adopted and amended shall be revised
so as to delete the premises designated as Block 1007, Lots 32 and 34 from the C-4 Rt. 66 East
Commercial Zone and to include the aforesaid Tax Lots in the R-2 Low Density Single-Family
Residential Zone.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The amended Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and the
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 27, 2014
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 10, 2014
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-07
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE, VOLUME II, TO ADD §415.20, ENTITLED,
“CONVENIENCE STORE WITH GAS”
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune in the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance,
§415.20, entitled, “Convenience Store With Gas,” is hereby added to the Land Development
Ordinance of Neptune Township as follows:
§415.20 – This section shall be added as follows:
A. Permitted - Convenience Stores with Gas are permitted as a conditional use in the
following zones: Planned Commercial Development (C-1); Corridor Commercial (C2); Route 66W Commercial (C-3); Route 66E Commercial (C-4); Route 33W
Commercial (C-5); Route 33E (C-6); Route 35 Commercial (C-7); Town Commercial
(B-1); Professional Office (B-2); Marina Mixed Use (B-3); and the Light Industrial (LI),
provided the following standards are met, together with any applicable requirements
of this chapter as follows:
(1) The minimum site area shall be 1.5 acres
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet. On corner lots, the street frontage
on the primary roadway shall be 200 feet and on the secondary roadway the
street frontage shall be 150 feet
(3) There shall be no repair, maintenance or washing of motor vehicles conducted
on the premises, except for customary services provided while refueling motor
vehicles, such as adding vehicle fluids and washing windows, and except for selfservice air pumps for tires and self-service vacuums for motor vehicles
(4) Any fuel pumps, canopy over the fuel pumps and shelter for pump attendants
shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential use located in a residential
zone district, and 50 feet from any property line
(5) Must front on Route 66, Route 33, Route 35 and Asbury Avenue
(6) Maximum canopy height of 18 feet to the peak of the canopy
(7) Parking: one space for every 200 square feet of building footprint plus one space
for each employee at the maximum shift
(8) No direct glare from the lights shall fall upon adjoining streets or properties
(9) The sale, rental or lease of new or used vehicles is prohibited
(10)A four season buffer, 25 feet wide shall be provided on any lot line adjacent to a
residential use or zone. A 10 foot buffer shall be provided to any non-residential use.
(11) All fuel, oil or similar volatile substances shall be stored as per National Fire
Prevention Association Standards
(12) All unpaved areas of the site shall be graded and planted with grass, shrubs,
trees or other suitable landscaping material
(13) There shall be no drive-thru facilities associated with the convenience store
(14) Outdoor solid waste disposal containers and dumpsters shall be contained
within masonry structures with the same fascia material as the convenience store or
gas station building
2
(15)A traffic study by a licensed Professional Engineer in the State of New Jersey
shall be provided; either completed during peak time and season, or adjusted for
such. The study shall include delivery and fuel truck maneuvers as well as on-site
ingress and egress routes
(16) The proposed convenience store with gas is located at least 2,500 feet in any
direction from any other existing convenience store with gas or existing gas station
that maintains a convenience store, only if the existing convenience store is 2,000
square feet or greater
(17) If a car wash is proposed the subject property should be 2 acres in size
(18)Convenience stores shall be permitted provided that:
a. They contain not less than 2,000 square feet and not more than 6,500 square
feet of gross floor area
b. Parking and pedestrian circulation for the handicapped shall conform with the
Americans with Disabilities Act
c. The location and access to the convenience store does not impede or interfere
with vehicular and pedestrian circulation to and from the fuel pumps
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The amended Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and the
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 27, 2014
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 10, 2014
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-08
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE, VOLUME II, §300, ENTITLED, “DISTRICTS” AND
TO ADD §424 TO BE ENTITLED, “HOSPITAL SUPPORT ZONE”
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune in the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, §300,
entitled, “Districts,” shall be amended as follows, and §424, entitled, “Hospital Support Zone” is
hereby added to the Land Development Ordinance of Neptune Township as follows:
§300 Districts – This section, which is part of Article III, entitled, “Zoning Districts and
Zoning Map,” shall be amended to add the Zoning District, entitled, “Hospital Support Zone” with
a zoning symbol of “H-S.”
§424 Hospital Support Zone – Is hereby added as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Hospital Support Zone (H-S) is for those properties
fronting on Route 33, Route 66 and Neptune Boulevard north of Route 33.
B. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the H-S Hospital Support
Zone – NAICS Code 6.2:
(1) Hospitals
(2) Physicians and other professional offices
(3) Clinics and other therapeutic and rehabilitation facilities
(4) Medical and Dental diagnostic offices and laboratories
(5) Sale of surgical and hospital supplies, orthopedic braces, appliances and
shoes
(6) Emergency medical service facilities
(7) Pharmacies and other retail establishments for the sale of medical surgical
supplies, equipment and clothes or goods and prescription eyeglasses
(8) Nursing homes, life-care facilities and extended-care facilities
(9) Restaurants
(10)Adult Care Centers
(11)Assisted Living Residences
(12)Public or quasi-public facilities
(13)Light industrial and manufacturing uses related to medical and dental uses:
a. Sports & Recreation Instruction – 611620
b. Health and Fitness Club – 713940
c. Testing Laboratories – 541380
d. Custom Computer Programming Services – 541511
e. Computer Systems Design Services – 541512
f. Computer Facilities Management Services – 541513
g. Other Computer Related Services – 541519
h. Frozen Specialty Food Manufacturing – 311412
i. Commercial Wholesale Bakeries – 311812
j. Commercial Lithographic Printing – 323111
2
k. Other Commercial Printing – 323111/323113
l. Prepress Services – 323120
m. Medicinal and Botanical Manufacturing – 325411
n. Research Laboratory – 541711/541712
o. Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing – 325412
p. All other miscellaneous chemical product and prep manufacturing –
325320/327110
q. Radio, TV Broadcast & Wireless Communications Equipment
Manufacturing – 334220
r. Other Electronic Component Manufacturing – 334419/335999
s. Automatic Environmental Control Manufacturing – 334512
t. Surgical and Medical Instrument Manufacturing – 339112
u. Dental Laboratories – 339116
v. Film and Sound Recording Studios – 512240/512110
w. Data Center – 518210
C. Accessory Buildings and Uses – An “Accessory Building or Use,” for purposes of
this section is one which:
(1) Is subordinate to and serves any principal building or use
(2) Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal
use served
(3) Contributes to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants or the
principal building or principal use served
(4) Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served
D. Area, Yard and Building Requirements – The following area, yard and building
requirements shall apply in the H-S Zone:
(1) Minimum Size of Lot: one acre
(2) Minimum Frontage:
a. Interior Lot: one hundred (100) feet
b. Corner Lot: one hundred fifty (150) feet
(3) Minimum Width: one hundred (100) feet
(4) Minimum Depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet
(5) Minimum Yard Requirement for Principal Building
a. Front Yard: fifty (50) feet
b. Side Yard: twenty (20) feet
c. Rear Yard: thirty (30) feet
(6) Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Building:
a. Side Yard: fifteen (15) feet
b. Rear Yard: fifteen (15) feet
(7) Maximum Lot Coverage by Building: thirty percent (30%)
(8) Total Impervious Coverage: seventy percent (70%)
(9) Maximum Building Height:
a. Hospital Buildings: one hundred (100) feet
b. All Other Buildings: forty-eight (48) feet/three (3) stories
E. Miscellaneous Requirements.
3
(1) Landscaping and Buffer Requirements:
a. Wherever the property line of an occupied lot in the H-S Zone abuts a
residential use or zone, a buffer of at least fifty (50) feet in width shall
be provided.
(2) Outdoor Storage or Sales of Inventory is prohibited
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The amended Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and the
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: January 27, 2014
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: February 10, 2014
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-39
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY
REZONING CERTAIN PROPERTIES ALONG ROUTE 66 TO C-1
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE AND
REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 14-24
WHEREAS, properties known and designated on the Tax Map of Neptune Township as
Block 233, Lot 1; is currently zoned LI-Light Industrial, and,
WHEREAS, properties known as Block 1002, Lots 1 and 10 are zoned C-4 Route-66
East Commercial, and,
WHEREAS, properties known as Block 9000, Lots 24, 25, 25.01, 34, 35 and 35.01;
Block 9025, Lots 49, 51, 52, 52.01, 54.01, 54.02, 67.01, 67.02, 67.03, and 68; Block 9029, Lots
9 and 10; Block 9033, Lot 13; Block 10000, Lots 5 and 29; and Block 10017, Lots 5 and 6 are
presently zoned C-3 Route 66 West Commercial, and,
WHEREAS, Properties known as Block 10000, Lots 4, 7.03, 7.04, 7.05, 25, 27 and 28;
are presently zoned PUD/R-1 Planned Unit Development, and,
WHEREAS, the aforementioned properties all front along the Route 66 Corridor, and,
WHEREAS, the rezoning of these properties to the C-1 Planned Commercial Zone will
allow for a more consistent land use along the Route 66 Corridor, and,
WHEREAS, the proposed changes in zoning are consistent with the goals and
objectives of former and current Township Master Plan documents. By way of example, the
2011 Comprehensive Master Plan recommends to evaluate the opportunity to consolidate
commercial zoning districts along the Route 33, Route 35 and Route 66 corridors,
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of
Neptune, County of Monmouth, that the Land Development Ordinance of the Township of
Neptune is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1. ZONING MAP AMENDED
The “Zoning Map” of the Township of Neptune is hereby supplemented and amended to
reflect the rezoning of the abovementioned properties to the C-1 Zone.

SECTION 2. REPEALER
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES/REPEAL OF ORDINANCE NO. 14-24
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency, including Ordinance No. 14-24 which is hereby
repealed its entirety.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING:
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED:
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 14-48
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE, VOLUME II, §300, ENTITLED, “DISTRICTS” AND
TO ADD §423 TO BE ENTITLED, “TRANSIT VILLAGE ZONE”
WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Committee tabled Ordinance No. 14-06 at second
reading on February 10, 2014; and,
WHEREAS, the text of Ordinance No. 14-06 is identical to the ordinance herein which
the Township Committee desires to reconsider; and,
WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Planning Board adopted Resolution #14-08 which
expressed the Board’s finding that Ordinance No. 14-06 advances the purposes of the planning
objectives of the Neptune Township Master Plan; and,
WHEREAS, given that Ordinance No. 14-06 is identical to the ordinance herein, the
Planning Board’s findings extend to this ordinance,
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune in the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, §300,
entitled, “Districts,” shall be amended as follows, and §423, entitled, “Transit Village Zone” is
hereby added to the Land Development Ordinance of Neptune Township as follows:
§300 Districts – This section, which is part of Article III, entitled, “Zoning Districts and
Zoning Map,” shall be amended to add the Zoning District, entitled, Transit Village” with a
zoning symbol of
“TV.”
§423 Transit Village Zone – Is hereby added as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Transit Village Zone (TV) District is to provide a form
based code to provide an opportunity for future development that will take place at
an appropriate scale, and takes into consideration how development projects will
impact the aesthetics and function of the public realm.
B. Form A – Commercial Zone – Form A includes the following Blocks and Lots:
Block 162, Lot 67 Block 163, Lot 62 Block 164, Lot 50 Block 165, Lot 13
 Lot 53 Lot 38
 Lot 37
Permitted Principle Uses.
(1) Retail – First Floor only
(2) Restaurants – First Floor only
(3) Personal Service – First Floor only
(4) Office – First and Second Floor only
2
(5) Multi-Family Dwellings – Not permitted on the First Floor
(6) Residential units are not permitted on the First Floor
Minimum Lot Size.
(1) 5,000 sf
Yard and Bulk Regulations.
(1) Lot Frontage: 50 feet minimum
(2) Lot Width: 50 feet minimum
(3) Lot Coverage: 80%
Principal Building.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 0 feet minimum – 15 feet maximum
(2) Side Yard Setback: 0 feet minimum – 15 feet maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 0 feet minimum – no maximum
Accessory Structure.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 24 feet minimum plus principal building setback
(2) Side Yard Setback: 0 feet minimum - no maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 3 feet minimum – no maximum
Density/Intensity Standards.
(1) Maximum Residential Density: 20 units/acre
(2) Principal Building Height: 4 stories/48 feet – 2 stories minimum
(3) Accessory Building Height: 2 stories/20 feet
C. Form B – Medium Density Residential Zone - Form B includes the following Blocks
and
 Lots:
Block 162, Lot 73 Block 163, Lot 72 Block 164, Lot 10 Block 165, Lot 16
 Lot 74 Lot 74 Lot 40 Lot 20
 Lot 70 Lot 60 Lot 42 Lot 25
 Lot 1 Lot 44
 Lot 2 Lot 45
 Lot 9 Lot 41
 Lot 10 Lot 47
 Lot 11 Lot 48
 Lot 49
 Lot 9
 Lot 2
 Lot 8
 Lot 4
 Lot 5
 Lot 7
3
Permitted Principal Uses.
(1) Multi-Family Dwellings
Minimum Lot Size.
(1) 5,000 sf
Yard and Bulk Regulations.
(1) Lot Frontage: 50 feet minimum
(2) Lot Width: 50 feet minimum
(3) Lot Coverage: 70%
Principal Building.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 10 feet minimum – 20 feet maximum
(2) Side Yard Setback: 5 feet minimum – no maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 5 feet minimum – no maximum
Accessory Structure.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 20 feet minimum plus principal building setback
(2) Side Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum, no maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum, no maximum
Density/Intensity Standards.
(1) Maximum Residential Density: 15 units/acre
(2) Principal Building Height: 3 stories/36 feet – 2 stories minimum
(3) Accessory Building Height: 2 stories/20 feet
D. Form C – Lower Density Residential Zone - Form C includes the following Block and
Lots:
Block 163, Lot 69 Block 164, Lot 1 Block 165, Lot 23
 Lot 70 Lot 3 Lot 24.01
 Lot 71 Lot 6 Lot 25
Permitted Principle Uses.
(1) Multi-Family Dwellings
Minimum Lot Size
(1) 5,000 sf
4
Yard and Bulk Regulations.
(1) Lot Frontage: 50 feet minimum
(2) Lot Width: 50 feet minimum
(3) Lot Coverage: 70%
Principal Building.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 20 feet minimum – no maximum
(2) Side Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum – no maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum – no maximum
Accessory Structure.
(1) Front Yard Setback: 20 feet minimum plus principal building setback
(2) Side Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum – no maximum
(3) Rear Yard Setback: 6 feet minimum – no maximum
Density/Intensity Standards.
(1) Maximum Residential Density: 10 units/acre
(2) Principal Building Height: 2 stories/35 feet
(3) Accessory Building Height: 2 stories/20 feet
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The amended Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and the
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING:
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED:
ATTEST:
__________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 15-08
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTIONS 201 AND 410 OF THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY ESTABLISHING “NET DENSITY PROVISIONS
AFFECTING RESIDENTIAL ZONES”
WHEREAS, bulk zoning regulations affecting residential zones per Section 410 of the
Land Development Ordinance include Maximum Gross Residential Density, and
WHEREAS, gross density is defined under Section 201, Definitions, of the Township’s
Land Development Ordinance as “The permitted number of dwelling units per total area of land
to be developed,” and
WHEREAS, establishing a standard formula for calculating a Net Residential Density of
developable units, as defined below, will provide developers and land owners with a clear basis
on which to estimate the maximum permissible residential development on a property
encumbered by environmental, legal, and man-made constraints, and
WHEREAS, the purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Sections 201 and 410 of the
Land Development Ordinance to establish a definition of Net Residential Densities, and to
establish a formula for calculating Net Residential Densities respective to Section, and
WHEREAS, Net Residential Density shall be defined as, “The permitted number of
dwelling units which may be developed per acre of land, exclusive of wetlands and wetland
buffers, water bodies and their riparian buffers, easements, steep slopes, and any and all other
environmental, legal, or man-made constraints.”, and
WHEREAS, Net Residential Density shall be the lesser of either a.) 10 units per acre, or
b.) the result of the following calculation, where G = Maximum Residential Density permitted in
the zone, P = proportion of property encumbered by environmental, legal, or man-made
constraints:
SECTION 1.
Section 201, Definitions, of the Land Development Ordinance is hereby supplemented
and amended to include the definition of Net Residential Density as aforementioned.
SECTION 2.
Section 410 of the Land Development Ordinance is hereby amended to be subdivided
into Sections 410.01 and 410.02, as follows:
§410 ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
§410.01 SCHEDULE B 
See Schedule B for Bulk Regulations by Zoning District.
§410.02 NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY REQUIREMENT
A. For Zone Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, B-3, and any other non-historic Zone
District, the net residential density shall be the lesser of either a.) 10 units per acre,
or b.) the result of the following calculation, where G = Maximum Residential Density
permitted in the zone, P = proportion of property encumbered by environmental,
legal, or man-made constraints:
B. Developable dwelling units shall be calculated by multiplying the net density by the
number of unencumbered acres on the property in question.
SECTION 3. REPEALER
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 4. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: February 9, 2015
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: March 9, 2015
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Mary Beth Jahn,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 15-09
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION 201 OF THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY AMENDING THE DEFINITION OF “IMPERVIOUS
COVER”
WHEREAS, Section 201, Definitions, of the Township’s Land Development Ordinance
defines Impervious Cover as, “Any structure, surface or improvement that reduces and/or
prevents absorption of stormwater into land. Porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed
stone, crushed shell, elevated structures (including boardwalks), and other similar structures,
surfaces or improvements are considered impervious cover. Grass, lawns or any other
vegetation are not considered impervious cover.”, and
WHEREAS, amending this definition to specify the pervious or impervious character of
surfaces and structures for which such character is unclear would enable developers and
property owners to better comply with the Township’s Bulk Regulations, and
WHEREAS, the purpose of this Ordinance is to amend the definition of Impervious
Cover in Sections 201 and to replace the term “Impervious Cover” with “Impervious Coverage”
throughout the document,
SECTION 1.
The definition of “Impervious Cover” in Section 201, Definitions, of the Land
Development Ordinance is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
Impervious Coverage: Any structure, surface or improvement that reduces and or
prevents infiltration into the surface shall be considered impervious; Driveways or other
similar areas that experience loading that are constructed of open cell pavers or stone
shall be considered impervious. Patios that are constructed at grade are impervious.
Decks that are twelve (12) inches or more above average grade shall be considered
pervious. Porous paving, gravel, crushed stone, crushed shells and similar surfaces not
utilized in driveways or other areas that experience heavy loading shall be considered
pervious.
Open cell pavers shall be considered fifty percent (50%) pervious if filled with vegetation.
Grass, lawns or other similar vegetation shall be considered pervious. Water area of
pools shall not be counted as impervious.
Additionally, in this and all sections of the Land Development Ordinance, the term
“Impervious Cover” is hereby replaced with “Impervious Coverage”.
SECTION 2. REPEALER
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: February 9, 2015
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: March 9, 2015
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Mary Beth Jahn,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 15-28
AN ORDINANCE TO FURTHER AMEND AND SUPPLEMENT
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP
OF NEPTUNE BY AMENDING AND ADDING VARIOUS
DEFINITIONS IN SECTION 201 AND ADDING AND AMENDING
SECTION 411.14 – DORMERS; SECTION 412.07 - FENCES
AND WALLS; SECTION 415.06A - BILLBOARDS – SECTION
415.06B, ELECTRONIC BILLBOARDS; AND SECTION 416 -
SIGNS
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, that the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended and
supplemented as follows:
SECTION 1
Section 201 - Definitions - shall be amended and supplemented as follows:
advertising billboard sign - Any structure or portion thereof, situated on private premises, on
which lettered, figured, or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes, except for the
name and occupation of the user of the premises or the products primarily sold or manufactured
on the premises or noncommercial messages, and having an area of 100 square feet or more.
Any signboard carrying a message excepted in this definition that also carries extraneous
advertising of 100 square feet or more shall be considered a billboard.
Billboard, digital - A billboard which displays digital messages which advertises goods,
products, services or facilities not conducted upon the premises where the sign is located. (new
definition)
Dormer - A structure projecting from a sloping roof, containing a window or a vent. (new
definition)
Lot, Corner – A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets where
the interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot
abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than one
hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The front yard area of a corner lot will be established by
the location of the front door. The lot line opposite the front lot line will be considered
the rear lot line and the other two lot lines will be considered side lot lines.
Lot, Through – A lot other than a corner lot which adjoins two (2) street lines which are at
opposite ends of the lot. A through lot shall be considered to have two front yard lines. The
front lot line shall be established by the location of the front door. The opposite lot line
to the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line.
Sign, abandoned - A sign shall be considered abandoned when the business activity or firm,
which such sign advertises, is no longer in operation. (new definition)
Sign, non-conforming - A non-conforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and which by reason of such adoption fails to
conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this ordinance. (new definition)
SECTION 2
Section 411.14 – Dormers – shall be added as follows:
Section 411.14 – Dormers
A. Area. Dormers shall not occupy more than 25% of the roof area on which it
is situated.
B. Height. No part of the dormer shall extend beyond the projection of the
roofline.
Dormer(s)
Maximum
Permitted Area:
25% of roof area
on which it is
situated
Height:
No part of the
dormer can
extend beyond
the projection of
the roofline
SECTION 3
Section 412.07 – Fences and Walls – shall be amended as follows:
B. Fences and walls in non-historic districts. Fences and walls in non-historic zone
districts shall be permitted accessory structures subject to the following provisions:
1. Front Yards.
a) For residential uses, fences shall be permitted to be located in front yards,
provided such fences shall not exceed. four (4) feet in height, as measured
from ground level and shall be constructed so that at least fifty (50) percent
thereof is non-solid and open. Fence types such as board-on-board and
stockade shall be considered solid fences. Decorative walls are permitted to
be located in front yards for residential uses, provided such shall not exceed
two and one half (2 1/2) feet in height, as measured from ground level. Fence
posts, corners, gateways, and wall piers and entryways may not exceed five
(5) feet in height. For corner lots the second front yard now considered a
side yard may have a solid fence, six (6) feet in height extending to the
front buildings line of the dwelling unit and shall not interfere in the site
triangle.
SECTION 4
Section 415.06 – Billboards – shall be renumbered as Section 415.06A and shall be amended
as follows:
415.06A - Billboards
Billboards may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the appropriate Board in
the LI Zone District in accordance with the following conditions:
G. Billboards shall be located no closer than 800 feet to a residential zone or as
indicated by the New Jersey Department of Transportation regulations.
M. Any billboard that legally exists may be converted to a digital subject to the
additional conditions set forth in 415.06B
SECTION 5
Section 415.06B – Digital Billboards – shall be added as follows:
415.06B - Digital Billboards
In addition to conditions set forth in 415.06A Digital Billboards may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the appropriate local land use Board in the LI Zone
District in accordance with the following conditions:
A. Display.
1. A digital billboard display shall remain fixed for a period of at least
eight (8) seconds before changing, and a message change shall be
accomplished completely within two (2) seconds or less.
2. The maximum brightness levels for a digital billboard shall not
exceed three tenths (0.3) foot-candle over ambient light levels as
measured using a foot candle meter at the following preset
distances:
(a) 0-350 square foot signs are to be measured 150 feet from the
source;
(b) 351-650 square foot signs are to be measured 200 feet from
the source;
(c) 651-672 square foot signs are to be measured 250 feet from
source.
Upon the completion of construction, the billboard owner shall
provide a certification of the Township’s Engineering Department
demonstrating that the sign has been preset to automatically adjust
the brightness to these levels or lower. Re-inspection and
recalibration may be periodically required at the discretion of the 
Township to ensure that the specified brightness levels are
maintained at all times.
3. A digital billboard must have installed an ambient light monitor,
which shall continuously monitor and automatically adjust the
brightness level of the display based on ambient light conditions
consistent with the terms of this article.
4. Brightness of digital billboards shall be measured as follows:
(a) At least 30 minutes following sunset, a foot candle meter
shall be used to obtain an ambient light reading for the
location. This is done while the sign is off or displaying black
copy. The reading shall be made with the meter aimed
directly at the sign area at the pre-set location.
(b) The sign shall then be turned on to full white copy to take
another reading with the meter at the same location.
(c) If the difference between the readings is 0.2 foot candles or
less, the brightness is properly adjusted.
B. NJDOT Compliance. All applications for billboards shall comply with the
current New Jersey Department of Transportation regulations.
C. Emergency Services. Digital billboard operators shall coordinate with the
Neptune Township Office of Emergency Management to convey real time
emergency information in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare.
D. Malfunction. In the event the digital billboard sign is found to be in
disrepair, the digital billboard operator must respond to address the issue
within one hour of the notification. The digital billboard sign display must
be deactivated until the issue is remedied. The issue with the digital
billboard sign must be remedied within 12 hours after notification to the
digital billboard operator has been made.
SECTION 6
Section 416 – Signs – is hereby amended in its entirety as follows:
416.01 - Purpose
The purpose of this Subsection is as follows:
A. To protect the public health, safety and welfare by restricting signs which impair
the public's ability to receive information, violate privacy, or which increase the
probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision.
B. To encourage signs that promote a desirable visual environment through creative
yet orderly design arrangements. 
C. To encourage signs that aid orientation, identify activities, describe local history
and character or serve other educational purposes.
D. To encourage the replacement of nonconforming signs by conforming signs
through the strict enforcement of the procedures and requirements of this Article.
E. To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrian, bicyclists and motorists
from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially
attributable to cluttered, distracting, or illegible signs.
F. To promote the use of signs that are aesthetically pleasing and of appropriate
scale to the zoning district.
G. To promote the use of signs that are compatible with the Township’s character.
416.02 - General Provisions
A. Permit Required.
1. An application shall be made to the Zoning Officer for the issuance of a
zoning permit by any person wishing to erect, alter, modify, or expand any
sign, except exempt signs as described in this Article. This shall apply
to all site plans that do not acquire approval at the board level.
2. A zoning permit and any other permits that may be required for the
erection or modification of a sign may only be issued subsequent to the
issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer.
3. If the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed sign does not conform
to the requirements contained herein, the Officer shall instruct the
applicant that Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment approval of
an application for development is required, and the Officer shall further
advise the applicant which Board has jurisdiction.
B. Site plan. On properties involved in an application for site plan review, all signs
shall be approved by the Board as part of the site plan application prior to the
issuance of permits for signs.
C. Measurement. For the purposes of this section, the size of any sign shall be
computed by determining the total area of any sign board, sign face or sign
background at its largest horizontal and vertical dimensions, including framing,
trim or molding. Where there is no framing, the sign area shall be deemed to be
the area of the smallest rectangular figure that can encompass all of the figures
and their supporting logos or elements, if any. For double-faced signs, only one
(1) display face shall be measured in computing the total sign area where the
sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angles formed by the faces are fortyfive (45) degrees or less. Maximum permitted size does not include the
supporting structure, as long as the supporting structure is not designed to
convey a message. The supporting structure shall not in itself convey any type
of message, except for the property address and for permitted appurtenances 
specified in this section.
D. Content. The content or advertising which may be displayed on signs shall be
limited to the identification and location of the premises, identification of its
owners or occupants and information concerning the activities conducted on the
premises or the goods and services offered in connection therewith, unless
specified otherwise herein.
E. Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in
good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated. All signs, together with all
supports, braces, anchors and other parts, shall be kept in continual repair,
including cleaning, painting, replacing of defective parts and otherwise
maintaining a presentable condition. The owner of any painted sign shall be
required to repaint the same when necessary to maintain the sign in good
condition and give it a neat appearance. Lack of proper maintenance shall be
considered abandonment, and the sign shall be repaired, painted, cleaned or
otherwise returned to a presentable condition or removed within ten (10) days
upon notification by the Zoning Officer or Construction Code Official.
F. Appurtenances. Notwithstanding the restrictions found elsewhere in this article
concerning sign face shape and area, sign appurtenances shall be permitted only
when designed as an integral part of the sign, constructed of similar materials,
and graphically compatible in color, shape, position, and scale with the permitted
sign face. Sign appurtenances cannot increase the proposed sign area by
greater than fifteen (15%) percent. Sign appurtenances cannot extend above or
to the side of the sign face by a distance greater than forty (40%) percent of the
sign face height. Sign appurtenances cannot project outward beyond the face of
the proposed sign. Sign appurtenances for Type B freestanding signs only may
identify the name of a retail or office development in accordance with the
foregoing standards.
G. Setback. The sign setback shall be measured from the property line to the
nearest part of the sign, including any base, frame or decorative elements. No
freestanding type A or B sign may be located within fifteen (15) feet of adjacent
residential use.
H. Height. Sign height shall be measured between average grade immediately
below the sign and the highest point of the highest element of the sign. Wall
signs shall not project more than 2’ above the top or beyond the ends of the wall
surface upon which they are placed, nor shall wall signs be placed on a parapet
or similar architectural device such that the sign would project above the
elevation of the roof behind such parapet or other device.
I. Projection. No wall sign may project more than nine (9) (12) inches from the
outer face of a wall and shall not extend over any public right-of-way, unless
otherwise provided for in this article. An awning shall not be construed in any
way to be a wall sign.
J. Change of use, occupancy or vacancy. Whenever any change of use,
occupancy or vacancy occurs, all existing signs no longer relating to the current
use and occupancy of the premises shall be immediately removed. In addition, 
any signs not conforming to any requirement of this Section and removed in
accordance to this requirement shall not be replaced unless it conforms to all
requirements of this article.
K. Nonconforming signs. Any lawfully nonconforming sign may be altered as
follows:
1. Minor and nonstructural maintenance and/or repairs to the sign support
structure and/or frame may be completed.
2. Re-lettering of an existing sign face containing the same specific
message or letters may be completed.
3. An existing sign face may be replaced, provided there is no expansion in
sign area, and provided the general provisions of this Subsection are
satisfied.
416.03 - Design Requirements
A. Illumination. Except for signs in historic zone districts regulated by municipality’s
regulations, signs may be floodlighted, spotlighted or internally illuminated from
the rear with a diffused light source, unless such illumination is specifically
prohibited elsewhere in this Ordinance. All illumination shall be subject to the
following:
1. All lighting sources shall be completely shielded from the view of
vehicular traffic.
2. Such illumination shall not project light above the highest elevation of the
front wall of the building for wall-mounted signs or more than five feet
above ground level for freestanding signs.
3. Internally illuminated signs shall not have a white or light-colored
background or signboard.
3. Where a sign is located on a lot adjacent to a lot used primarily for
residential purposes, such shall not be illuminated in a manner that
permits any light to shine or cause a nuisance to the adjacent residential
use.
4. No illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from
any residential district and visible from such residential district shall be
illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the
use to which the sign pertains is open for business during those hours.
5. No sign shall contain exposed neon, blinking, flashing, flickering, tracer or
sequential lighting. All signs shall remain stationary and constant in
intensity and color at all times.
6. All wiring for permanent illuminated signs shall be installed and
maintained so that it is not within public view. The running of wiring or 
conduit along the exterior wall of a building to access a sign is specifically
prohibited unless in the judgment of the Construction Official there is no
practical way to run the conduit so that it is not within public view.
7. No illuminated sign shall be of such a color or located in such a manner
as to be confused with, or to diminish or detract in any way from, the
effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar official safety or warning
device.
8. Light Emitting Diode (L.E.D) signs may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board in the B-1, C1, C-4, C-5, C-6, and C-7 Zoning Districts, in accordance with the
following conditions:
(1) On properties which contain professional office complexes,
and retail shopping plazas.
(2) One (1) sign shall be permitted and shall not exceed twentyfour (24) square feet in area.
(3) The LED portion of the sign shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(i) The digital message portion of the sign may not
exceed 75% of the total sign area.
(ii) The LED portion of a sign shall change messages at
intervals of no less than three changes per minute.
(iii) The LED portion of the sign shall only be in operation
during the hours of operation of the business,
organization or facility which operates the sign.
(iv) The LED sign may advertise only the products and
services offered by the business, organization or
facility operating the sign and may not advertise
specials or sales offered by any business,
organization or facility.
(v) Permitted messages may be displayed no more than
twenty (20) minutes in any one (1) hour. The balance of
the LED messages shall include community messages
supplied by the Township of Neptune and
informational messages about public safety.
(4) Each business which has a liquor license may have an LED
sign subject to the following restrictions:
(i) No more than one (1) sign of this type shall be
permitted. 
(ii) The digital message portion of the sign shall not
exceed one-third (1/3) of the total sign area or twentyfour (24) square feet, whichever is less.
(iii) The message of such signs shall be limited to three (3)
lines indicating entertainment or special and limited
commercial or professional events.
(5) In addition to the signs authorized in the zones permitting
filling stations, fuel, oil and gasoline filling stations may
display one (1) digital message sign for the purpose of
indicating their gasoline price only. The additional price sign
shall not be attached to the building, but shall be attached to
the approved freestanding station identification sign located
on the site. The size of the price sign shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area.
B. Landscaping. The base of a freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped with
a combination of shrubs, ground cover, flowers or other plant material.
C. Painting and Cleaning Required. All signs shall be maintained in good condition
and have a neat appearance. The owner of any painted sign shall be required to
repaint the same when necessary to maintain the sign in good condition and give
it a neat appearance.
D. Skirting. Freestanding signs shall be skirted to enclose the supporting pole or
pylon of the sign, except for signs in historic zone districts. The skirting shall
extend the full dimensions of the sign at its lower edge from ground to sign. The
skirting shall not be included in the sign size calculation unless it displays a
message.
416.04 - Exempt Signs
The following signs are permitted and are exempt from zoning permit requirements:
A. Real estate signs. Non-illuminated real-estate signs for residential uses,
provided they do not exceed ten (10) square feet in area and four (4) feet in
height; No more than one such sign shall be erected on a property. Real estate
signs for residential uses must pertain to the property on which it is located, and
may not be placed within any sight triangle or public right-of-way. Such sign shall
be removed immediately upon execution of a contract and/or closing for the
lease or sale of the property.
B. Credit or charge card signs. Credit or charge card signs within window areas for
commercial uses, or signs indicating membership in professional or trade
organizations, provided such signs do not exceed one (1) square foot. Credit
card signs may not be pole-mounted.
C. Gasoline pumps signs. Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot attached to
gasoline pumps, provided that their sole purpose is to communicate fuel prices;
D. Traffic, parking, informational and street identification signs. Traffic, parking,
informational and street identification signs that conform to the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) as approved by any Township agency or any
county, state or federal agency shall be permitted in any district or public right-ofway. Any other signs required by any provision of law shall be permitted in any
district or public right-of-way.
E. Political signs. Any political sign that is protected under the free speech
provisions of the United States and New Jersey Constitutions shall be permitted
in any Zoning District, provided that such is not located in a public right-of-way.
F. Temporary window Window advertising signs. Temporary window advertising
signs shall be prohibited in all districts, with the exception of permitted ground
level retail and personal service business uses and eating and drinking
establishments located in the B-1 and HD-B-1 Zone Districts, subject to the
following conditions:
1. Such signs may be constructed of paper, cardboard or plastic, and any
written, numerical, graphic or photographic material or information shall
constitute such a sign.
2. Such signs shall be contained solely within the ground level window of the
subject business.
3. Maximum total area of such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) (30)
percent of the total area of ground level windows, excluding window
portions of doors, fronting on a public street. For the purposes of this
subsection, any window area covered with a permitted permanent window
sign, pursuant to this article, shall be excluded from the calculation of the
total area of all ground floor windows.
4. Information on such signs shall be limited to advertisements for special
promotions, temporary sales and other such similar nonpermanent sales
promotions.
5. Such signs shall be removed after a period of thirty (30) days and shall
have the date of installation printed clearly in the lower right-hand corner
of such, as viewed from the exterior.
6. Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all times.
7. This section shall not be interpreted in such a manner as to limit or
prohibit any business from displaying merchandise in an interior window
display area.
G. Residential uses. Signs for residential uses, based on the type of residential
structure pursuant to the following provisions.
1. Single-family dwellings and shall be permitted one residential nameplate
sign indicating the name and/or address of the occupants. The maximum
size of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area and shall 
not contain advertising of any kind. In addition, one informational sign
indicating the private nature of a driveway, no trespassing or other such
similar private property usage shall be permitted, provided the maximum
size of such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
2. Apartments, townhouses, and other multifamily residential uses shall be
permitted the following:
(a) One wall-mounted residential directory nameplate sign indicating
the name and/or address of the occupants, provided it does not
exceed five (5) square feet in area. Such sign must be located at
the building’s main entrance and may consist of either changeable
lettering or individual nameplates. If the multifamily residential use
cannot be accommodated by such directory sign, then individual
exterior wall-mounted nameplate signs indicating the name and/or
address of each dwelling unit shall be permitted. Said individual
nameplate signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square inches in
area and must be located at the main entrance of the respective
dwelling unit. Nameplate signs may not be illuminated and shall
not contain advertising of any kind.
(b) Two wall signs per building identifying the name or number of the
multifamily structure, provided the maximum size of such sign
shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign. Such sign
may be indirectly illuminated and shall not be backlighted. Or
internally illuminated.
(c) One non-illuminated wall sign indicating the location of the
management office, provided the maximum size of such sign shall
not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
H. Sandwich Board signs in B-1 and HD- B-1 in all zoning districts. Sandwich
Board signs shall be permitted provided they not exceed twenty inches (20”) in
width, forty-two inches (42”) (36”) in height and six (6) square feet in area. Such
signs shall be maintained in front of the business of the property, and
removed at the end of business every day.
I. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association signs.
1. Public safety and informational signs.
2. Bronze memorial signs.
3. Street signs
(a) Standard street signs.
(b) Monument street sign not to exceed twenty-four inches (24”) in
height. 
J. Portable Location Signage. Portable location signage is permitted pursuant to
the following standards:
1. Maximum height Three (3) feet
2. Maximum width Twenty-four (24) inches
3. Maximum area Four (4) square feet
4. Maximum quantity One (1) per location
5. Signage must be associated with a permitted use.
K. Warning Signs. limited to no more than two façade or ground-mounted signs per
occupancy, are no more than three square feet in area, are non-illuminated, and
if ground mounted, are no higher than three feet in height.
L. Special Events Signs. No more than three non-illuminated signs placed in at any
business during the special event or sale which sign shall not be erected and
maintained for more than 45 days prior to the special event or more than 3 days
after the special event.
M. Public Transportation Signs. Signs indicating public transportation stops
provided that they are installed or authorized by the Township or Public
Transportation Authority or agency.
N. Interior Signs. Signs which are located within buildings and are not visible from a
public street or public parking facility.
416.05 - Permitted Temporary Signs
All temporary signs shall require a zoning permit. The following temporary signs may be
installed in all zone districts:
A. Project Signs. Temporary non-illuminated project signs shall be permitted for
residential and new major non-residential development pursuant to final approval
from the approving authority. No more than one (1) project sign shall be
permitted on any lot identifying builders, contractors, architects, engineers or
others associated with the construction of any building situated on any such lot.
Project signs are to be removed within two (2) weeks of the completion of a
project, or if work on the project has substantially slowed.
1. Residential Projects. Such signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet
from all property lines, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in
area.
2. New Major Non-residential Development. Such signs shall be setback at
least ten (10) feet from all property lines, and shall not exceed twenty (20)
square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in height.
B. Freestanding or wall mounted real-estate signs of up to twenty (20) square feet
for non-residential uses may be erected in non-residential zones for a period of
ninety (90) days. A window sign of up to twelve (12) square feet may be used for
the same purposes. Freestanding signs must be setback from all property lines
at least ten (10) feet. The Zoning Officer may extend the ninety (90) day period
by an additional ninety (90) days if it is shown that this additional time period is
necessary to facilitate the sale or rent of a particular site.
C. Contractor signs are permitted in all zone districts to a maximum area of fifteen
(15) square feet. Such sign shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from all
property line, and may not be illuminated. Contractor signs may be permitted for
the duration of the exterior improvement activity, and must be removed within two
(2) weeks of completion of improvement.
416.06 - Prohibited Signs
The following signs shall be prohibited in all zone districts within the Township of Neptune,
unless otherwise specified within this Ordinance:
A. Signs utilizing inert ionized gas sign lighting, commonly called neon, when the
neon tube is visible, including window surrounds and similar inert gas illumination
with or without a distinct message;
B. Signs in the public right-of-way unrelated to the public health, safety and welfare;
C. Signs which project more than nine (9) inches from a wall surface, except for
projecting signs in historic zone districts which are governed by 416.08;
A. Any sign for advertising purposes that mimics or is substantially similar to a
public purpose sign; Signs which use the words stop, look, caution, danger or
any similar wording which may confuse or mislead the public.
B. Signs with lights or illuminations which flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink,
flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation;
C. Signs within designated sight triangles, and signs which directly obstruct driver’s
lines-of-sight;
D. Non-public banners that stretch across a public right-of-way between telephone
poles, trees or other structure; No advertising flags, banners, pinwheels, portable
signs, or similar advertising devices shall be permitted.
E. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on or above the roof of a building.
F. Freestanding signs of any type in historic zone districts;
G. Reader board signs;
K. Any sign that, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, presents an immediate danger
to the public health, safety or welfare;
H. Signs with continuing visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement;
I. Signs that advertise or identify a use which has ceased operation;
J. Any illegal non-conforming sign, as defined herein;
K. The continuous parking or storage of a motor vehicle or other mobile unit
displaying an advertising message;
L. Signs containing obscene, pornographic or lewd messages;
M. Signs that obstruct a fire escape, door, window or other required access way;
N. Signs that are not accessory to a principal use on a property;
O. Painted Signs. No sign may be painted directly on the surface of any building
façade, wall, fence or similar structure.
T. Signs placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which
extends above the eave of the roof of any building.
P. Signs painted on or attached to any trees, rocks, fence posts, utility poles or
similar structures or objects.
Q. Commercial Advertising Billboard Signs.
1. the further erection, construction or enlargement of signs known as
commercial advertising billboards is prohibited.
2. Existing commercial advertising billboards may be repaired or maintained
in the same location, but may not be enlarged, relocated to another lot, or
replaced in the event of the total destruction thereof.
R. String of lights outlining rooflines, door, windows, or wall edges of any building
except seasonal decorations.
S. Any sign not expressly permitted by this ordinance is prohibited
416.07 - Permitted Signs
The following signs shall be permitted in all zones except historic Non-Historic zone districts
per Zoning Schedule C. Standards for permitted signs in historic zone districts are contained in
§416.08.
A. In commercial, industrial and mixed use zones one freestanding sign in
accordance with the following standards shall be permitted.
1. Where a lot has multiple street frontages, then two (2) freestanding signs
subject to the following standards shall be permitted. Where two (2)
freestanding signs are permitted by virtue of multiple street frontage, each 
permitted sign shall be allowed to have the maximum square footage
allowed based on the formulas shown below. In addition, the sign area
allowed may be transferred from one (1) sign to another; provided, that no
freestanding sign shall exceed four hundred square feet in area.
2. Where multiple signs are permitted because of multiple street frontages,
the signs may be erected on the same street frontage.
3. For double-faced signs, each sign face can have the maximum square
footage allowed.
4. Landscaping. All freestanding signs shall be placed within landscaped
areas.
5. Permitted Areas.
Floor Area of Building Single Use Development Multiple Use
Development
0--1,500 s.f. 35 s.f. 60 s.f.
1,501--5,000 s.f. 35 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 60 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
additional 50 s.f. of each additional 40 s.f.
floor area over 1,501. of floor area over 1,501.
5,001--50,000 s.f. 100 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 50 s.f. of
additional 500 s.f. of 150 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
floor area over 5,001. each 300 s.f. of floor area
over 5,001.
Over 50,001 s.f. 190 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per each 300 s.f. plus 1 s.f. per
additional 1,000 s.f. of each additional 1,000
floor area over 50,001 s.f. of floor area over
up to a maximum size of 300 s.f. 50,001 up to a maximum size
of 400 s.f.
*In computing allowable sign size, only the footprint of the structure can be used. The floor area
of gas station and drive-thru canopies cannot be applied toward the freestanding sign
allowance.
The allowable sign size is related to building size.
Step 1: Determine the square footage of the building:
Building size (in square feet): ________________ (This will be inserted in the formula below)
Step 2: Complete the appropriate allowable signage formula:
SINGLE USE DEVELOPMENT:
If the building is 0 – 1,500 square feet in size, you are allowed a 35 square foot sign.
If the building is 1,501 – 5,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 1,501 = ÷ 50 = + 35 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 5,001 – 50,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 5,001 = ÷ 500 = + 100 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 50,000 + square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 50,001 = ÷ 1,000 = + 190 =
Building size Allowed sign size
MULTIPLE USE DEVELOPMENT:
If the building is 0 – 1,500 square feet in size, you are allowed a 60 square foot sign.
If the building is 1,501 – 5,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 1,501 = ÷ 40 = + 60 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 5,001 – 50,000 square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 5,001 = ÷ 500 = + 100 =
Building size Allowed sign size
If the building is 50,000 + square feet in size, complete the following:
 - 50,001 = ÷ 1,000 = + 300 =
Building size Allowed sign size
The “allowed sign size” may be placed on each side of the freestanding sign.
6. Setback. Freestanding signs shall be setback from the property line ¾ of
the height of the sign.
7. Height.
Sign Area Permitted Height
150 sq.ft or less 15 ft.
151 sq.ft. - 190 sq.ft 20 ft.
191 sq.ft. - 400 sq.ft 40 ft.
B. Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted signs may be constructed as follows (see
also Appendix D):
1. Single tenant structures.
(a) Size:
48 square feet, or oneand-five tenths (1.5)
square feet for each
lineal foot of wall face
that the sign is mounted
on, whichever is less.
(b) Mounting Height:
8’ maximum (including
hardware) and not to
extend more than 2'
above the roof line.
(c) Quantity: 1 maximum
(d) Maximum permitted
horizontal sign dimension: 75% of the wall face
(e) Projection: 1' maximum
2. Multi-tenant retail structures.
(a) Size:
48 square feet, or one-andfive tenths (1.5) square feet
for each lineal foot of wall
face that the sign is
mounted on, whichever is
less.
(b) Mounting Height:
8’ maximum (including
hardware) and not to
extend more than 2' above
the roof line.
(c) Quantity: 1 per tennant
(d) Maximum permitted
horizontal sign dimension: 75% of the wall face
(e) Projection: 1' maximum
3. Secondary wall-mounted signs.
(a) Business uses that have a side or rear building facade fronting on
a parking lot or face a secondary street frontage may have a
secondary wall-mounted sign not to exceed 50% of the area of the
primary building sign. This provision shall not apply in situations
where a parking lot is located between a building and a public
street.
(b) Service station canopies may have a secondary wall-mounted
sign not to exceed 50% of the area of the primary building sign. In
no instance may a service station canopy sign face a residential
use, or have changeable lettering.
4. Wall-mounted signs on larger buildings in Planned Development Districts.
Buildings and uses in the Planned Development Districts (LI, PUD and C1) in excess of 75,000 square feet in floor area may provide two (2) wall
signs per building with a maximum area of up to five (5%) percent of the
wall area, not to exceed two hundred and forty (240) square feet.
C. Awning signs. Awning signs may be constructed as follows (see also Appendix
D):
1. Quantity: maximum 2 per awning
2. Sign face vertical
dimension:
max. eighteen (18) inches
3. Letter/number/
character/image height: 10” maximum
4. Letter/number/
character/image width: 1’ maximum
5. Colors: 2 maximum including sign
lettering
6. Awning signs shall only be permitted on first-story
awnings.
7. The minimum height from ground level to lowermost
portion of awning shall be eight (8) feet.
8. The maximum horizontal projection dimension of an
awning from the building wall, including any
appurtenances, shall not exceed five (5) feet. Such
awning may project over a public sidewalk only and shall
not extend over any other portion of any other public rightof-way. No canopy may project over a public right-of-way,
unless approved by the Township Committee.
9. The maximum vertical dimension of an awning shall not
exceed the horizontal projection dimension.
10. The sign shall only be located on a portion of the awning
that is both parallel to the vertical orientation of the
building wall to which it is attached and is parallel to the
building line of the building wall to which it is attached.
This portion is more commonly known as the “valance.”
11. The horizontal dimension of the sign shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet, or sixty percent (60%) of the length of the
awning occupied by the use, whichever is less.
D. Directory Nameplate.
1. Size: maximum 12 square feet
2. Height: maximum 5’
3. Quantity: maximum 1 per lot
4. A directory sign may not be located so as to be visible from a
public street or any adjacent property.
E. Directional Signs.
1. Size: maximum 3 square feet
2. Height:maximum 3’
3. Setback: minimum 0’
4. No directional sign may be located within a sight triangle.
5. A directional sign must contain a clear message which directs the
flow of traffic, and should be designed to blend harmoniously with
other on-site signage
6. No directional sign shall extend into or over any public right-ofway.
F. Permanent Window Signs. A business establishments located below the
third story of a building shall be permitted to display permanent window
sign(s), subject to the following regulations:
1. Sign Content. The sign(s) shall be limited to the resident business
name, resident business logo, resident business type, street
address, and/or telephone/fax number. No permanent window
sign shall depict brand names and/or logos of products,
commodities, services, etc. other than those owned by the local
resident business establishment itself.
2. Sign materials and placement. A permanent window sign shall
be:
(a) Professionally painted on the interior side of a window;
and/or
(b) A fixture constructed by a professional sign manufacturer
hung on the interior side of a window
3. Sign Area. Maximum area of any and all permanent window signs
shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total window area
within which it is displayed, not to exceed eighteen (18) square
feet.
4. Quantity. One (1) sign per business per window shall be
permitted, up to a maximum of two (2) signs per business on any
wall, not to exceed four (4) signs per business on any building.
5. Location. No permanent window sign shall be permitted in a
window above the second-story of a building.
6. Visibility. No permanent window sign shall be displayed in a
window unless it is visible from a public street or an approved
parking area.
7. Illumination. The sign(s) may be internally illuminated or
externally illuminated from the interior of the building. Framing of 
a window with neon lights and/or tubing shall not be permitted as
a method of illumination for window signs.
G. Window Stencil Signs. For all non-residential properties where one or
more businesses or uses occupy a single building, side and rear
entrances may contain a sign indicating the occupant of that space. Such
signs shall be stenciled or professionally lettered. Each letter shall be
three (3) inches to five (5) inches in height. No information other than the
name of the occupant may be included in the sign. Upon the change of
the occupant, the sign must be removed or relettered with the name of
the new occupant.
416.08 -Signs in Historic Districts
A. Applicability. This Sub-section applies to all signs in any historic zone district.
B. Illumination.
1. No sign may be internally illuminated.
2. Neon signs shall not be permitted.
3. All illuminated signs shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. each night during
all seasons of the year.
C. Materials. Signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or other solid or rigid
material.
D. Permitted Signs. The following types and sizes of signs shall be permitted:
1. Professional nameplates not exceeding one (1) square foot in area.
2. Bulletin boards not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area for religious
or other semi-public and public institutions when they are located on the
same premises as the buildings.
3. Signs for ground floor business establishments, other than historic hotels,
shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations:
(a) Wall mounted signs. One (1) wall-mounted sign having a
maximum area not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet and one (1)
wall-mounted sign having a maximum area not to exceed six (6)
square feet. Where the business is located at a corner lot, four (4)
signs are permitted; two (2) on each road frontage meeting the
above specified area requirements. The maximum height of such
signs shall be fifteen (15’) feet or the sill level of the second (2nd)
story, whichever is less. The signs shall be applied flat against the
wall and shall conform to all other applicable requirements
contained herein.
(b) Projecting signs. One (1) projecting sign may extend from the
primary building face to a maximum horizontal dimension of 42”.
Such sign is to be perpendicular to a building face, and shall be
situated to be visible to those traversing sidewalk areas. The
maximum area for such a sign shall be five (5) square feet. The
bottom of the sign must be a minimum eight (8) feet from ground
level.
(c) Awnings signs. A maximum of two (2) awning signs shall be
permitted. Such signs may only state the name of the
establishment associated with the awning. Maximum image height
shall be ten (10) inches, and maximum image width shall be one
(1) foot. Awning signs shall only be permitted on first-story
awnings. The sign shall only be located on a portion of the awning
that is both parallel to the vertical orientation of the building wall to
which it is attached and is parallel to the building line of the
building wall to which it is attached. This portion is more
commonly known as the “valance.” The horizontal dimension of
the sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, or sixty percent (60%) of
the length of the awning occupied by the use, whichever is less.
The minimum height from ground level to lowermost portion of
awning shall be eight (8) feet. The maximum horizontal projection
dimension of an awning from the building wall, including any
appurtenances, shall not exceed five (5) feet. Such awning may
project over a public sidewalk only and shall not extend over any
other portion of any other public right-of-way. No canopy may
project over a public right-of-way, unless approved by the
Township Committee. The maximum vertical dimension of an
awning shall not exceed the horizontal projection dimension.
(d) Permanent window signs. Permanent window signs shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations:
(i) Sign Content. The sign(s) shall be limited to the resident
business name, resident business logo, resident business
type, street address, and/or telephone/fax number. No
permanent window sign shall depict brand names and/or
logos of products, commodities, services, etc. other than
those owned by the local resident business establishment
itself.
(ii) Sign materials and placement. A permanent window sign
shall be professionally painted on the interior side of a
window; and/or a fixture constructed by a professional sign
manufacturer hung on the interior side of a window.
(iii) Sign Area. Maximum area of any and all permanent
window signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
total window area within which it is displayed, not to
exceed twelve (12) square feet.
(iv) Quantity. One (1) sign per business per window shall be
permitted, up to a maximum of two (2) signs per business
displayed on any building.
(v) Location. No permanent window sign shall be permitted in
a window above the first-story of a building.
(vi) Visibility. No permanent window sign shall be displayed in
a window unless it is visible from a public street or an
approved parking area.
(vii) Illumination. The sign(s) may be internally illuminated or
externally illuminated from the interior of the building. Neon
light window framing shall not be permitted as a method of
illumination for window signs.
4. Signs for historic hotels, rooming houses and other transient residential
establishments shall be permitted based on the number of guest rooms,
as follows:
(a) Under 20 rooms. One (1) sign with a maximum area of ten (10)
square feet and one (1) sign with a maximum area of four (4)
square feet. Wall mounted signs. One (1) wall-mounted sign
having a maximum area not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet and
one (1) wall-mounted sign having a maximum area not to exceed
six (6) square feet.
(b) Each permitted accessory use is permitted one wall mounted sign
not to exceed fifteen square feet in area on each street frontage.
(c) Awning signs as described in §416.08.D.3.c.
(d) Signs shall not be located in the historic flared open space area.
5. Memorial signs or tablets not to exceed two (2) square feet in area are
permitted, when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material or
when cut into the masonry surface of the building to commemorate the
name of the building and/or the date of construction.
6. Temporary signs not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in area denoting
the architect, engineer or contractor when placed on the work under
construction shall be permitted for three (3) months and renewable for
five (5) month periods.
7. A single real estate sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area and
forty-eight (48) inches in height, on the property which advertises the
sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is located or a
name sign for a residential building shall be permitted, when attached to
the lowest floor of the building, parallel to the street.
8. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, notice of dangerous
conditions and other temporary emergency or non-advertising signs of
public interest shall be permitted by approval of the Neptune Chief of
Police in cases of emergency or the Township Committee in all other
cases.
E. Signage for Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (OGCMA) shall be
permitted, as follows:
1. Internally illuminated religious symbols sixteen (16’) feet in height placed
at an elevation not to exceed seventy-five (75) feet high.
2. Wall mounted identification signs not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
area with a maximum height of fifteen (15’) feet.
3. Wall mounted informational signs not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in area
with a maximum height of fifteen (15’) feet.
4. Public safety and informational signs.
5. Bronze memorial signs.
6. Street signs
(a) Standard street signs per Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(b) Monument street signs not to exceed twenty-four (24”) inches in
height.
416.09 - Enforcement
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of all regulations
contained within this article. The Zoning Officer may initiate enforcement procedures if any of
the regulations contained herein are in violation. The Zoning Officer may call upon the Chief of
Police and any duly authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this title. If in the opinion
of the Zoning Officer a particular sign presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety
and welfare, appropriate action may be initiated to cause said sign to be immediately removed.

SECTION 7. REPEALER
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 8. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
SECTION 9. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 10. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 22, 2015
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: July 13, 2015
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Deputy Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 15-49
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION 419 OF THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE ENTITLED FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS BY
AMENDING THE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State
of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, Volume II, Section 419 entitled “Flood
Hazard Regulations” shall be amended as follows:
SECTION 1.
Subsection 419L shall be amended in its entirety replaced with the following:
L. Architectural Design. In all cases where elevation of a constructed or
reconstructed improvement is either necessary or desirable, façade treatment
shall be necessary to at least two and one half (2 ½) feet from the finished grade
of the building with regard to all sides of the building. Architectural treatment
shall be consistent with the balance of the structure. The following treatment
alternatives are not permitted: parging; concrete block; stucco (unless the entire
structure is comprised of stucco); and lattice. Structures constructed on piles are
subject to the requirements herein.
SECTION 2.
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3.
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
SECTION 4.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 5.
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: October 26, 2015
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: November 9, 2015
___________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Deputy Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 16-20
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION 201 AND ZONING
SCHEDULE B OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF
THE TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY DEFINING “EFFECTIVE
LAND AREA” AND AMENDING THE MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA
RATIO CALCULATION
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune, County of
Monmouth that the Land Development Ordinance be and is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1.
SECTION 201 – DEFINITIONS, shall be amended to include the following:
Effective Land Area- The area of the lot after first reducing the total area by portions of land
subject to certain constraints as provided in the following schedule:
Constraint
Percentage of Area of Constraint by which Lot Area Is To Be
Reduced
Bodies of water 100
Flood areas1 100
Wetlands2 100
Slopes 15% to 25%3 50
Slopes 25% to 35%3 75
Slopes 35% and
greater3
100
1
DEP or other equally reliable source.
2
Verification by the NJDEP.
3
Calculated within two-foot contour intervals from aerial topography or survey by a New
Jersey licensed land surveyor.
SECTION 2.
ZONING SCHEDULE B- ZONING DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS, shall be amended
as follows:
(For the following amendments, sections marked in bold, italicized and underlined
shall indicate an addition, and words marked with a strikethrough shall indicate a deletion. All
other portions of the ordinances shall otherwise remain unchanged)
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
B-1, C-4, C-6, C-7 0.6***
B-2 1.0***
B-3 0.7***
C-1 0.6 0.8***
C-2, C-3, C-5 0.6 0.8***
*** Floor Area Ratio shall be calculated using the Effective Land Area

SECTION 3. REPEALER
The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the aforementioned ordinance not
specifically amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 4. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All other Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision,
clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: May 23, 2016
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: June 27, 2016
___________________________ _________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 16-23
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING SECTION
412 OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY AMENDING THE PROVISIONS
FOR TEMPORARY TRAILERS, DUMPSTERS, PORTABLE
STORAGE UNITS AND LIKE PORTABLE ON-DEMAND
STORAGE CONTAINERS WHEN PLACED ON A PUBLIC
ROADWAY WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township of Neptune of the County of Monmouth in the State
of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance, Section 412.21, Subsection H, shall be
amended as follows (added language is reflected in bold):
§412.21 TEMPORARY TRAILERS, DUMPSTERS, PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS AND
LIKE PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE CONTAINERS
H. Prohibition of dumpsters, portable storage units or like portable ondemand storage containers in certain private property areas and in public
areas.
1. It shall be generally unlawful for any person to construct or place a
storage container for garbage, such as a “dumpster” or a storage
container for portable on-demand storage, such as a portable
storage unit as defined in this ordinance upon any front yard of
private property or upon any Township owned or unaccepted
dedicated street, avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place. No
permit shall be issued for such use or storage of dumpsters,
portable storage units or like portable on-demand storage
containers unless the applicant establishes a hardship by
satisfying one or more of the following criteria:
(a) Narrowness of distance between property lines making
placement of the dumpster, portable storage units or like
portable on-demand storage containers elsewhere other
than at the front of said private property or at a public area
difficult if not impossible.
(b) Parking needs affected.
(c) Traffic flow affected.
(d) Other reasons establishing the necessity of placement on
the front of private property or on a public area.
2. Should the applicant demonstrate a hardship warranting
placement of a dumpster, portable storage unit or like portable ondemand storage container on the front yard of private property or
on a public area as defined above, the Director of Code 
2
Enforcement shall issue a permit with regards to dumpsters,
portable storage units or similar portable on-demand storage
containers on a temporary basis, in the case of a dumpster for a
period not to exceed ninety (90) days and in the case of a
portable storage unit or like portable on-demand storage
containers not to exceed thirty (30) days. Extensions cannot be
granted for more than the aforesaid time period set unless a
longer period is granted by site plan approval before the Planning
Board or Zoning Board. Both a permit for a dumpster and a
permit for portable storage container shall require a fee of Thirty
($30.00) Dollars.
3. Should a permit be issued for the placement of a dumpster,
portable storage unit or like portable on-demand storage
container on a public area, as defined above in Paragraph 1,
within the Ocean Grove Historic District, the dumpster,
portable storage unit or like portable on-demand storage
container shall not be permitted in the public area on a
weekend during the summer season. Weekend shall be
defined as between Friday at 3:00 p.m. and Monday at 8:00
a.m. Summer season shall be defined as between the dates
of May 15th and September 15th. This prohibition shall extend
to Tuesday at 8:00 a.m. should the weekend be followed by
Memorial Day, Labor Day or the 4th of July legal holiday.
4. Any permit may be revoked by the Director of Code Enforcement
if it is determined that the existence of the dumpster, portable
storage unit or like portable on-demand storage container is
affecting traffic flow or affecting the safety or welfare of the public.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
The Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: June 27, 2016
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: July 25, 2016
ATTEST:
____________________________ ______________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 16-32
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
NEPTUNE BY AMENDING SECTION 605, ENTITLED, “POWERS
AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION”, SECTION 913, ENTITLED, “PENALTY;
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS” AND SECTION 1105,
ENTITLED, “PENALTIES”
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of Neptune in the
County of Monmouth in the State of New Jersey that the Land Development Ordinance be and
is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1
Section 605 be and is hereby amended as follows:
§605 – Powers and Responsibilities of the Historic Preservation Commission.
Subsection J and Subsection O are rescinded.
SECTION 2
Section 913 be and is hereby amended as follows:
§913 – Penalty; Certificate of Appropriateness.
A. Failure to Obtain Approval or Comply with Approval
Any person who shall undertake any activity in violation of any provisions relating
to historic zoned districts and designated historic sites without first having
obtained a Certificate of Appropriateness or any other required approval, or who
fails to comply with the terms, conditions and limitations of an approval granted,
shall be deemed in violation of these provisions.
B. Service of Notice of Violation
Upon learning of the violation, the Township Zoning Officer or Zoning Officer’s
designee shall personally serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is
occurring a notice describing the violation in detail. The violator shall be required
to file an application for the Certificate of Appropriateness to the Historic
Preservation Commission or in case of non-compliance with an existing
Certificate of Appropriateness, comply with said approval within 10 days of
receipt of the Notice of Violation. If the owner cannot be personally served within
the municipality with the notice, a copy of the same shall be posted on the site in
question, and a copy shall be sent by Certified Mail/RRR to the owner at his or
her last known address as it appears on the Township Tax Rolls.
C. Issuance of Summons and Complaint
In the event that the violator fails to file an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, or comply with a prior Certificate of Appropriateness granted
within the specified 10 day period following service and/or posting on the site in
question, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer or Zoning Officer’s designee
shall cause to be issued a Summons and Complaint, returnable in the Municipal
Court charging violation of the Land Development Ordinance. Each separate
day the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation of the
Land Development Ordinance.
D. Penalties Designated
All penalties and form of relief available under this Section shall be pursuant to
Section 1105 of the Land Development Ordinance.
Subsection E shall be rescinded and superseded by Section 1105.
SECTION 3
Section 1105 be and is hereby amended as follows:
§1105 – Penalties.
A. Fines
(1) Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law
to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding
$2,000.00 as such court in its discretion may impose; or if the parties so
convicted be a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such
term not exceeding 90 days as such court in its discretion may impose, or
appear at community service not exceeding 90 days or any combination
thereof as such court in its discretion may impose. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Additional Remedies
(1) In addition to the remedy or remedies hereinbefore provided, any person,
persons, company or corporation violating the Land Development
Ordinance or any provision or section thereof, may be proceeded against
by the Township of Neptune or by the Zoning Officer of the Township of
Neptune or any designee of the Township of Neptune or Zoning Officer or
by the owner of any property in the Township of Neptune by appropriate
action or by proceeding in equity or otherwise to prevent and enjoin any
threatened violation or any existing violation or continuing violation of the
Land Development Ordinance or any provision or section thereof.
SECTION 4
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are repealed, but
only to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 5
The amended Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and the
publication as required by law.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: September 12, 2016
APPROVED, PASSED, AND ADOPTED: September 26, 2016
___________________________ __________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Kevin B. McMillan,
Municipal Clerk Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 16-47
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF NEPTUNE BY AMENDING SECTION
1010, ENTITLED, “PLOT PLANS AND AS-BUILT
SURVEY” AND SECTION 1012, ENTITLED, “ZONING
PERMITS”
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey that the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby
amended as follows:
SECTION 1.
Section 1010 “Plot plans and as-built survey” is hereby amended and
supplemented in its entirety as follows:
§ 1010. Plot plans and as-built survey.
A. Two signed and sealed copies of individual plot plans in accordance with NJAC 3:40-
7.3 shall be submitted to the Township Engineer to accompany any permit
application for any new construction and for any building addition or land disturbance
greater than 150sf or 50sf in Ocean Grove section. The individual plot plan shall be
utilized to review the project for adequate drainage and grading and compliance to all
applicable Township standards.
B. The Township Engineer will review the submitted documents and either disapprove
or approve the submitted plot plan. The applicant will be notified if any revisions are
required.
C. The Construction Official shall not issue any construction permit until the Township
Engineer approves the proposed individual plot plan.
D. Each individual plot plan shall be drawn to scale of not less than one inch equaling
50 feet, signed and sealed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-7.3 by a professional
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, and shall be no smaller than 8 1/2
inches by 14 inches.
E. Individual plot plans shall include the following information:
(1) Bearing and distances.
(2) North arrow, written and graphic scale.
(3) Existing/proposed easement and dedications.
(4) Existing/proposed building, pool, decks, patios, porches, sheds and accessory
structures dimensions.
(5) Existing/proposed sidewalks, driveways and retaining walls.
(6) Building envelope graphically depicting and dimensioning zoning setback
requirements and/or setbacks approved by the Board if (applicable).
(7) Street name, right-of-way width, pavement width and composition of the
street(s) fronting the lot.
(8) The title block on the plot plan must include the property address, the block and
lot number of the property in question and the name of the applicant.
(9) Limits of clearing and soil disturbance. Show number of trees over four (4)
inches diameter to be removed.
(10) Existing trees to be protected and remain. Include tree replacement plan, if 
applicable as per 525 of the Land Development Ordinance (LDO).
(11) Location of wetlands, floodplains, stream encroachment lines and/or any other
environmental constraints to the property. If there are no wetlands, then a note
should be added to the plan stating that no wetlands exists on the subject
property.
(12) Sufficient street elevations including center line, gutter and top of curb (if
applicable); existing and proposed lot elevations to include, at a minimum,
property corners, midpoints of property lines, building corners and center of lot;
the finished floor, basement and garage floor elevations of the proposed
adjacent dwellings, corner elevations and topography within 10 feet of property
lines or as far as necessary to determine adequate drainage characteristics. All
elevations shall be according to the NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum)
and the source of datum so noted. Any specific circumstances for which
elevation requirements cannot be met will be subject to review by the Township
Engineer and Construction Official on a case-by-case basis. Under no
circumstances shall individual lots be graded in such a manner as to redirect
stormwater runoff onto an adjacent and/or downstream property or disturb or
change the existing drainage patterns of an adjacent lot. Drainage flow arrows
shall be provided to clearly depict the directions of stormwater runoff. No
grading or the creation of sump conditions shall be permitted on adjacent lot(s)
unless permission has been specifically granted, in writing, by the owner of
said adjacent lot(s).
(13) Location of any storm drainage pipes within 25 feet of the property including
pipe size, grade and invert.
(14) Lot grading shall be designed to provide positive runoff with grades at a
minimum slope of 1.5%.
(15) Swales designed to convey surface runoff shall be designed with suitable
subgrade material containing well draining sand or gravel, stone, sand mix
topsoil or other material acceptable to the Township Engineer. A construction
detail shall be included on the plan.
(16) Utility connections, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, gas,
electric, telephone and cable.
(17) Elevations, cross sections, details, and dimensions of driveways and retaining
walls.
(18) The plan shall show new or existing utilities to be utilized in accordance with
applicable standards.
(19) Location and direction of all existing and proposed downspouts.
(20) If sidewalk and/or curbing is proposed details to be provided and sufficient
proposed grades to ensure positive drainage.
(21) A separate road opening permit is required for any disturbance in the Township
Right of Way
(22) Prior Board approval or waiver granted for construction in easements.
(23) Other items that may be required by the Township Engineer for proper
construction of the site
F. Plot plans of Planning Board approved projects still required individual grading plans
and shall match the intent of approved subdivision/site plans.
G. If a basement is proposed, a subsurface soil investigation certified by a licensed
engineer shall be submitted with the plot plan.
H. The applicant shall submit a foundation survey to the Zoning Officer prior to an
inspection of the foundation for approval and backfilling. This survey shall include the
location of the foundation and the actual floor elevations. If the as-built survey 
establishes locations or elevations different from those submitted in the plot plan,
changes in the proposed grading shall be noted. A revised grading plan shall be
submitted to the Engineering and Planning Department and a revised building plan to
the Construction Official.
I. The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of a final as-built survey for new
construction,building addition or land disturbance over 150sf or 50 sf for Ocean
Grove. Building additions signed and sealed by a professional engineer or land
surveyor licensed in the state of New Jersey prior to requesting a final certificate of
occupancy (CO) inspection from the Municipal Engineer.
J. The as-built plan shall address constructed conditions and/or location of:
(1) Final grading elevations;
(2) Roads including curbing and sidewalks;
(3) Utilities, new or existing;
(4) Building location (s);
(5) Driveways and parking lots;
(6) Location and direction of downspouts;
(7) Stormwater management facilities, including as-built topographic contours and
volume calculations;
(8) Walls and fences, and
(9) Lighting
(10) Planting(s)
(11) Signage
(12) Refuse Area
(13) Other structures or conditions deemed pertinent by the Municipal Engineer.
K. Exemption from the requirements of this section for new construction, building
addition or land disturbance under 150sf or 50sf for Ocean Grove requires the
approval of the Township Engineer, said exemption to be contingent upon:
(1) Proof that the subject addition is not in a flood hazard zone
(2) A survey locating the existing dwelling and showing the proposed improvements
(3) A site inspection by a Township engineering inspector to verify that the proposed
addition will not create drainage problems.
(4) A notarized letter from the property owner stating there will be no adverse
drainage impacts.
(5) Submission of a $75.00 review fee;
In the event that the review of the application does not prove acceptable for an
exemption, a full grading plan/plot plan shall be submitted along with required
application and fees for review.
SECTION 2
Section 1102, “Zoning Permits” Paragraph C, “Lot grading and elevation plan” be
and is hereby amended and supplemented in its entirety as follows:
C. Lot grading and elevation plan. As a condition precedent to the issuance
of a new zoning permit, a proposed plot plan for each individual lot shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval. Details of the
individual plot plan shall conform to the submission requirements outlined in
Section 1010 “Plot Plan and As-built Survey”.
SECTION 3
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be and
the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 4
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted
by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair
the remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and
upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: December 12, 2016
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: December 22, 2016
ATTEST:
____________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell Kevin B. McMillan
Municipal Clerk Mayor 

ORDINANCE NO. 17-17
AN ORDINANCE TO FURTHER AMEND AND SUPPLEMENT
THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP
OF NEPTUNE BY ADDING THE DEFINITION OF EXEMPT
DEVELOPMENT AND AMENDING THE DEFINITION OF MINOR
SITE PLAN IN SECTION 201
WHEREAS, Neptune Township's Land Development Ordinances and Regulations
include standards that control the location, scale and type of land uses within the
Township; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Neptune focused on moving small improvements
forward and encouraging business particularly where redevelopment of under-utilized
and dilapidated properties can be achieved; and
WHEREAS, the Neptune Township Committee routinely reviews various zoning
regulations and design standards in order to address particular issues discussed in the
Master Plan and Master Plan Reexamination Report relative to implementation of various
zoning regulations and design standards on a Township-wide basis; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with section 40:55D62 of the Municipal Land Use Law,
the Neptune Township Committee is charged with adopting zoning standards ordinances
relating to the nature and extent of uses of the land and of buildings and structures
thereon in order to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Committee of the
Township of Neptune, in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey that the Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Neptune be and is hereby amended and
supplemented to read as follows:
SECTION 1.
Section 201 – “Definitions” is here amended to add the definition of “Exempt
Development” as follows:
Exempt Development - Site plan and/or subdivision approval shall not be required prior
to issuance of a Development Permit for the following:
a. Construction, additions, or alterations related to single-family or two-family
dwellings or their accessory structures on individual lots. These types of applications
will require board approval when a variance is required. In addition, these
applications will still require construction permits and may require grading plan
approvals depending on size and type of development;
b. Interior Alterations to an existing structure (that are not additions as stipulated within
paragraph k of Exempt Development) which do not cause an increase in the existing
square footage or change the existing footprint, do not increase the required number of
off-street parking spaces, are in compliance with all the applicable bulk and yard 
standards for the zone and all other development regulations, and which conform to the
performance standards of this Chapter.
c. Any change in occupancy which is not a "Change in Use" (as herein defined).
d. Sign(s) which installation is on a site already occupied by a principal use for which
site plan approval is not otherwise required and provided such sign(s) conform to the
applicable design and zoning district regulations of thisChapter.
e. Construction of a parking lot or an addition to an existing parking lot provided that
the new lot or the proposed addition contains three (3) spaces or less and the
location and design of which conforms to the standards and zoning district
regulations of the Neptune Township Land Development Ordinance;.
f. Construction or installation of underground facilities which do not alter the general
use, appearance or grade of the site.
g. Division of property and conveyances so as to combine existing lots, which are
not considered to be subdivisions in accordance with the definition· of "Subdivision"
contained within thisArticle.
h. Farms and accessory farm buildings and structures provided such buildings and
structures are located on, operated in conjunction with, and necessary to the
operation of a farm as defined by the Neptune Township Land Development
Ordinance. This shall not include accessory structures which contain dwelling units.
i. Gasoline pump canopies subject to compliance in all respects to the regulations
governing such canopies, contained elsewhere in the Neptune Township Land
Development Ordinance;
j. Individual applications for accessory mechanical or electrical equipment up to one
hundred (100) square feet in area, whose operation and location conforms to the
design and location standards conform to the design standards of the Neptune
Township Land Development Ordinance and where such installation will be
accessory to an already established principal use of the property. In no case shall
such equipment be located in a street setback area.
k. Additions to existing, conforming structures containing non-residential uses in the,
and zones; provided such additions to existing structures do not exceed 8,500
square feet or 10% of the total gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, an addition consisting of an area of 1,000
square feet or less shall be considered an exempt development. Such development
must occur within the existing limit of disturbance and must not increase the
impervious cover, be in compliance with all the applicable bulk and yard standards
for the zone and all other development regulations, does not result in an expansion
or increase of any preexisting violation of the provisions of the Neptune Township
Land Development Ordinance, or the zoning ordinance, and there must be sufficient
parking on site to support the additional floor area. The Zoning Officer and the
Township Planner will be responsible for determining compliance with this chapter.
l. Construction of storage sheds, no larger than 200 square feet, for permitted 
nonresidential uses, provided they comply with the accessory structure setback
requirements and all other applicable bulk and yard standards for the zone in which
they are located as per the Neptune Township Land Development Ordinance.
SECTION 2.
Section 201 – “Definitions” is here amended to fully amend the definition of “Minor
Site Plan” as follows:
Minor Site Plan - A development plan for one (1) or more lots which is (are) subject to
development which:
a. Requires site plan approval, and,
b. Meets the requirements set forth in this Chapter and the Neptune Township Land
Development Ordinance and contains the information needed to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by this Chapter for
approval of a minor site plan have been met, and,
c. Meets the following conditions:
1. New building construction, or building additions that do not qualify as exempt
development, of less than three thousand (3,000) square feet
2. The proposed development does not increase parking requirements y more
than fifteen (15) spaces, nor entail or propose the construction of a total of more
than fifteen (15) parking spaces.
3. The proposed development conforms is not in a Flood Zone.
4. The proposed development conforms to the performance standards set forth in
this Ordinance and the Neptune Township Land Development Ordinance.
5. The proposed development does not involve planned development.
6. The proposed development does not involve any new unmapped street or the
extension of any existing street, not anticipated on the tax map.
7. The proposed development does not involve the extension or construction of
any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D- 42.
8. The proposed development does not involve the disturbance of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet or more of ground area.
SECTION 3
All Ordinance, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be and
the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 4
Should any section, paragraph, clause or any other portion of this Ordinance be adjusted
by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect or impair the
remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to law and
upon the filing of a certified copy thereof with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
APPROVED ON FIRST READING: May 22, 2017
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED: June 12, 2017
ATTEST:
____________________________ ___________________________
Richard J. Cuttrell, Dr. Michael Brantley,
Municipal Clerk Mayor 