Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 9-6-1977]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of North
Brunswick, of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Township
Committee of the Township of North Brunswick, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 146, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Township of North Brunswick," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after September 6, 1977.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of North Brunswick by impressing thereon the seal of the township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Clerk of the township, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of North
Brunswick" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book; copies of ordinances. [Amended
2-22-1994]
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
of North Brunswick to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
A. Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from
the Clerk upon the payment of a fee of $200.
B. An electronic version of the Code book may be obtained by entering into
a licensing agreement with the Township of North Brunswick for a fee
of $200 for the first year and $25 for renewal each year thereafter.
During the course of the year, supplements may be obtained for an
additional fee of $25.
C. Copies of individual ordinances or pages of ordinances may be
purchased at a fee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2 which is as
follows:
(1) One to 10 copies: $0.75 per copy.
(2) Eleven to 20 copies: $0.50 per copy.
(3) Over 20 copies: $0.25 per copy.
§ 1-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 1-9
1:4
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 1, 1973.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees; establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees; and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
L. Any ordinance making any change or revision in the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking.
N. An ordinance prescribing rules and regulations governing the Police
Department, adopted 3-4-1963.
O. An ordinance providing for the annual organization meeting, adopted
12-21-1970.
P. Any ordinance relating to the creation of or maintenance of the Police
Department and amendments thereto.
Q. An ordinance relating to the appointment and regulations of special
policemen, adopted 9-18-1967.
R. Section 1 of an ordinance creating a Sewer Department, adopted
2-15-1960.
S. An ordinance creating the position of Police Director, adopted 7-2-1973.
T. An ordinance creating the office of Deputy Clerk, adopted 1-18-1954.
U. An ordinance creating the position of Planning Consultant, adopted
9-18-1961.
V. An ordinance creating civil service classifications for township
employees, adopted 4-16-1962.
W. An ordinance to establish a payroll checking account for the township,
adopted 2-1-1954.
§ 1-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 1-14
1:6
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments, revisions or deletions
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Penalties. In the following sections, the penalty provisions have been
amended or added to provide that violators will be punished, upon
conviction, by a fine not to exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.2 [Amended
4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-063]
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following Code sections were amended or added. A
complete description of these revisions is on file in the office of the Township Clerk:
§§ 14-5, 106-4A(1) and (2), 184-6 and 281-6. Also pursuant to § 1-14B, former Section 7 of
an ordinance adopted 8-16-1937, as amended 2-3-1969, restricting the sale and use of
alcoholic beverages by females, was deleted.
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14C, as adopted 9-6-1977, the following penalty sections
were amended or added. A complete description of these revisions is on file in the office of
the Township Clerk: §§ 32-35, 32-36, 106-10, 109-11, 116-13, 119-10, 123-16, 135-6,
143-9, 143-19, 157-23, 165-5, 168-7, 184-11, 188-7, 197-7, 212-14, 219-3, 234-33, 238-3,
238-10, 238-14, 243-23, 250-2, 262-3, 276-29, 281-7, 287-4, 292-7, 297-19, 311-9, 342-14,
342-29 and 352-35.
3. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the following penalty sections
were amended to provide that violators will be punished, upon conviction, by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both: §§ 32-36,
106-10, 109-13, 116-13, 119-10, 123-16, 135-6, 143-9, 143-19, 157-23, 158-11A, 165-5,
168-7, 184-9, 188-7, 197-7, 212-14, 219-3, 234-33, 238-3, 238-14, 243-23, 250-2, 262-3,
276-32, 281-7, 287-10, 292-7, 297-19, 342-14, 342-29 and 352-35.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Adoption of 1993 Renumbering of Code
[Adopted 1-18-1994]
§ 1-15. Adoption of renumbering.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of North
Brunswick of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township
Committee (now Mayor and Council) of the Township of North Brunswick on
September 6, 1977, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and as renumbered to consist of
Chapters 1 through 356, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of North
Brunswick," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 2
ABILITIES COUNCIL
§ 2-1. Creation.
The North Brunswick Abilities Council is hereby established.
§ 2-2. Members; compensation; terms; vacancies.
The Council shall consist of nine members appointed by the Mayor. All of
the members shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick; at
least 1/2 of the members shall be disabled citizens; one member shall also
be a member of the Township Council; the members shall serve without
compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Council shall designate
a member to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Council. The
initial term of members shall be for one, two or three years to be designated
in the initial appointment. The terms thereafter shall be for three years. The
initial appointments shall be made in such manner so that the terms of 1/3
of the members shall expire each year. A vacancy on the Council occurring
otherwise than expiation of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 2-3. Purpose.
The Council is established for the purpose of assisting the Township in
insuring that all disabled citizens of the Township are afforded the benefits
of the Americans with Disabilities Act, including making recommendations
as to how the Township and businesses operating within the Township may
better implement the Act.
§ 2-4. Records and annual reports; meetings.
The North Brunswick Abilities Council shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and report to the governing body as the Council deems
advisable and/or as the governing body shall request. The meetings at the
North Brunswick Abilities Council shall be open to the public and conducted
in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.4
§ 2-5. Appropriations.
The Council may incur such expenses as it may from time to time require,
providing the same shall be within the limits of funds, if any, appropriated
to it by the governing body or otherwise available to it, and there shall be
established in the municipal budget a line item for this Council.
Chapter 3
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 1-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 2-5
2:10
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Court — See Ch. 14.
Cultural Arts Committee — See Ch. 17.
Development Committee — See Ch. 21.
Environmental Committee — See Ch. 26.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29.
Board of Health — See Ch. 38.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42.
Motor Vehicle Maintenance
Department — See Ch. 53.
Officers and Employees — See Ch. 58.
Department of Planning and
Development — See Ch. 62.
Planning Director — See Ch. 65.
Safety Committee — See Ch. 76.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 79.
Traffic Safety Committee — See Ch. 91.
Rent control — See Ch. 268.
§ 2-5 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 2-5
2:11

ARTICLE I
Title; Word Usage; Interpretation
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "North Brunswick Administrative Code."
§ 3-2. Word usage.
For the purpose of this code and any other ordinances or resolutions
heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise
require:
§ 3-3. Interpretation.
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" mean any visual mode of reproducing words or
numbers on paper or similar material that is in general use.
G. "Charter" shall mean the Mayor-Council-Administrator Plan pursuant to
statute N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.1 et seq. of the Optional Municipal Charter
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1, and all applicable provisions of the general law.
A. It is the intent of the Council in enacting this code to exercise fully the
powers delegated by the Charter to organize and regulate its internal
affairs, and the provisions of the code shall be construed liberally to
that end.
B. The code shall be interpreted and administered so as to maintain the
separation of legislative and administrative powers as provided in the
Charter.
§ 3-1 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-3
2:13

ARTICLE II
Township Council
§ 3-4. Election; term; compensation. [Amended 1-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-1; 3-5-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4]
§ 3-5. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Council shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 3-6. President. [Amended 12-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-32;
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24]
The Council, at its first meeting on or after January 1 of any year, shall elect
a President of the Council from among its members to serve for a term of
one year or until the election and qualification of his/her successor. In the
absence of the President of the Council, the Council shall elect a temporary
presiding officer who shall have the functions, powers and duties of the
President during his/her absence. Upon the arrival of the President, the
officer presiding shall relinquish the chair immediately upon the conclusion
of the particular item of the business before the Council.
§ 3-7. Postelection transition.
Members-elect of the Council shall be notified of all Council meetings to
be held between election day and the date of organization, the same as
incumbents. They shall be entitled to attend all such meetings and to
participate in all premeeting conferences without vote.
§ 3-8. Powers and duties.
The Council will exercise all powers and perform all duties granted by the
Optional Municipal Charter Law, P.L. 1950, c. 210,5 and by general law,
which are not otherwise delegated by the Administrative Code.
§ 3-9. Meetings.
A. Members of the Council, elected as provided by the Charter, for terms
beginning January 1, 1984, shall be paid in accordance with the Annual
Salary Ordinance in the same manner as all other officers and
employees.
B. Members of the Council shall be given the option to receive benefits,
which shall include, but not be limited to, health, dental, major medical,
hospitalization and prescription plans. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-15; 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-37]
A. All meetings, including premeeting conferences, shall be public and
held at times and places fixed by the Council, in accordance with the
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-4 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-9
2:15
§ 3-10. Adoption of bylaws and procedural rules.
The Council may by resolution adopt bylaws and procedural rules.
§ 3-11. Council to act as Board of Health.
The Council shall be the duly constituted Board of Health.
§ 3-12. Audit of municipal accounts and records.
The Council shall appoint an independent auditor to make an annual audit
of the municipal accounts and financial records as required by law.
Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). Exceptions, if any,
shall be as authorized therein.
B. Regular meetings. The Council shall schedule its regular meetings and
conference meetings by resolution adopted from time to time.
C. Premeeting conferences. The Council may hold premeeting conferences
in preparation for regular meetings as permitted by law.
§ 3-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-12
2:16
ARTICLE III
Township Clerk
§ 3-13. Appointment; powers and duties.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint a Clerk
who shall:
§ 3-14. Organization.
The office shall be organized pursuant to plan approved in Article VII,
§ 3-26.
A. Serve as Clerk of the Council, keeping its minutes and records of its
proceedings, maintaining and compiling its ordinances and resolutions
as required by the Charter.
B. Have custody of the Township Seal and affix it to such books, papers
and documents as may be authorized pursuant to law.
C. Have and take custody of all official books, papers and documents of the
Township for which no other repository is provided by Charter or
ordinance.
D. Perform such functions as are vested in the Clerk by the licensing
provisions of state law or ordinance.
E. Perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by general
election law (Title 19 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes).
F. Perform all functions required regarding vital statistics.
§ 3-13 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-14
2:17

ARTICLE IV
Township Attorney
§ 3-15. Appointment; qualifications.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council in accordance with the Charter. Prior to appointment,
the Attorney shall have been admitted to the practice of law in this state.
§ 3-16. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Council, Mayor, Business
Administrator, departments and other municipal agencies except as may
otherwise be provided by law. The Attorney shall prosecute and defend
actions and proceedings by and against the Township, departments and
agencies thereof. In furtherance of these powers, and without limitation
thereof, he shall:
§ 3-17. Organization.
The office shall be organized pursuant to plan approved in Article VII,
§ 3-26.
§ 3-18. Administration materials to be property of Township.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of the office of Attorney shall be and remain the property
of the Township. Upon the termination of his service with the Township,
the Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his successor all such property,
A. Prepare or approve all ordinances and substantive resolutions prior to
introduction and passage.
B. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Township.
C. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township as directed by the Council.
D. Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Township is involved.
E. Advise or render opinions upon any questions of law pertaining to
municipal affairs submitted to him by the Mayor, the Council or the
Business Administrator.
F. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interests, and report thereon from time to time
as the Mayor, Council or Administrator may require.
G. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by Charter or ordinance.
§ 3-15 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-18
2:19
together with a written consent to substitution of his successor in all legal
actions and proceedings then pending to which the Township is a party.
§ 3-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-18
2:20
ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 3-19. Establishment; jurisdiction; appointment of Judge.
There shall be a Municipal Court, which shall have and exercise the limited
civil and criminal jurisdiction prescribed by law. The Judge shall be
appointed in accordance with law.
§ 3-20. Clerk; organization.
The Court shall have a Clerk. The Court shall be organized pursuant to plan
approved as provided in Article VII, § 3-26.
§ 3-19 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-20
2:21

ARTICLE VI
Mayor
§ 3-21. Election; term; compensation. [Amended 1-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-1; 3-5-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4]
§ 3-22. Absence, disability or refusal to preside.
The President of Council shall serve in place of the Mayor in the event of his
absence, disability or refusal to preside in accordance with the Charter.
§ 3-23. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall exercise the executive power of the Township in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
§ 3-24. Civil defense and disaster control director.
The Mayor shall be the civil defense and disaster control director.
A. The Mayor, elected as provided by the Charter for four years, shall be
paid in accordance with the Annual Salary Ordinance in the same
manner as all other officers and employees. The Mayor will not be
entitled to receive any benefits except those mandated by state
statutes.
B. The Mayor shall be given the option to receive benefits, which shall
include, but not be limited to, health, dental, major medical,
hospitalization and prescription plans. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-15; 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-37]
§ 3-21 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-24
2:23

ARTICLE VII
Administrative Organization
§ 3-25. Departments and offices under control of Mayor. [Amended
12-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-31; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-1]
There shall be the following administrative departments and offices under
the direct executive authority of the Mayor:
§ 3-26. Internal organization.
The internal organization of each office and/or department shall be
recommended by the director of the department, approved by the Mayor
and Administrator. Any plan calling for changes in personnel strength or in
classification or pay of employees shall require approval of the Council by
resolution or ordinance, as appropriate.
A. Office of the Administrator.
B. Department of Finance.
C. Department of Public Safety.
D. Department of Public Works.
E. Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services.
F. Department of Community Development.
G. Office of the Tax Assessor.
§ 3-25 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-26
2:25

ARTICLE VIII
Administrator
§ 3-27. Appointment.
The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. The Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council and may be removed by the Council in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:69A-149.9.
§ 3-28. Compensation.
The Administrator shall be paid in accordance with the Annual Salary
Ordinance in the same manner as all other officers and employees.
§ 3-29. Qualifications; residency requirements.
The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications. Previous, responsible, successful experience
in local government and possession of a master's degree in public
administration, business administration or municipal management shall be
preferred. The Administrator need not be a resident of the Township or the
state at the time of his appointment, but may thereafter reside outside the
Township only with approval of the Council.
§ 3-30. Functions.
The Office of the Administrator shall have the following functions: The
Municipal Administrator shall administer the business affairs of the
municipality and shall, as provided by ordinance, have such powers and
perform such duties which are not required by this Article6 or general law
to be exercised by the Mayor, Council or other officer, board or body.
§ 3-31. Powers and duties.
The Administrator shall be the Chief administrative officer of the Township,
responsible to the Mayor and Council for the administration of all Township
affairs, and with the following powers and duties. He shall:
A. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by law.
B. Recommend to the Mayor and/or the Council appointment and, when
necessary for the good of the service, suspension or removal of
department heads and all other employees except the Clerk, the
Attorney and personnel appointed by them.
C. Develop and administer a comprehensive personnel program when
approved by the Council or as provided under civil service pursuant to
Title 11 of New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
6. Editor's Note: "This Article" refers to Article 16A of New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 3-27 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-31
2:27
§ 3-32. Liaison between Council and administrative staff.
Except for the purpose of inquiry and communication, Council members
shall deal with the administrative staff through the Administrator.
D. Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in
discussion but not to vote.
E. See that all laws and all acts of the Council subject to enforcement by
him or by officers and employees subject to his direction and
supervision are faithfully executed.
F. Assist the Council in preparing the annual budget and capital program.
G. Submit to the Mayor and Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
Township as of the end of each fiscal year.
H. Make such other reports as the Mayor and/or Council may require
concerning the operation of Township government.
I. Keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the current financial
condition and future needs of the Township and make such
recommendations to them concerning the affairs of the Township as he
deems desirable.
J. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 3-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-32
2:28
ARTICLE IX
Department of Finance
§ 3-33. Director.
The Department shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and who shall be qualified by education and experience.
§ 3-34. Functions.
The Department shall perform all appropriate functions associated with:
§ 3-35. Organization.
The Department shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided
in Article VII, § 3-26.
A. Billing and collection of all revenues and taxes.
B. Budgetary accounting, fiscal control and reporting.
C. Custody, investment and disbursement of town moneys.
D. Data processing.
§ 3-33 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-35
2:29

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Safety
§ 3-36. Director.
The Department shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and be qualified by education and experience.
§ 3-37. Functions.
The Department shall perform or supervise all appropriate functions
associated with:
§ 3-38. Organization.
The Department shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided
in Article VII, § 3-26.
A. Enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
Township, preservation of public peace and protection of persons and
property.
B. Traffic enforcement.
C. Animal control.
D. Police communication system.
E. Regulation of school crossings.
F. Perform liaison with the volunteer fire company and rescue squad.
§ 3-36 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-38
2:31

ARTICLE XI
Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services7
[Added 12-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-31; 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-18;
11-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-21; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-03;
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-20; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-18]
§ 3-39. Director.
The Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services shall be
headed by a Director who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be
qualified by education and experience.
§ 3-40. Functions.
The Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services shall
perform or supervise all appropriate functions associated with:
§ 3-41. Organization.
The Department shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided
in Article VII, § 3-26.
§ 3-41.1. Fees.
A. Development and administration of a comprehensive recreation
program.
B. Senior citizen programs and services.
C. Public health services.
D. Parks and public grounds development and maintenance.
E. Public outreach and volunteerism.
F. Development and administration of programs for the handicapped.
G. Tree planting, care and removal on public property and in the public
right-of-way.
H. Animal control services.
I. Before and after school LEAL programs.
J. Summer camp.
7. Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Department of Building and Motor Vehicle Maintenance, as
amended 12-17-1990, was repealed as follows: § 3-39, Director, 8-2-1999 by Ord. No.
99-19; § 3-40, Functions, and § 3-41, Organization, 10-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-25.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also effected the merger of the former Department of Parks
and Recreation and the former Department of Human Services into the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services.
§ 3-39 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-41.1
2:33
A. The following fees shall be collected by the Department of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services prior to permitting participation of
any resident of the Township, or nonresident of the Township, in
programs operated by the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services:
Activity Resident Fee Nonresident Fee
Teen night $5 per participant --
Special teen trips The fee set for trips
depend on the cost of
each event
--
Water aquacise $40 $60
Swimmer's clinic $45 $55
Lifeguard training $125 $150
Pool birthday parties $125 --
Open swim family pass $35 --
Swim lessons $45 --
Friday night recreation $2 --
Basketball clinic $45 --
Wrestling league $50 --
Adult fitness yearly
pass
$35 --
Tennis $40 $50
Preschool program $80 to $85 $95 to $100
Bowling league $300 at registration
or $80 in 4 payments
or $11 a week
--
Lacrosse $65 --
Camp Journey Summer
2001
Option A: four-week
camp
$600 --
Option B: four-week
trip
$1,300 --
Option C: trip only $710
DPR Rapids Swim Team
First child $50 $60
Second child $45 $55
Third child $40 $50
Horseback riding clinic $35 $45
§ 3-41.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-41.1
2:34
Activity Resident Fee Nonresident Fee
Horseback riding
minicamp
$160 $180
Beginner golf $45 $55
Township Runner Club
Family $30 --
Individual $20 --
Gymnastics and
conditioning April to
June, twice a week
$45 --
Stage Struck $215 --
Extra week of camp $10 more than 2000 --
Counselors in service $45 --
Extra week of camp $5 more than 2000 --
Summer camp $85 --
Extra week of camp $5 more than 2000 --
B. Reference in the above schedule to "residents" and "nonresidents" shall
mean residents and nonresidents of the Township of North Brunswick.
For those activities for which nonresident fees are not stated, the
Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services will maintain
a list of nonresidents interested in participating, and after assessing the
participation by residents and the availability of openings, will notify
the appropriate number of interested nonresidents, in the order that
their names were added to the list for an individual activity, that they
may register, at fees 20% higher than that charged to residents.
C. The fees for any program or activity not otherwise listed in this article
shall be established by the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services. No such fee shall be effective until same is
approved by the Township Council, which approval may be provided in
a resolution. The fee shall be not more than the total cost of the
program or activity divided by the minimum number of participants
attending. The Department of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services shall, with the consent and approval of the Township Council,
by resolution, also establish an administration fee, not in excess of $10,
for each participant in the program or activity.
§ 3-41.1 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-41.1
2:35

ARTICLE XII
Department of Public Works
§ 3-42. Director.
The Department shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and who shall be qualified by education and experience.
§ 3-43. Functions.
The Department shall perform all appropriate functions associated with:
§ 3-44. Organization.
The Department shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided
in Article VII, § 3-26.
A. Maintenance and improving of streets, roads, sanitary and storm
sewers, water supply, drainage and parking facilities.
B. Repair and maintenance of traffic signals and installation, repair and
maintenance of signs, street marking, parking meters and water
meters.
C. Refuse collection, recycling and disposal, and leaf collection.
D. Maintenance and repair of public works facilities.
E. Street leaf and snow removal.
§ 3-42 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-44
2:37

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)9
§ 3-45. (Reserved)
§ 3-46. (Reserved)
§ 3-47. (Reserved)
9. Editor's Note: Former Article XIII, Department of Human Services, consisting of §§ 3-45
through 3-47, was repealed 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-1; see now Art. XI, Department of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services.
§ 3-45 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-47
2:39

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Community Development
§ 3-48. Director.
The Department shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and who shall be qualified by education and experience.
§ 3-49. Functions.
The Department shall perform or supervise all appropriate functions
associated with:
§ 3-50. Organization.
The Department shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided
in Article VII, § 3-26.
A. Professional services to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment.
B. Economic and community development planning.
C. Code enforcement, including but not limited to:
(1) Building construction.
(2) Zoning.
(3) Housing.
(4) Fire.
D. Grant applications.
E. Central engineering services as provided by ordinance.
§ 3-48 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-50
2:41

ARTICLE XV
Assessor
§ 3-51. Appointment; qualifications.
The Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council in accordance with the Charter. Prior to appointment, the
Assessor shall have been certified according to law.
§ 3-52. Responsibilities.
The Assessor shall be responsible for the assessment of real estate for tax
purposes.
§ 3-53. Organization.
The Office shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided in
Article VII, § 3-26.
§ 3-51 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-53
2:43

ARTICLE XVI
Nondepartmental Boards and Agencies
§ 3-54. Designation.
The nondepartmental boards and agencies shall be:
§ 3-55. Continuance.
They shall be continued in accordance with pertinent law and ordinance.
§ 3-56. Creation by Council.
The Council may create such other nondepartmental boards and agencies
as it may deem desirable.
§ 3-57. Procedure.
Nonstatutory boards, agencies and commissions shall be advisory to the
Council, the Mayor, Administrator and/or Township departments as
appropriate, and shall be provided staff assistance, with the approval of the
Administrator, when available within appropriate funds. A member of the
Council may be appointed to each advisory board.
A. Environmental Committee.
B. Development Committee.
C. Community Development Committee.
D. Rent Leveling Board.
E. Accident and Incident.
F. Planning Board.
G. Zoning Board of Adjustment (Council appointment).
H. Recreation Committee.
I. Advisory Board of Health.
J. Board of Assistance.
K. Library Board.
L. Cultural Arts.
M. Ethics Board.
N. Traffic Safety Committee.
O. Heritage Day Committee.
§ 3-54 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-57
2:45

ARTICLE XVII
General Provisions
§ 3-58. Procedure upon termination.
Every officer or employee shall, upon termination, deliver forthwith to his
successor or, if there is no successor, to the Administrator, all moneys,
papers, books, memoranda, accounts and data pertaining to his office.
§ 3-59. Full-time officers and employees.
Every officer and employee whose compensation is established on a fulltime
basis shall devote his entire time during business hours to the duties
of his office.
§ 3-58 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-59
2:47

ARTICLE XVIII
Transitional Provisions
§ 3-60. Transference of employees.
All employees who are in the service of the Township on the effective
date of this code are transferred to the appropriate departments to which
their respective functions, powers and duties have been herein transferred.
They shall not by such transfer be adversely affected in seniority, pension,
promotion or salary rights.
§ 3-61. Transference of records and property.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all records and property of the
Township are transferred to the respective departments to which the
various functions are assigned by this code.
§ 3-62. Effect on existing ordinances and resolutions.
All ordinances and resolutions adopted before the effective date of this code
shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or amended, provided
that, any found to be inconsistent with the Charter or this code or law
shall be considered repealed or amended to comply with existing law to the
extent of any such inconsistency.
§ 3-60 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-62
2:49

ARTICLE XIX
Antinepostism
[Added 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-19]
§ 3-63. Title.
This article shall be called the "Antinepotism Policy of the Township of
North Brunswick."
§ 3-64. Applicability.
§ 3-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Persons holding the position of Mayor or Township
Council.
RELATIVE — Includes spouses, parents/children, siblings, grandparents/
grandchildren, in-laws to the extent of parents or children, brothers- and
sisters-in-law, first cousins and aunts or uncles/nieces or nephews.
SUPERVISOR — Any employee of the Township having supervisory duties
and powers over another employee or employees within the respective
department of the Township.
A. The prohibitions set forth in this article shall apply solely to employee
positions for the Township of North Brunswick.
B. This article shall not apply to appointments to the various boards,
commissions, committees and authorities of the Township.
C. Subject to the exception in Subsection D below, this article and the
prohibition against certain hiring contained herein shall be applied
prospectively only from the effective date of its enactment and shall not
in any way be construed to prohibit or make unlawful any current
employment relationship or situation or the hiring or promotion of any
person currently employed by the Township of North Brunswick as of
the effective date of this article which may technically be violative of
the terms hereof but for its prospective application. For purposes of
interpreting this exception, persons appointed to positions of
employment with the Township for a set term shall be considered
current employees, notwithstanding the fact that the then term may
have ended. Such persons holding positions of employment with the
Township under a set term may be hired to any position in the
Township, rehired, reappointed or promoted, as may be the case,
without violating this article.
D. The prohibitions and restrictions contained in § 3-66 shall not apply in
the case of seasonal part-time employment.
§ 3-63 ABILITIES COUNCIL § 3-66
2:51
§ 3-66. Restriction in hiring and promoting employees.
The following restrictions shall apply in the hiring and promotion of
employees to employment positions for the Township of North Brunswick:
§ 3-67. Purpose.
This policy is not for the purpose of depriving any citizen of an equal chance
for employment with the Township, but is solely intended to eliminate
the potential for preferential treatment of the relatives of governmental
personnel.
§ 3-68. Current employees.
Except as may be otherwise expressly provided for herein, this article shall
not affect the employment of any present Township employees and/or any
existing contractual obligations with employees by the Township of North
Brunswick.
A. Supervision. No relative (as defined herein) shall be considered for
employment by the Township of North Brunswick or hired to a position
of employment with the Township where that person will be the
supervisor of or be supervised by another relative who is an existing
employee within the same department.
B. Applications. Applications for employment submitted by relatives of
Township employees holding current supervisory positions (hereinafter
"supervisor") will not be accepted for positions in the same department
of the Township in which the supervisor works or where, through
promotion, such a situation or relationship could exist.
C. Relatives of elected officials. No person who is a relative of any elected
official of the Township of North Brunswick (i.e., Mayor or Township
Council) shall be considered for employment as an employee of the
Township. This shall not restrict nor prohibit the continued employment
of individuals to a position or positions with the Township where a
relative of an employee is elected as a Mayor or Township Council after
the date of the employee's start of employment with the Township.
D. Promotion of existing employees. Notwithstanding the prospective
application as to the remainder of this article as applied above, no
elected official (Mayor or Township Council) or supervisor in a
department may participate in the promotion process or hiring process
in that department of any existing employee who is a relative of such
elected official or supervisor, as the case may be. Such elected official
or supervisor shall abstain from participation in such personnel action
as it applies to such relative.
§ 3-66 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 3-68
2:52
Chapter 4
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Television Franchise — See Ch. A433.
§ 3-68 CABLE TELEVISION § 3-68
4:53

ARTICLE I
Videocopy Fee Policy
[Adopted 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-3]
§ 4-1. Prerecorded programs; production assistance.
Community access users are encouraged to supply prerecorded programs.
When this is not possible, a group, organization or individual may request
production assistance from NB TV-71 a minimum of one month in advance.
Users requesting production assistance are responsible for reimbursing
the Township of North Brunswick Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services10 for all costs of said production, including but not
limited to supplies and labor.
§ 4-2. Ownership of videotapes; home borrowing; copies of
programs.
Any videotapes produced by the Township of North Brunswick are the
property of the Township. The Township does not offer home borrowing of
videotapes. Members of the public interested in obtaining a copy of a NB
TV-71 program must complete a video request form, provide videotapes(s)
for recording, pay a dubbing fee of $25 per tape, and abide by all guidelines
set forth in the Cable TV Policy Manual.
10.Editor's Note: The former Department of Human Services became the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-1.
§ 4-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 4-2
4:55
Chapter 5
CELEBRATE NORTH BRUNSWICK COMMITTEE
§ 5-1. Creation.
The Celebrate North Brunswick Committee is hereby established.
§ 5-2. Members.
The Committee shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Council. All
of the members shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick; the
members shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided.
The Council shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Committee. The initial term of members shall be
for one, two or three years to be designated in the initial appointment. The
terms thereafter shall be for three years. The initial appointments shall be
made in such manner so that the terms of 1/3 of the members shall expire
each year. A vacancy an the Committee occurring otherwise than expiration
of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 5-3. Powers.
The Committee is established for the purpose of planning an annual New
Year's Eve celebration and festivities that are suitable for families and
residents of North Brunswick. The Committee shall have the power to
create two subcommittees, one consisting of the Alchemists Club of the
North Brunswick High School, and the second subcommittee shall consist of
other high school students. The number of members of such subcommittee
shall be determined by the Committee.
§ 5-4. Records and annual reports.
The Celebrate North Brunswick Committee shall keep records of its
meetings and activities and report to the governing body as the Committee
deems advisable and/or as the governing body shall request. The meetings
of the Celebrate North Brunswick Committee shall be open to the public
and conducted in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 5-5. Appropriations.
The Committee may incur such expenses as it may from time to time
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the governing body or otherwise available to it and there shall be
established in the municipal budget a line item for this Committee.
Chapter 6
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
§ 4-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 6-1
5:56
§ 6-1. Authorization to deliver goods or perform services.
§ 6-2. Presentation of bill of demand.
Any person claiming payment from the municipality for goods delivered or
services rendered shall present a duty certified detailed bill of demand in
the form of a municipal voucher, same to be presented to the Township
Chief Financial Officer or his/her designee. Said bill of demand must be
sufficiently detailed so that any individual without intimate knowledge of
the facts and circumstances surrounding the claim can understand what
work was performed. The detail shall include:
A. No vendor shall enter into a contract with the Township or perform any
work on behalf of the Township without first receiving authorization
therefor in the form of a duly executed purchase order approved by the
Township's Purchasing Agent and, if applicable, a resolution of the
Township Council approving said contract. Any such authorization is
expressly limited to the dollar figure indicated in the purchase order.
Any increases in such authorization shall require a revised purchase
order prior to the delivery of goods or the rendering of services.
B. Any professional having executed a professional service contract shall,
upon performing services totaling 70% of the amount of the purchase
order, whether such services have been billed or not, provide the
Township Purchasing Agent with an estimate as to whether additional
funds are anticipated to be necessary to conclude the matter. If the
professional determines in accordance with the provisions hereof that,
having expended 70% of the amount authorized by the purchase order
that the remaining 30% will be insufficient to complete the tasks set
forth in this agreement, the professional shall immediately notify the
Township Business Administrator and the Township Purchasing Agent
requesting that the Township Council approve an amended professional
service budget and resolution prior to the rendering of any additional
services beyond the authorized amount. The Township shall not be
responsible for the payment of any sums in excess of the original
encumbered amount unless there has been compliance with this
section.
A. For a claim based upon delivery of goods, a description of the goods
delivered, the delivery date, the delivery location (or person receiving
delivery), the cost per unit and the total units delivered.
B. For a claim based upon services rendered, where the services are to be
compensated on an hourly basis, a description of said services,
identification of the specific projects for which payment is requested, a
status update of each respective project (i.e., percentage complete,
project billings to date, remaining hours and/or dollars to complete, to
the extent ascertainable, etc.), the claimant's personnel assigned to
each project, claimant personnel titles and their billing rates, the exact
days and hours billed for each claimant personnel, a description of each
task performed by the service provider and the time spent on each such
§ 6-1 CLAIMS PROCEDURE § 6-2
6:57
§ 6-3. Certification of voucher.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer or his/her designee to
receive verification from the appropriate department head or municipal
employee who has knowledge that said goods or services rendered were in
fact delivered to the municipality. Said verification shall be evidenced by
having the appropriate department head or municipal employee certify this
knowledge by affixing his or her signature to the municipal voucher in the
designated place.
§ 6-4. Adjustment of claims.
The Township Purchasing Agent, Chief Financial Officer or other official
designated by the Mayor and Council may question the accuracy, veracity
or legitimacy of any claim against the township by demanding further
clarification from the claimant and, where appropriate, making adjustments
in claims submitted. The Mayor and Council shall be the final arbitrator of
any payment of claims dispute.
§ 6-5. Approval by Mayor and Council.
After being satisfied that all claims are in proper order and that moneys are
available for payment, the Chief Financial Officer shall deliver said bills to
the Mayor and Council for approval at a public meeting of said body. Claims
shall be approved for payment not less than once per calendar month. The
Chief Financial Officer may set administrative deadlines after which claims
may not be submitted for approval at a given meeting of the governing body.
§ 6-6. Recording of claims in minutes.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to record all claims, approved or
disapproved, in the official minutes. Any claim disapproved by the Mayor
and Council shall be referred back to the Chief Financial Officer with
explanation, said explanation likewise to be entered into the public record.
§ 6-7. Payment procedure.
Upon approval of payment by the Mayor and Council, the Chief Financial
Officer shall forthwith prepare all necessary checks, same to be signed by
the Mayor or other designated member of the Township Council and cosigned
by the Chief Financial Officer. All such checks shall be recorded in
proper books of account and thereafter mailed or otherwise delivered to
claimants.
task based upon increments of no less than a quarter hour, and any
other information necessary for adequate clarification.
C. For a claim based upon services rendered on a fixed-fee basis, a
description of the services rendered, identification of the specific
project, and a status update of each respective project (i.e., percentage
complete, project billings to date, remaining dollars to complete, etc.)
§ 6-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 6-8
6:58
§ 6-8. Payroll checks.
In the case of payrolls, the Chief Financial Officer shall prepare, sign and
issue payroll checks in accordance with proper payroll procedure and upon
certification that each employee has rendered the service for which he or
she is receiving remuneration.
Chapter 8
CONSENT AGENDA
§ 8-1. Intent.
The Municipal Council desires to provide for a process whereby resolutions,
reports and other business which appear to be routine and noncontroversial
may be placed on a consent agenda and be considered an action without
reading in full unless removed from the consent agenda at the request of
any member of the governing body.
§ 8-2. Authorization.
There is hereby authorized a consent agenda for inclusion as a part of the
agenda of every regularly scheduled meeting of the Municipal Council.
§ 8-3. Items which may be included.
Items which may be included in the consent agenda include, but are not
limited to, the following:
A. Approval of minutes; payment of bill list.
B. Conveyances, easements, leases and agreements previously approved
in principle.
C. Routine reports of receipts and awards of bids.
D. Payroll.
E. Awards of bingo and taxi licenses.
F. Refund of tax payments of less than $1,500 for the year in question.
G. Cancellation of tax sale certificates.
H. Honorary and memorial resolutions when the individual or members of
the family are not present at the Municipal Council meeting.
I. Resolutions for permits to hold parades, sidewalk sales, solicitations
and other similar matters.
J. Payment of outside attorney fees in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-155.
§ 6-8 CONSENT AGENDA § 8-3
8:59
§ 8-4. Composition of agenda.
The consent agenda shall consist of any item so designated by the Municipal
Council and marked on the agenda with an asterisk. This shall not preclude
the reading by title of any ordinance as permitted by law.
§ 8-5. Filing of consent items prior to meeting.
No item shall be designated on the consent agenda unless an accurate copy
of the resolution, proclamation, report or other matter which is the subject
of the consent item is filed with the Township Clerk at least 24 hours prior
to the meeting at which the items are to be considered.
§ 8-6. Removal of items from consent agenda prior to vote.
Prior to voting upon any item on the consent agenda, the Mayor shall open
the meeting to members of the Municipal Council for the sole purpose of
hearing requests for removal of items from the consent agenda.
§ 8-7. Discussion of consent items.
There will be no separate discussion of items on the consent agenda unless
a member of the Municipal Council so requests, in which event the item will
be removed from the consent agenda and considered in its normal sequence
on the regular agenda.
§ 8-8. Reading of consent items.
Those items which appear on the consent agenda are not required to be
read at the meeting in their entirety but may be read by description only.
§ 8-9. General statement of substance on consent items.
Once a matter is placed on the consent agenda and no member of the
Municipal Council requests its removal, there will be no separate discussion
of that item, but the person moving or reporting on the item may make a
brief general statement of the substance of the report or general purpose of
the proposed action.
§ 8-10. Voting on consent items.
Each such item requiring a vote will be voted upon by oral or roll call vote
as may be required.
§ 8-11. Appearance of consent items in minutes.
All items approved or rejected on the consent agenda will appear on the
Council minutes in their complete and proper form.
K. Placing of liens on property for demolition thereof or removal of a
health or safety hazard.
§ 8-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 8-12
8:60
§ 8-12. Reading less than all of an item.
Nothing herein shall preclude the reading of less than all of an item on the
agenda session of the regular business meeting of the Municipal Council of
the Township of North Brunswick or authorized by law or where this has
been the normal practice.
Chapter 14
COURT
§ 14-1. Establishment.
A Municipal Court for the Township of North Brunswick is established as of
January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of
1948, as amended and supplemented.11
§ 14-2. Title.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of North Brunswick."
§ 14-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 14-4. Judge.
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council and who shall serve for a term of three years from the
date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 14-5. Salary. [Amended 9-6-1977; 3-29-2004 by Ord. No. 04-7;
8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 09-13; 8-4-2014 by Ord No. 14-08]
A. The Judges of the Municipal Court shall receive such salary as may be
authorized by the current Salary Ordinance for their position. The base
salary of each Judge shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of
other municipal officers. The base salary shall be calculated on each
Judge being scheduled for 64 sessions of the Municipal Court annually.
After consultation and consent of the Mayor, if a Judge is scheduled for
more or less than 64 sessions annually, the Judge's annual salary shall
be adjusted proportionately to the number of scheduled sessions
annually.
B. Any special session scheduled for a sitting Judge in addition to their
routinely scheduled service or a visiting Judge shall be compensated at
$500 per session.
11.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1993, c. 293. See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 8-12 CONSENT AGENDA § 14-6
8:61
§ 14-6. Powers and duties.
The said Municipal Court and the Judge of the Municipal Court shall have,
possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction
conferred by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended
and supplemented, or by any other law.
§ 14-7. Location of Court; hours.
Chapter 17
CULTURAL ARTS COMMITTEE
§ 17-1. Creation; members; vacancies; terms. [Amended
10-21-1974; 2-8-1977]
There is hereby created a Cultural Arts Committee of the Township of North
Brunswick consisting of 11 members whose terms of office shall be for one
year each and shall run concurrently. The members of the Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor and Council. Vacancies upon the Committee
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments and any such
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. All terms
shall commence as of September 1, 1973.
§ 17-2. Election of Chairman.
The Cultural Arts Committee shall elect one of its members upon organizing
each year as Chairman of the Committee, and it may also select such other
officers as it deems necessary.
§ 17-3. Duties.
The duties of the Committee shall consist of engaging and encouraging
cultural and artistic exhibitions, events and all related activities.
§ 17-4. Annual report to Mayor and Council.
The Cultural Arts Committee shall report annually to the Mayor and Council
as to its activities. The Cultural Arts Committee shall also furnish its
opinions and advice on any particular subjects at the request of the Mayor
and Council.
A. The Municipal Court shall be held in the Municipal Building or such
other place or places as the Mayor and Council may designate by
resolution.
B. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall sit at such times as the business
of the Court may require or as may be designated by resolution of the
Mayor and Council and subject to the rules applicable to municipal
courts.
§ 14-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 17-4
17:62
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 19, Defense and Indemnification, adopted 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-9, was repealed 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15. See now
Ch. 61, Personnel.]
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
Chapter 22
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY
SERVICES COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Human Services Committee — See Ch. 45.
§ 22-1. Creation; terms; appointment; vacancies.
A. There is hereby created, under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services, the following committees:
(1) Arts and Humanities.
(2) Media Advisory.
(3) Community Outreach and Celebrations.
(4) Municipal Alliance.
(5) Heritage Day.
B. All Committee members shall be appointed annually by the Mayor
except for the Arts and Humanities Committee and the Municipal
Alliance which shall be appointed by the Township Council. The initial
term of committee members shall be for one, two or three years to be
designated by the Mayor in making the appointment. The terms shall
thereafter be for three years. The appointments shall be made in such a
manner so that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members shall
expire each year. The Community Outreach and Celebrations
Committee shall consist of not more than 12 members, all other
committees created by this section shall consist of not more than 10
members. Vacancies upon any committee created by this section shall
be filled in the same manner as original appointments and any such
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 17-4 (RESERVED) § 22-2
21:63
§ 22-2. Officers.
Each committee shall elect one of its members upon organizing each year
as Chairperson of the committee, and it may also elect officers as it deems
necessary.
§ 22-3. Duties.
A. Art and Humanities Committee. The Arts and Humanities Committee
shall be responsible for addressing the cultural and ethnic concerns of
the community. The Committee shall offer programs that bring the arts
(visual, audio, etc.) to the community and expand the artistic
experiences for residents. The Committee shall provide programs and
services that incorporate and are inclusive of all residents, regardless
of race, religion, physical ability, etc.
B. Media Advisory Committee. The Media Advisory Committee shall work
with the Department of Human Services and the Station Manager to
offer ideas for consideration as they relate to media efforts made by the
department. Media outlets include NB TV-71, press material, the cable
television bulletin board, and the Township Web site.
C. Community Outreach and Celebrations Committee. The Community
Outreach and Celebrations Committee shall plan special community
events, assist in the programs of the department, and act as an advisory
group to the department staff.
D. Municipal Alliance Committee. The duties of the Municipal Alliance
Committee shall include, but not be limited to: [Amended 9-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-19]
(1) Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens, and
representatives from public and private human service agencies to
develop and implement a comprehensive and coordinated effort to
promote and support drug and alcohol prevention, education
programs and related activities with an emphasis on youth.
(2) Assessing the needs of the Township of North Brunswick in relation
to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
(3) Identifying existing efforts and services endeavoring to reduce
alcoholism and drug abuse.
(4) Coordinating projects within Township of North Brunswick to avoid
fragmentation and duplication.
(5) Developing programs to be implemented at the municipal level, or
participating in regionally developed programs to accomplish the
purposes of the alliance effort and the Municipal Alliance
Committee.
(6) Assisting Township of North Brunswick in acquiring funds for
alliance programs.
§ 22-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 22-3
21:64
§ 22-4. Annual report to Mayor and Council.
Each committee shall report annually to the Mayor and Council as to its
activities. Each committee shall also furnish its opinions and advice on any
particular subject at the request of the Mayor and Council.
Chapter 26
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 26-1. Creation.
The Township of North Brunswick Environmental Commission is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
to 40:56A-12), as amended by Chapter 35, P.L. 1972, Chapter 334, P.L. 1975,
and Chapter 168, P.L. 1989.
§ 26-2. Members.
(7) Cooperating with the Governor’s Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse/Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal
data, reports or other information which may be required for the
County Annual Alliance Plan or needed to assist the alliance effort.
(8) The Municipal Alliance Committee may apply for and accept
mandatory Drug Enforcement and Demand Reduction (DEDR)
funds through the request for proposal process initiated annually
through the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee.
(9) Under the guidelines set forth by the Municipal Alliance Grant, the
Municipal Alliance Committee shall provide services and programs
that work on drug, alcohol, tobacco, other drugs and violence
prevention.
E. Heritage Day Committee. The Heritage Day Committee shall be
responsible for the coordination and execution of the Heritage Day
event.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board and
all of whom shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick; the
members shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter
provided. The Mayor shall designate one or the members to serve as
Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission. The terms of the
office of the first Commissioners shall be for one, two or three years, to
be designated by the Mayor in making his appointments and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and until the
appointment and qualification of their successors. The first members of
the Commission shall be appointed for the following terms:
§ 22-3 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-2
26:65
§ 26-3. Powers of Commission.
The Commission is established for the protection, development or use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within territorial
limits of the Township of North Brunswick. The Commission shall have
power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial
bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print,
and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its
judgment it deems necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all
open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open marshland, swamps
and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas and may from time to time recommend to the Planning Board plans
and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use
of such areas.
(1) Two members for the one-year term expiring December 31, 2002.
(2) Two members for the two-year term expiring December 31, 2003.
(3) Three members for the three-year term expiring December 31,
2004.
B. The Mayor or governing body may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after the hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
C. Alternate members. The governing body may appoint not more than two
alternate members, to be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
(1) The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except
that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be
two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
(2) An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(3) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 26-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 26-4
26:66
§ 26-4. Acquisitions by Commission.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the municipality by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 26-5. Records and annual reports.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the governing body.
§ 26-6. Appropriations.
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees and incur
such expenses as it may from time to time require, providing the sane shall
be within the limits of funds appropriated to it by the governing body or
otherwise available to it.
§ 26-7. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
Chapter 29
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 29-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Brunswick
Township Code of Ethics."
§ 29-2. Findings.
The Township Council of the Township of North Brunswick finds and
declares that:
A. Public office and employment are a public trust.
§ 26-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-2
29:67
§ 29-3. Purpose and authority.
§ 29-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body, including the chief
executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the
Township of North Brunswick, and any independent local authority created
by or appointed under the authority of the Township of North Brunswick,
which performs functions other than of a purely advisory nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether parttime
or full-time, employed by or serving on an agency, who is not a local
government officer.
B. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend upon the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives.
C. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private interests
and the duties of a government officer or employee, that confidence is
imperiled.
D. Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed and to apprise their officers and employees
of the behavior which is expected of them while conducting their public
duties.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township of North Brunswick shall be
clear, consistent, uniform in their application and enforceable and to
provide those officers or employees with advice and information
concerning possible conflicts of interest which might arise in the
conduct of public duties.
B. It is the further purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29.12
C. This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29, and under the further authority granted to
the Township of North Brunswick under the provisions of Titles 40 and
40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 29-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 29-4
29:68
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee residing in the same household.
OFFICER — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or
full-time, who is one of the following:
A. Mayor.
B. Member of the Township Council.
C. Township Administrator.
D. Director, Department of Finance.
E. Director, Department of Inspections.
F. Superintendent, Department of Public Works.
G. Director, Department of Human Services.
H. Chief of Police and Police Director.
I. Deputy Chief of Police.
J. Tax Assessor.
K. Township Clerk.
L. Township Attorney.
M. Township Engineer.
N. Township Planning Consultant.
O. Township Auditor.
P. Municipal Judge.
Q. Township Prosecutor.
R. Construction Code Official.
S. Planning Board member.
T. Planning Board Attorney.
U. Zoning Board of Adjustment member.
V. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.
W. Superintendent of Parks and Recreation.
X. Library Board of Trustees member.
§ 29-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-4
29:69
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Township of
North Brunswick or of an agency under the authority of or appointed by the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 29-5. Ethical standards.
Officers and employees of the Township of North Brunswick shall comply
with the following provisions:
Y. Director, North Brunswick Public Library.
Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer-
Employee Relations Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3, of the Township of North
Brunswick or of an agency created under the authority of or appointed
by the Township of North Brunswick.
Z.
A. No officer or employee of the Township of North Brunswick or member
of his or her immediate family shall have an interest in a business
organization or engage in any business, transaction or professional
activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his
or her duties in the public interest.
B. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or
others.
C. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
matter where he, a member of his or her immediate family or any
business organization in which he or she has an interest has a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence or judgment.
D. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or
her official duties.
E. No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family or any
business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him, directly
or indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties. This provision
shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the
campaign of an announced candidate for elective public office, if the
officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign
contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to influence the
officer in the discharge of his or her official duties.
§ 29-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 29-5
29:70
§ 29-6. Financial disclosure statements.
F. No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her public
office or employment or any information not generally available to the
members of the public which he or she receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his or her office or employment for the
purpose of securing financial gain for himself, any member of his or her
immediate family or any business organization with which he or she is
associated.
G. No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or she
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
township in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other
matter pending before any agency of the Township of North Brunswick.
This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an employee from
representing another employee where the representation is within the
context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.
H. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group.
I. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor.
J. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Township of North
Brunswick or members of his or her immediate family from
representing himself, herself or themselves in negotiations or
proceedings concerning his or her or their own interests.
A. Officers of the township shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information, which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the officer's job title:
(1) Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000
received by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees,
customers receipts or commissions on transactions received
through a business organization need not be separately reported as
sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the source of
income, the security need not be reported unless the local
§ 29-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-6
29:71
§ 29-7. Ethical Standards Board.
government officer or member of his or her immediate family has
an interest in the business organization.
(2) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(3) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source,
excluding relatives, received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(4) The name and address of all business organizations in which the
local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family had an interest during the preceding calendar year.
(5) The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her
immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar
year.
B. The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board shall prescribe
a financial disclosure statement form for filing purposes. If a financial
disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey
Local Finance Board, in accordance with the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law,13 then that form shall be used. The Township
Clerk shall make the forms available to the officers and employees
required to file a financial disclosure statement.
C. The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk within 90
days after the effective date of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics
Law. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or before April 30 of
each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the North
Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board.
D. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
A. There is hereby established the North Brunswick Township Ethical
Standards Board, consisting of six members who are residents of the
township, at least two of whom shall be public members. The members
of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Council. The members
shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for
integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs. No more than
three members of the Board shall be of the same political party.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 29-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 29-7
29:72
§ 29-8. Facilities and staff.
B. The members of the North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards
Board shall annually elect a Chairperson from among the membership.
C. The members shall serve for terms of five years; except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for terms of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years, and the remaining members
shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each member shall
serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. Any
vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties under this chapter.
E. All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested cases
under the Administrative Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.
F. In the event that a hearing is to be held, the officer or employee
charged with violation of this section shall be accorded due process of
law, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Right to counsel.
(2) Right to prehearing discovery.
(3) Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any person.
(4) Reasonable notice of hearing.
(5) Right to subpoena persons and documents.
(6) Right to make a stenographic record of the hearing.
(7) Right of examination and cross-examination.
A. The Township Council shall provide the North Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board with the facilities needed for the conduct of its
business and the preservation of its records and shall supply equipment
and supplies as may be necessary and as may be provided for in the
annual municipal budget.
B. All necessary expenses incurred by the North Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board and its members shall be paid, upon
certification of the Chairperson of the Board, by the Township
Treasurer within the limits of funds appropriated in the annual budget
or by emergency appropriations for those purposes.
§ 29-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-8
29:73
§ 29-9. Adoption of Code of Ethics.
C. The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board may request
and receive assistance from township officers and employees, including
the Township Clerk and the Township Attorney, and may appoint
employees, including independent counsel, and clerical staff as are
necessary to carry out the provisions of this code within the limits of
funds appropriated by the Township Council for those purposes in the
annual budget.
A. Within 90 days after the appointment of the North Brunswick Township
Ethical Standards Board, the Board shall promulgate by resolution a
code of ethics for all officers and employees serving the township.
Officers and employees serving a township independent authority shall
be deemed to be serving the township for purposes of this chapter. Until
such time as the North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board
shall have adopted a code of ethics, the provisions set forth herein shall
serve as the code of ethics.
B. The code of ethics promulgated by the Board shall be either identical to
the provisions set forth in § 29-5 or more restrictive, but shall not be
less restrictive.
C. Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the code of ethics
and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held on the code of
ethics shall be published in the newspaper designated for the
publication of official notices for the township and shall be distributed
to the Township Clerk and to the Township Administrator for circulation
among the officers and employees serving the township.
D. The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board shall hold a
public hearing on the code of ethics not less than 30 days following its
promulgation, at which any officer or employee of the township and any
other person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify.
E. The Board may amend or supplement the code of ethics as it deems
necessary.
F. If the code of ethics is not identical to the provisions set forth in § 29-5,
the North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board shall, as
required by law, submit the code of ethics to the New Jersey Local
Finance Board for approval.
G. If the Commission fails to act within 60 days of the submission, the code
of ethics shall be deemed approved.
H. A code of ethics requiring approval by the New Jersey Local Finance
Board shall take effect 60 days after approval by the Commission.
I. A code of ethics identical to the provisions set forth in § 29-5 shall take
effect 10 days after the public hearing.
§ 29-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 29-9
29:74
§ 29-10. Powers and duties of Ethical Standards Board.
The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board shall have the
following powers:
§ 29-11. Advisory opinions.
J. The Board shall forward a copy of the code of ethics to the Township
Clerk and shall make copies available to officers and employees serving
the township.
A. To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with
regard to possible violations of the municipal code of ethics or financial
disclosure requirements by local government officers or employees
serving the township.
B. To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance
of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the
holding of a hearing.
C. To forward to the Middlesex County Prosecutor or the Attorney General
or other governmental body any information concerning violations of
the code of ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers or
employees serving the township which may warrant the institution of
other legal proceedings.
D. To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees serving the
township as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of the code of ethics or financial
disclosure requirements.
E. To enforce the provisions of the code of ethics and financial disclosure
requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the township
and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by
this chapter.
F. To adopt rules and regulations as are necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
A. An officer or employee of the Township of North Brunswick may request
and obtain from the North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards
Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed activity or
conduct would, in its opinion, constitute a violation of the code of ethics
or any financial disclosure requirements.
B. Advisory opinions shall not be made public except when the Board, by
the vote of 2/3 of all of its members, directs that the opinion be made
public.
C. Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer or
employee unless the Board, in directing that the opinion be made
public, so determines.
§ 29-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-12
29:75
§ 29-12. Complaints.
§ 29-13. Enforcement and penalties.
A. The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board, upon receipt
of a signed written complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of
any officer or employee of the Township of North Brunswick serving the
township is in conflict with the code of ethics or financial disclosure
requirements, shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint within 30
days of receipt and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and
circumstances set forth in the complaint.
B. The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint is
within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable factual
basis.
C. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its jurisdiction,
frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce that conclusion to
writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the complainant and to the
officer or employee of the Township of North Brunswick against whom
the complaint was filed.
D. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its jurisdiction
and has factual basis, the Board shall notify the officer or employee of
the Township of North Brunswick against whom the complaint was filed
of the nature of the complaint and the facts and circumstances set forth
therein.
E. The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present the Board
with any statement or information concerning the complaint which he
or she wishes.
F. If the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to whether
the officer or employee of the Township of North Brunswick is in
conflict with the municipal code of ethics or any financial disclosure
requirements, the Board shall conduct a hearing concerning the
possible violation and any other facts and circumstances which may
have come to the attention of the Board with respect to the conduct of
the officer or employee.
G. The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the
officer or employee is in conflict with the code of ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by no less than 2/
3 of all members of the Board.
H. If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict with
the code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose any
penalties which it believes are appropriate within the limits of this
chapter.
A. An appointed or elected officer or employee of the Township of North
Brunswick found guilty by the North Brunswick Township Ethical
§ 29-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 29-13
29:76
§ 29-14. Records of Ethical Standards Board.
All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed
pursuant to this chapter and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts
or other official papers prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be preserved
for a period of five years from the date of filing or preparation, as the case
may be.
§ 29-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication of notice
of adoption as required by law, except that the requirements providing for
the filing of financial disclosure reports shall take effect on the 21st day of
May, 1991, with the first reports required to be filed not later than August
19, 1991.
Chapter 32
FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 176.
Standards Board of the violation of any provision of this chapter or of
any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1. The North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board shall
report its findings to the office or agency having the power of removal
or discipline of the appointed officer or employee and may recommend
that further disciplinary action be taken.
B. The finding by the North Brunswick Township Ethical Standards Board
that an appointed officer or employee of the Township of North
Brunswick is guilty of the violation of the provisions of this chapter or of
any code of ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient
cause for his or her removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary
action by the officer or agency having the power of removal or
discipline. When a person who is in the career service is found to have
violated the provisions of this chapter or any code of ethics in effect
pursuant to this chapter, the procedure leading to removal, suspension,
demotion or other disciplinary action shall be governed by any
applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ 29-13 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 29-15
32:77

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 11-2-1959]
§ 32-1. Authority to establish.
Fire companies may be authorized and established, in addition to those
already in existence in the township, by the Mayor and Council of the
Township of North Brunswick when and if the said Mayor and Council
deems it necessary for the safety and welfare of the township.
§ 32-2. Composition; qualifications. [Amended 7-3-1972; 5-21-1990]
The Fire Department of the Township of North Brunswick shall consist of
a Fire Chief, the Chief of each fire company established in the township,
who shall be designated as Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department in order
of rank, or the top officers of each company, and as many firemen as are
members of the respective fire companies. Each member of the respective
fire companies shall, at the time of his or her election to membership in
one of the said companies, be in compliance with the physical examination
guidelines and standards as set forth by the New Jersey State Firemen's
Association for the acceptance of new members. All applicants for
memberships in one of the said companies shall provide a physician's
certification that he or she is qualified for membership in accordance with
the aforesaid physical examination guidelines.
§ 32-3. Approval of members. [Amended 1-17-1995]
Any citizen within the age limit stated above who has been elected to one of
the several companies in the township shall become a member of the Fire
Department; provided, however, that a proposal to that effect is made in
writing, with the approvals of the Chief of the Department and the Chief of
the particular company endorsed thereon, to the Mayor and the Council of
the Township of North Brunswick, and the said Mayor and Council grants its
approval. All resignations from the Fire Department shall take the identical
course as that outlined above with respect to elections to the Department.
§ 32-4. (Reserved)14
§ 32-5. Board of Fire Officers. [Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No.
97-1]
The Fire Chief and the three top officers of each company shall constitute
the Board of Fire Officers; provided, however, that each appointment to
the Board shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council of
the Township of North Brunswick. Said Board shall reorganize annually
and shall hold meetings at least monthly throughout the year, and more
frequently when required, for the purpose of transacting the business of
14.Editor's Note: Former § 32-4, Inspections, was repealed 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1.
§ 32-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 32-5
32:79
the Fire Department. The Board shall have complete and absolute control
over and management of the Fire Department during such times when the
Department is not on active duty, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council. Said approval may be granted or refused by the Mayor and Council
only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as specifically and
particularly provided.
§ 32-6. Election of Fire Chief and Assistant Chief. [Amended
3-3-1980]
§ 32-7. Annual meeting of the Fire Department.
The Board of Fire Officers shall call the annual meeting of the Fire
Department in December.
§ 32-8. Fire Prevention Bureau. [Added 5-1-1967; amended
3-1-1971; 4-17-1978; 1-17-1995]
A. The Fire Department, at its annual meeting in December, shall elect the
Fire Chief, First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief of the
township, each of whom is to serve for a term of one year, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council by resolution duly adopted. A twothirds
vote of those present at said annual meeting shall be required to
elect said Fire Chief and Assistant Chiefs. The offices of Fire Chief and
Assistant Chiefs shall be filled on a Fire Company Nos. 1, 2 and 3
rotation basis from among the qualified officers of the several
companies. A qualified officer for Township Chief or Assistant Chief
must be an active or exempt member who is responding to 40% of the
alarms for the year previous to assumption of office and must have been
a Department fire line officer of Fire Company No. 1, 2 or 3 for at least
four years previous to his election and holding the rank of Lieutenant or
above. [Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
B. In the event that the Township Chief vacates his office for any reason,
the First Assistant Township Chief will become Acting Township Chief
for the duration of the term. The Second Assistant Township Chief will
become Acting First Assistant Township Chief. The rank of Second
Assistant Township Chief will be filled by the fire company of which the
vacated Township Chief was a member.
A. The Chiefs of each of the fire companies of North Brunswick shall
appoint one man from their respective companies to act as Fire
Inspector. These Inspectors, in turn, shall appoint six men from their
own companies to act as Assistant Inspectors. Collectively, the
Inspectors and Assistant Inspectors shall be known as the "Fire
Prevention Bureau." Appointments to the Fire Prevention Bureau shall
be made, as indicated, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council. The term of all members shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Members, after serving 48 consecutive months and upon receiving
Fire Inspector certification from the Department of Community Affairs
§ 32-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 32-8
32:80
§ 32-9. Number of firemen in each company.
Each fire company shall contain as many firemen and honorary members
as the particular company shall deem necessary for its purposes, subject to
the approval of the Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick.
Honorary members shall be elected to the Fire Department in the same
manner as the election of firemen as outlined above.
§ 32-10. Duties of firemen at times of fire.
It shall be the duty of the firemen of the Department, upon learning of the
outbreak of a fire, by alarm or otherwise, to proceed immediately to their
respective firehouses and to convey their apparatus to the place of the fire,
unless otherwise directed by the Chief or an Assistant Chief or by the senior
officer in charge. Each fireman shall remain at the scene of the fire under
the direction and subject to all orders of the officer present who is in charge.
Bureau of Fire Safety of the State of New Jersey, shall be permanently
appointed to the Fire Prevention Bureau and shall remain until they
resign or are removed.
B. The members of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall elect the following
officers: Chief Inspector, First Assistant Inspector, Second Assistant
Inspector and three Captains.
C. Any member of the Fire Prevention Bureau not fulfilling his duties may,
after a hearing by the Bureau, be removed by a two-thirds vote.
D. All members of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall serve without financial
compensation.
E. Duties of the Bureau of Fire Prevention:
(1) Educate the general public on fire prevention.
(2) Perform the duties necessary for Fire Prevention Week.
(3) Have the authority to police all fire lanes and fire zones within the
boundaries of North Brunswick and issue summons.15
(4) Under the supervision of the Bureau of Fire Safety, the Fire
Prevention Bureau may inspect non-life-hazard buildings.
(5) The Bureau of Fire Safety, under the supervision of the Fire Official,
shall be responsible for fire investigations. The Fire Prevention
Bureau, under the supervision of the Fire Official, may assist the
Bureau of Fire Safety and Fire Investigations. [Amended
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-116]
15.Editor's Note: See Chapter 173, Fire Lanes and Fire Zones, § 173-7, Enforcement agencies.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection E(6), regarding revenue
generated by the Fire Prevention Bureau, and Subsection F, regarding the right of
members to enter buildings, structures or premises, both of which followed this
subsection.
§ 32-8 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 32-10
32:81
Upon being ordered home, each fireman shall immediately proceed thereto,
making such that the apparatus is returned, well washed and cleaned and
that all tanks and extinguishers are filled.
§ 32-11. General supervision of Department.
The Fire Chief shall have general supervision of the Department when it
is not on actual duty involving a fire, which supervision shall be subject
to and not in conflict with such rules and bylaws for the government and
management of the Department as may from time to time be adopted.
§ 32-12. Control and command during fires.
The Fire Chief, or his Assistant Chiefs in order of rank in the event of his
absence, shall have full power and absolute control and command while the
Department is engaged in active fire duty and shall cause the several pieces
of apparatus to be utilized in the most advantageous manner for combating
the fire.
§ 32-13. Assumption of duties in absence of superior officers.
In the event that the Fire Chief and the Assistant Chiefs are absent from a
fire, the fireman having charge of the apparatus who first arrives at the fire
shall assume the duties of the Chief until the arrival of a superior officer,
who will then take charge.
§ 32-14. Police power and authority while on fire duty.
The Fire Chief and the Assistant Chiefs, or the one in command at the
fire, are hereby clothed with full and complete police power and authority
while on fire duty and are hereby authorized and directed to require and
secure the removal of any and all obstructions from in front of and around
hydrants, and for that purpose are hereby authorized to call upon the heads
of any of the municipal departments for aid and assistance in securing the
removal of such obstructions.
§ 32-15. Reports to Fire Chief of faulty hydrants.
It shall be the duty of the fire company officer in charge of his company at
a fire or a drill to report to the Fire Chief all fire hydrants that are found to
be inoperative or leaky or are set in such a manner as to make it difficult to
connect thereto.
§ 32-16. Tampering with apparatus.
No member of any fire company shall be permitted to tamper with or fix
or repair any of the apparatus of the company or the Department unless so
directed by the Chief of his company or the Assistant Chief of said company
or by the senior officer in charge.
§ 32-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 32-17
32:82
§ 32-17. Driving mobile apparatus.
No member of any company shall drive the mobile apparatus of the
company or the Department, except the regularly qualified drivers unless
directed to do so by the Fire Chief or an Assistant Chief or by the senior
officer in charge, and then only in case of emergency.
§ 32-18. Reports to Mayor and Council of faulty hydrants.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make a permanent record of
all reports of defective, inoperative or improperly set hydrants, and he
shall submit a report to the Mayor and Council, giving the location of
such hydrants, the name of the maker and a specification of the troubles
involved.
§ 32-19. Chief to submit reports to Council. [Amended 3-1-1971]
The Fire Chief shall submit a report to the Mayor and Council, containing
the following information: the condition of the various pieces of fire
apparatus and appurtenances, including fire hydrants; a tabulation of all
fires occurring within the township during the period of the report,
specifying their date, location, actual or suspected cause and the loss
occasioned thereby; a manpower status report detailing the authorized
strength of the various fire companies, their actual strength on a monthly
basis during the period of the report, election of new members and any
resignations or expulsion of old members during the period of the report;
a brief summary of the activities of the Fire Prevention Bureau during
the period of the report, including any recommendations regarding the
updating or amending of the Fire Prevention Code, Life Safety Code,17
Zoning Ordinance,18 Building Code and any other township ordinance
relative to fire prevention, fire protection or fire safety; and any condition,
building or structure existing within the township which, in the opinion of
the Fire Chief, constitutes a hazard to life or property from fire or explosion.
§ 32-20. Records of fire and drill service. [Amended 1-21-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
The Chief of each fire company shall keep a permanent record of the fire
and drill service of each member of the company and shall submit a copy of
such record to the Board of Fire Officers at the close of the calendar year.
§ 32-21. Power of expulsion or suspension of members.
Each company shall have the power, pursuant to its own rules and
regulations, to expel or suspend any member who is guilty of
insubordination or misconduct while not on fire duty.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 32-17 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 32-22
32:83
§ 32-22. Reports of suspension, expulsion to Department at next
regular meeting. [Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
The vote of any of the fire companies of the Department to expel or suspend
any of the members of the particular company shall be reported to the next
regular meeting of the Fire Department following said action.
§ 32-23. Right to appeal suspension or expulsion to Department.
[Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
The expelled or suspended member shall have the right to appeal to the Fire
Department at its next regular meeting; provided, however, that notice of
the appeal is filed with the fire company within 30 days after the vote for
expulsion or suspension, as the case may be. After hearing the charges and
defenses thereto, the members attending that meeting or joint meeting shall
then vote whether to confirm or reverse the decision of the fire company.
§ 32-24. Appeal of expulsion or suspension to Mayor and Council.
[Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
In the event that the Fire Department votes to confirm the fire company, the
expelled or suspended member shall then have the further right of appeal
to the Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick, or an officer
to be appointed by the Mayor and Council in their stead, provided, however,
that notice of this appeal is filed with the fire company and the Mayor
and Council within 30 days after the vote at the meeting. The Mayor and
Council, or appointed officer, shall hear the charges and defenses and its
decision shall be final and binding upon all the parties, and there shall be
no appeal therefrom.
§ 32-25. Filing charges against firemen. [Amended 1-21-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
Charges of insubordination, neglect of duty or misconduct while on fire duty
may be brought by the Fire Chief or any of the Assistant Chiefs of the Fire
Department, or by any member of the Fire Department, against any officer
or fireman of a fire company before such company in which the charged
officer or fireman is a member, or may be brought directly to a meeting of
the Fire Department.
§ 32-26. Appeal of charges to Department. [Amended 1-21-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
In the event that such charges are brought before the fire company, either
side may appeal to a meeting of the Fire Department from an adverse
decision of the company by filing a notice of such appeal with the fire
company and with the Board of Fire Officers within 30 days after the
decision is reached.
§ 32-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 32-27
32:84
§ 32-27. Appeal of Department decision to Mayor and Council.
[Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
The decision of the meeting of the Fire Department, either on appeal or
in initial proceedings, may be appealed to the Mayor and Council of the
Township of North Brunswick, or an officer to be appointed by the Mayor
and Council in their stead, by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days from
the decision of the meeting. The decision of the Mayor and Council, or
appointed officer, shall be final and binding, and there shall be no appeal
therefrom.
§ 32-28. Practice drills.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to hold practice drills when and where,
in his discretion, he deems them to be necessary, and for that purpose he
may call out any or all of the fire companies to participate in such drills,
provided, however, that each fire company is called to drill and training at
least one time during each month of the year.
§ 32-29. Failure to respond to call for drill or training.
Any fire company or officer or member thereof refusing or failing to respond
to a call for drill or training, as aforesaid, shall be liable to suspension or
expulsion.
§ 32-30. Charges against individuals for failure to respond to
practice drills.
Charges against any officer or member of a fire company for refusing or
failing to respond to a call for drill or training may be brought in the manner
detailed in §§ 32-25 through 32-27 of this chapter.
§ 32-31. Charges against fire company for failure to respond to
practice drills. [Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
Charges against a fire company for refusing or failing to respond to a call
for drill or training shall be brought by the Fire Chief directly to a meeting
of the Department, which may vote to suspend or expel.
§ 32-32. Right of fire company to appeal to Mayor and Council.
[Amended 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
Such fire company shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Council
of the Township of North Brunswick, or an officer to be appointed by the
Mayor and Council in their stead, provided that such appeal is filed within
30 days after the decision of the meeting. The decision of the Mayor and
Council, or appointed officer, shall be final and binding, and there shall be
no appeal therefrom.
§ 32-27 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 32-33
32:85
§ 32-33. Provision of insurance coverage. [Amended 1-21-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-1]
Every member of the Fire Department shall be provided with life insurance
and workmen's compensation insurance by the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 32-34. Training at practice drills.
The Fire Chief shall arrange the drills and training, which shall include
the proper and efficient use of all of the appliances and apparatus of
the Department, including the quick handling, laying and raising of hose,
handling of streams, use of shutoff nozzles, Siamese connections, forcible
entry tools, salvage work, ladder work, lifesaving and modern methods of
extinguishment.
§ 32-35. (Reserved)19
§ 32-36. Penalty for refusal to permit entrance to fight fires.
[Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person, company or corporation refusing to permit entrance by any of
the members of the Fire Department for the purpose of fighting a fire or
preventing the spread of a fire in progress shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days,
or both. Said fine shall be imposed on complaint and conviction before the
Municipal Court of the Township of North Brunswick.
19.Editor's Note: Former § 32-35, Penalty for refusal to permit entrance for inspections, as
amended, was repealed 1-17-1995.
§ 32-33 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 32-36
32:86
ARTICLE II
Investigation of Applicants to Volunteer Fire Companies and First-
Aid and Rescue Squad
[Adopted 6-19-1978]
§ 32-37. Investigation and report required.
The Police Department of the Township of North Brunswick shall cause
to be conducted a complete investigation into all police records of every
applicant for membership in the North Brunswick Volunteer Fire Companies
and the North Brunswick First-Aid and Rescue Squad and shall forthwith
submit such report to the North Brunswick Mayor and Council, which
shall consider such police report in connection with the appointment of
the applicants to membership in the North Brunswick Volunteer Fire
Companies and the First-Aid and Rescue Squad.
§ 32-37 FIRE DEPARTMENT, VOLUNTEER § 32-37
32:87
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 37, Health Benefits, which consisted of Art. I, Part-
Time Employees, adopted 3-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5, was repealed
6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15. See now Ch. 61, Personnel.]
Chapter 38
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III of
the Code.
§ 38-1. Statutory provisions.
The provisions of subdivision B, which includes those provisions set forth
in N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 through 26:3-8.1 are hereby adopted for the purpose of
removing the local Board of Health created in this chapter from being
organized under the provisions of subdivision C, which includes those
provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:3-9 through 26:3-17.20
§ 38-2. Creation of Board; membership; terms; vacancy. [Amended
1-18-1994]
In accordance with the provisions set forth in said subdivision B, which
includes N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 through 26:3-8.1, there is hereby created a local
Board of Health for the Township of North Brunswick, which shall consist of
seven members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for terms
of three years, except that upon the appointment of the original local Board
of Health under this chapter,21 two members shall be appointed for three
years, two members shall be appointed for two years and one member shall
be appointed for one year. Thereafter, as the aforesaid terms expire, said
appointments shall all be for a term of three years. Upon the occurrence
of a vacancy for any reason, said vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment by the Mayor and Council. In addition to the original
appointment of the Board, two members will be appointed for terms of three
years.
20.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 26:3-17 was repealed by L. 1947, c. 181, p. 828, § 9.
21.Editor's Note: The original Board of Health consisted of five members.
§ 32-37 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 38-3
38:88
§ 38-3. Duties.
The local Board of Health created under this chapter shall perform its duties
in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 26 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
§ 38-4. Residency requirement.
Any person appointed a member of the local Board of Health shall be a
bona fide resident of the Township of North Brunswick. The term of any
member of the local Board of Health shall be automatically terminated
upon a change of residence to a location outside the Township of North
Brunswick.
Chapter 42
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 195. Housing standards — See Ch. 197.
§ 42-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law, as
amended, of the State of New Jersey, a body corporate and politic to be
known as the "Housing Authority of the Township of North Brunswick" is
hereby created and established.
§ 42-2. Filing of certified copy with state.
The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this
chapter with the Commissioner of the State Department of Community
Affairs.
Chapter 43
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMITTEE
§ 43-1. Creation.
The North Brunswick Human Relations Committee is hereby established.
§ 43-2. Members.
The Committee shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Mayor. All of
the members shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick; the
members shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided.
The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
§ 38-3 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 43-2
42:89
presiding officer of the Committee. The initial term of members shall be
for one, two or three years to be designated in the initial appointment. The
terms thereafter shall be for three years. The initial appointments shall be
made in such manner so that the terms of 1/3 of the members shall expire
each year. A vacancy in the Committee occurring otherwise than expiration
of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 43-3. Purpose; powers.
The Committee is established for the purpose of addressing racial, ethnic
or religious concerns that can undermine the strength and unity of a
community and is detrimental to the community's health and well-being.
As such, the Committee will assist in promoting good relations between
all the people of this community and to demonstrate a high regard for the
protection of the civil rights of all persons. This Committee is not intended
to or in no way may act or function as a review board for any actions of the
Township Council or any department thereof, including but not limited to
the Police Department, and may not infringe upon or in any matter assert
any power granted by the laws of the State of New Jersey, the ordinances of
the Township or the Township Council. The Committee shall:
§ 43-4. Records and annual reports.
The North Brunswick Human Relations Committee shall keep records of
its meetings and activities and report to the Township Council as the
A. Create and carry out educational programs which promote tolerance,
understanding and harmonious relations between all individuals of the
Township.
B. Foster participation in and encourage individual, organizational,
neighborhood and community efforts to engender understanding, good
will, cooperation amongst the various groups and individuals of this
Township.
C. At the request of the Township, serve to resolve individual or
community problems.
D. Study and analyze the status, nature and extent of discrimination,
prejudice, bias, intolerance, and indifference in the community at large.
E. Create formal or informal educational programs to address issues of
bias and violent acts based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender or disability.
F. Report from time to time, and not less than once a year, to the Mayor
and Township Council on ways and means to promote and encourage
understanding, good will, cooperation, equal opportunity and
conciliation in the community at large, and ways and means to
eliminate discrimination, bias, intolerance, indifference and group
tensions in the community at large.
§ 43-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 43-4
42:90
Committee deems advisable and/or as the Township Council shall request.
The meetings of the North Brunswick Human Relations Committee shall
be open to the public and conducted in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act.22
§ 43-5. Appropriations.
The Committee may incur such expenses as it may from time to time
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the Township Council or otherwise available to it, and there shall be
established in the municipal budget a line item for this Committee.
Chapter 45
VOLUNTEER TUITION CREDIT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
Length of service awards program — See Ch.
50.
Service awards — See Ch. 84.
§ 45-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the rules and regulations
governing the administration and application of the Volunteer Tuition Credit
Program ("program").
§ 45-2. Eligibility.
Active members in good standing, their spouses and dependent children, of
the Township of North Brunswick's Volunteer Fire Companies and First-Aid
and Rescue Squads are eligible to obtain tuition credit under the program.
A dependant child shall be defined as any student who does not meet any
of the eligibility criteria listed in N.J.A.C. 9A:9-2.6(a) or (b) for independent
student status. Volunteers must agree to serve as a member of a volunteer
organization for a minimum of four years to be deemed eligible for the
program.
§ 45-3. Applicability.
Tuition funds shall be provided for postsecondary courses on a tuitioncredit
basis in specific learning institutions such as county colleges, county
vocational schools or county technical institutes.
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 43-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-4
42:91
§ 45-4. Maximum tuition receivable.
Each eligible volunteer, his or her spouse or dependent child shall be
eligible to receive tuition credit in the amount of $600 per year, not to
exceed a maximum amount of $2,400 over a four-year service period,
provided that classroom space is available and that tuition-paying students
constitute the minimum number required for the course.
§ 45-5. Administration.
The Business Administrator, or his or her designee, shall administer the
program in the Township of North Brunswick and shall enter into any and
all agreements necessary and maintain files of all documents as may be
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:71-78.1 et seq.
§ 45-6. Program application; requirements; procedures.
Members of North Brunswick Fire Companies and First-Aid and Rescue
Squads shall apply for program benefits from the office of the Township
Business Administrator or his or her designee.
A. Eligible members of the North Brunswick Fire Companies or the First-
Aid and Rescue Squads must sign a service pledge agreement form (See
Schedule A23), pledging four (4) years of service, to be counter-signed
by the head of the volunteer organization. The eligible member shall file
same with the office of the Business Administrator or his or her
designee.
B. Following each year of active volunteer services, the volunteer
organization must provide the Business Administrator or his or her
designee with a verification of service performed (See Schedule B24) or
a blanket verification of service performed (See Schedule C25),
confirming that the volunteer has been a member in good standing for
the past twelve-month period. The first request for the letter of
verification may come at any time after a volunteer has earned one (1)
year of service.
C. Upon verification, the Business Administrator, or his or her designee,
shall issue a certificate of authorization (See Schedule D26) to be
presented to the learning institution by the volunteer or eligible family
member(s) during the enrollment period. Only the original form shall be
accepted. The certificate of authorization is an "original only"
document. In the event of its loss, it is not replaceable.
23.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
24.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
25.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included at the end of this chapter.
26.Editor's Note: Schedule D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 45-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 45-6
42:92
Chapter 50
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
§ 50-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997,27 to reward members
of the volunteer first aid and rescue squad and fire companies within the
Township of North Brunswick. Specifically, the eligible volunteer emergency
service organizations are as follows: North Brunswick First Aid and Rescue
Squad, Fire Company 1, 2 and 3.
§ 50-2. Annual contributions; plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth
below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that
shall be established by the Township pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 338; and that
such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code, and this chapter.
D. If registration is authorized, the learning institution will debit the
tuition amount of the course on the lower portion of the certificate and
maintain a running balance for other courses taken during the year.
E. Enrollment is limited to those classes where space is available and
tuition-paying students constitute the minimum number required for
the course. The institution may wait until the last day of registration to
determine space availability.
F. Upon completion of each semester or course cycle, the student must
submit a transcript to the municipality, which becomes part of the
permanent file kept by the Business Administrator or his or her
designee.
G. A student must maintain a grade of "C," "2.0" or "pass" in the courses
taken under the program to continue eligibility.
H. The Township of North Brunswick assumes no responsibility for the
requisitioning of any supportive documents.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 45-6 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 50-3
42:93
§ 50-3. Point system.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as provided in the LOSAP Point System in Schedule
A, annexed to this chapter.
§ 50-4. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless and until a public ballot question
in a form substantially the same as the LOSAP Ballot Question which is
annexed to this chapter as Schedule B28 is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.29
Chapter 53
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 53, Motor Vehicle Maintenance Department, adopted
2-20-1979, was repealed 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15. See now Ch.
61, Personnel.]
Chapter 58
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 58, Officers and Employees, which consisted of Art.
I, Mechanic, adopted 2-8-1977; Art. II, Residency Requirements,
adopted 5-2-1977: Art. III, Senior Citizens' Aide, adopted 6-20-1977;
Art. IV, Senior Account Clerk, adopted 7-18-1977; Art. V, Director
of Engineering and Technical Services, adopted 9-4-1979; Art. VI,
Assistant Public Works Superintendent, adopted 5-5-1980; Art. VII,
Recreation and Park Maintenance Foreman, adopted 11-3-1980; Art.
VIII, Assistant Water Superintendent, adopted 2-16-1982; Art. IX,
Juvenile Restitution Coordinator, adopted 6-7-1982; Art. X,
Administrator, adopted 8-16-1982; Art. XI, Assistant Construction
Code Official, adopted 2-7-1983; Art. XII, Code Enforcement Officer,
adopted 3-19-1984; Art. XIII, Chief Financial Officer, adopted
2-5-1990; Art. XIV, Municipal Public Defender, adopted 3-2-1998
by Ord. No. 98-2; and Art. XV, Assistant Director of Public Works,
adopted 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-4, was repealed 6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-15. See now Ch. 61, Personnel.]
28.Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Township offices.
29.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 01-17 was approved by the voters at the general election
held 11-6-2001.
§ 50-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 50-4
42:94
Chapter 60
OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of Government — See Ch. 3.
§ 60-1. Creation. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-9]
There is hereby created an Open Space Committee of the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 60-2. Membership; terms; appointments; vacancies. [Amended
2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-9]
The Committee shall consist of 12 members appointed by the Council,
one of whom shall also be a member of the Department of Community
Development, and all of whom shall be residents of the Township of North
Brunswick; the members shall serve without compensation except as
hereinafter provided. The Committee shall designate one of its members
to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Committee. The terms
of the office of the Committee members shall be for one year, January 1
to December 31. A vacancy on the Committee occurring otherwise than
expiration of a term shall he filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 60-3. Duties.
The duties of the Committee shall be to review and recommend open space
acquisitions and projects to the Township Council to be implemented under
the open space tax. The Open Space Committee may have an operating
budget as provided in the annual budget of the Township Council.
§ 60-4. Annual report; furnishing of advice.
The Open Space Committee shall report annually to the Mayor and Council
as to its activities. The Committee shall also submit interim reports on
specific projects when required. The Open Space Committee shall also
furnish its opinion and advice on open space preservation and acquisition
projects, including all green acre projects at the request of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 50-4 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 60-4
60:95
Chapter 61
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29.
Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
50.
Retirement — See Ch. 74.
Service awards — See Ch. 84.
§ 60-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 60-4
60:96
ARTICLE I
Definitions; Labor Laws
§ 61-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words have been defined, unless the context
otherwise indicates.
ACTIVE EMPLOYEE — A current employee, paid or unpaid, that has not
separated from the Township by a formal action that may include
resignation, termination, retirement or death.
ADMINISTRATIVE EMPLOYEE — An employee whose primary duty
involves nonmanual office work directly related to management policies or
general business operations, and requires the exercise of discretion and
independent judgment.
ADMINISTRATIVE TIME — For irregular or occasional excess hours
worked; as an alternative to overtime or compensatory time when an
employee that is not eligible to receive overtime accumulates time, on an
hour-for-hour basis, for hours worked over 40 hours in a workweek, to be
used at a later date as time off. Examples where administrative time may be
accrued include working at a public event or during inclement weather, or
responding to an emergency event.
APPOINTED POSITION — Job title that is permitted or required by state
law or local ordinance to be filled, and these laws or ordinances govern
the requirements of the job. An appointed employee serves for a fixed term
of employment, or at the pleasure of officials identified to serve as the
appointing authority.
BASE SALARY — Employee's rate of pay that will be within the salary range
of the current published ordinance. For full-time salaried employees that
are enrolled in the PERS, this shall be the "pensionable salary." The base
salary may include the following: payments made for occasional periods
when no work is performed due to vacation, holiday or other similar cause;
reimbursements, contributions made by the employer to a third person
pursuant to a bona fide plan providing for retirement, life, accident, health
or similar benefits; additional premium compensation for hours worked in
excess of eight hour per day or for work on Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays;
or overtime compensation. Under DCRP, for employees hired after July of
2007, for whom pensionable salary is limited to the salary on which social
security contributions are based, the employee's total pension plus DCRP
eligible base salary would be used. It would also be equal to the annualized
amount on which an hourly rate-based salary is structured.
CHAPTER 78 — Shall refer generally to Chapter 78 of the Laws of 2011, the
Pension and Health Benefits Reforms Law.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION (CSC) — An independent agency created
by state legislation that establishes employment rules and regulations to
be administered by appointing authorities; administers examinations for
employment and promotions; classifies jobs; identifies potential candidates
§ 61-1 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-1
60:97
for employment; and resolves appeals and disputes filed by state, county
and municipal civil service employees.
COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION AGREEMENT OF COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING UNIT — A contract between the Township as the employer
and a union, negotiated pursuant to the Public Employment Relations Act.
Individual management agreements are excluded from this term.
COMPENSATION — The total value of everything the employer provides, or
offers, an employee in exchange for working.
COMPENSATORY TIME — For irregular or occasional overtime work; as an
alternative to additional compensation, when the employee is exempt from
receiving overtime, such as a manager or administrative employee. They
shall accumulate time, on an hour-for-hour basis, for time worked over 40
hours in a workweek, to be used at a later date as time off.
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE — An employee whose functional
responsibility or knowledge in connection with the issues involved in the
collective negotiation process would make his or her membership in any
negotiating unit incompatible with his or her official duties.
DAYS — Calendar days unless specifically identified in this chapter
otherwise.
CSC — COMPETITIVE TITLE — Permanent titles that are subject to
an examination process and successful completion of a working test
period.
A.
CSC — NONCOMPETITIVE TITLE — Permanent titles in the career
service where competitive testing is not required due to the nature of
the knowledge, skills, and abilities associated with the job or difficulties
associated with recruiting.
B.
CSC — CLASSIFIED POSITION — Paraprofessional position as
determined by the CSC.
C.
CSC — UNCLASSIFIED POSITION — Includes job titles that are
permitted or required by state law or local ordinance to be unclassified,
and these laws or ordinances govern these job titles. An individual who
has an unclassified appointment serves for a fixed term of employment
or at the pleasure of the Township as the employer/appointing authority,
and may not accrue seniority or permanency in the unclassified job title.
Titles include confidential and managerial positions as determined by
the CSC.
D.
CSC — APPOINTING AUTHORITY — Any state government department
or local agency person (Business Administrator) having power of
appointment and/or removal of an employee; ensures employment
actions are administered in a manner consistent with CSC rules and
regulations.
E.
§ 61-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-1
60:98
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM (DCRP) — Pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq., provides eligible members with a tax-sheltered,
defined contribution retirement benefit.
DONATED SICK LEAVE — A leave program which allows employees to
donate accumulated time to coworkers that are experiencing a catastrophic
illness and their own time has been exhausted. As required, the Township's
current plan to participate in this program has been approved by the Civil
Service Commission.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Persons holding the position of Mayor and Council
for the Township.
EXEMPT AND NONEXEMPT POSITION — Federal legislation which, among
other things, requires an employer to pay certain of its employees premium
overtime for hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a week. Employees
may either be classified as covered (nonexempt) or exempt if they meet
certain criteria and standards. "Exempt" includes executive, management,
administrative, confidential and elected officials, which are excluded from
the provisions of overtime under the Fair Labor Standards Act based on
responsibilities of the job.
FRINGE BENEFITS — The New Jersey Wage Payment Law and selected
labor laws enforce separate benefit packages, which the Township has
agreed to provide to certain employees; including compensation for holiday,
vacation and personal days, and reimbursement of the certain expenses.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee whose regular hours of work are
more than 30 hours per normal or routine workweek for the Township.
HOLIDAY — A legal holiday or special holiday authorized by law or
executive order.
INTERIM APPOINTMENT — A nonpermanent appointment to the same title
as that of a permanent employee who is on leave of absence, indefinite
suspension, has been demoted or removed from the position or is pending
the results of an appeal.
MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT HEAD/DIRECTOR — Appointed position under
the direct executive authority of the Mayor that oversees an administrative
department. This includes the Department of Finance, Department of Public
Safety, Department of Public Works, Department of Community
Development, and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services.
NEW JERSEY DIVISION OF PENSIONS AND BENEFITS/NJDPB — Stateapproved
division with certain legislative power to promulgate rules and
regulations, under the State of New Jersey Department of Treasury.
OVERTIME — In accordance with the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, the
Township shall pay overtime compensation to nonexempt employees when
they work in excess of 40 hours per week, at an hourly rate of not less than
1 1/2 times their regular rate of pay. The term "work" shall mean "actually
worked," rather than time spent in a pay cycle when no work is performed,
i.e. sick/vacation.
§ 61-1 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-1
60:99
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee whose regular hours of work are
less than 30 hours per normal or routine workweek.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE — An employee who has received notification
of appointment in accordance with the Civil Service Commission and has
successfully completed the working test period, if required for the position.
A permanent employee may be part time or full time.
POLICE AND FIREMEN'S RETIREMENT SYSTEM (PFRS) — Pension fund
under the state-administered retirement system, with administrative
authority assigned to the New Jersey Department of Pensions and Benefits.
POSITION — A collection of duties and responsibilities assigned to a job.
PROVISIONAL EMPLOYEE — An employee receiving salary and certain
benefits in the same manner that a permanent employee receives, but has
no status or rights to continued employment.
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS COMMISSION (PERC) — Stateauthorized
agency that hears cases from employees or unions on unfair
labor practices in state and local government jurisdictions.
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RETIREMENT SYSTEM (PERS) — Pension fund
under the state-administered retirement system, with administrative
authority assigned to the New Jersey Department of Pensions and Benefits.
RECORD OF HOURS WORKED — An employee shall be required to submit
a true and accurate record of the hours worked and shall furnish to their
direct supervisor, or their authorized representative, a sworn statement of
the same in the manner prescribed by the Township as the employer. Such
records shall be open to inspection by Township officials and may be subject
to the laws governing the Open Public Records Act.30
REQUIREMENTS FOR POSITION — The minimum qualifications that are
required for successful performance of the job duties.
SALARY RANGE — In accordance with the most recent municipal
ordinance, the range of salary paid for a position or title.
SICK DAY or SICK LEAVE — A type of paid leave in which an employee
may use time off due to personal illness or injury, because of exposure to
contagious disease, to care for a sick member of the immediate family, or
due to the death of a member of the immediate family.
TEMPORARY/SEASONAL — Positions that exists for a term of six months or
less and are hired to perform a job that is needed on short-term basis.
TRAINING — Preplanned instruction with specific outcomes designed to
develop or improve employee performance through the acquisition or
enhancement of knowledge, skills, and attitudes.
WORK — As used herein, shall mean work actually performed by the
employee for the benefit of the Township, and does not include time the
employee spent in pay status when no work was performed (i.e., used sick
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 61-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-1
60:100
time, vacation time, compensation time, leave of absence or other accrued
time).
WORKWEEK — The designation assigned to a title to reflect the number of
hours worked in a normal week and the title's status. Full-time employees
shall have either a 37.5-hour or forty-hour workweek as determined by the
department and position they are assigned under. The workweek of parttime
employees shall be subject to the discretion of the director they are
assigned under.
§ 61-2. Labor laws.
The following labor laws shall be enforced under this chapter:
A. New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 4A:1-1.1 et seq.) — Regulates
the activities relating to employment, tenure and discharge of certain
state employees and certain employees of local government and
political subdivisions under the authority of the Civil Service
Commission.
B. New Jersey Statutes Annotated, Municipalities and Counties Civil
Service Act (N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq.) — State legislation which governs
the ways in which local governments must operate. Includes New
Jersey law governing the employment, tenure and discharge of certain
employees; and establishes the Civil Service Commission as a principal
department under the Executive Branch of New Jersey State
government.
C. New Jersey Wage and Hour Law (N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a et seq.) — Under
the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce, establishes a
minimum wage level for workers in order to safeguard their health,
efficiency, and general well-being and to protect them, as well as their
employers, from the effects of serious and unfair competition resulting
from wage levels detrimental to their health, efficiency and well-being.
D. New Jersey Security and Financial Empowerment Act ("NJ SAFE Act")
(N.J.S.A. 34:11C-3 et seq.) (P.L. 2019, c. 37) — Provides that certain
employees are eligible to receive an unpaid leave of absence, for a
period not to exceed 20 days in a twelve-month period, to address
circumstances resulting from domestic violence or a sexually violent
offense.
E. New Jersey Family Leave Act ("NJFLA") (N.J.S.A. 34:11B-1 et seq.) —
Provides for family leave for employees in certain cases and prohibits
certain employer practices by establishing interpretations of the
provisions of the statute.
F. Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") (Federal Code Title 29, Labor,
Subtitle B, Chapter 5, Subchapter C, Part 825) — A federal law that
guarantees that certain employees are eligible to receive up to 12
workweeks of unpaid leave in a year with no threat of job loss.
§ 61-1 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-2
60:101
G. New Jersey Earned Sick Leave (N.J.S.A. 34:11D-1 et seq.) — Provides
for minimum employer requirements related to an employee's sick
leave benefit.
H. Federal Fair Labor Standards Act ("FSLA") (Federal Code, Title 29,
Chapter 831) — Federal legislation which, among other things, requires
an employer to pay certain covered (nonexempt) employees premium
overtime for hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek.
I. New Jersey Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.; P.L. 1972, c. 45) —
Empowers all local public entities to indemnify local public employees
consistent with the provisions of said Act.
J. Open Public Records Act ("OPRA") (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.) — A state
law enacted to give the public greater access to government records
maintained by public agencies in New Jersey.
31.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.
§ 61-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-2
60:102
ARTICLE II
Employment
§ 61-3. Application for employment.
Township job opportunities shall be posted to the municipal website at
www.northbrunswicknj.gov. Candidates can submit an employment
application in response to an official job posting, as issued by the Township.
Applications can be submitted online or in person to the Office of the
Business Administrator/Human Resources. General resumes via email or
delivery without an application for employment are not considered a formal
response to a job posting.
§ 61-4. Merit system.
All permanent employees, appointments and promotions made by the
Township shall be hired and/or authorized in accordance with the Civil
Service Commission (CSC), as created and defined by state legislation,
which is based on merit and ability in accordance with the requirements
of the Constitution, statutes and applicable regulations of the State of New
Jersey. Under the CSC, applications may be weighted by criteria including
residency, knowledge, skills and veteran status.
§ 61-5. Background check.
A. As a condition of employment, a prospective candidate, including, but
not limited to, police officer, police dispatcher, special law enforcement
officer, court attendant, fire prevention officer, code enforcement
officer, informational technology staff, recreation staff, park ranger,
custodian, drivers, operators, and persons in positions requiring
individual involvement with children or elderly care, may be subject to a
criminal background check. In order to facilitate such background
checks, such persons may be subject to fingerprinting by the Police
Department and shall execute the appropriate consent form.
B. The results of a background check shall not be considered public
information and shall be released only to the Business Administrator,
Director of Public Safety, Deputy Chief of Police or their designee, or
the Municipal Attorney.
C. If the Business Administrator, Director of Public Safety, Deputy Chief of
Police or their designee makes a determination to reject a prospective
employee as a result of the information obtained from the background
investigation, the prospective employee shall be advised, and the
portions of the report upon which the recommendation is based shall be
shared with the individual.
D. The costs of the background checks shall be borne by the applicant for
the position.
§ 61-3 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-5
60:103
§ 61-6. Fit-for-duty exam.
§ 61-7. Residency.
E. The positions for which background checks shall be conducted, as set
forth in Subsection A of this section, may be amended and
supplemented at any time as deemed necessary based on the job
responsibilities.
A. As a condition of employment, a prospective candidate may be required
to take a medical examination to determine their fitness for duty.
B. Fit-for-duty examinations are used to determine the candidate's ability
to perform their job duties, as specified by the job title outlined by the
Civil Service Commission.
C. Drug testing is included in a fit-for-duty examination.
D. Information on a candidate's medical report issued will be kept on file in
the Business Administrator's office in a secured location and
maintained confidential.
A. State residency. In accordance with the New Jersey First Act, P.L. 2011,
c. 70, effective September 1, 2011,32 public employees are required to
obtain New Jersey residency within one year of employment, unless
granted an exemption from a state-appointed committee. No distinction
is made between types of appointments, that is, temporary, part-time,
full-time, classified or unclassified.
B. Municipal residency. Whenever the appointing authority for the
Township shall determine that there are certain specific positions of
employment requiring special talents or skills which are necessary for
the operation of the Township, and which are not likely to be found
among the residents of the Township, such positions of employment so
determined may be filled without a requirement as to residency within
the Township. The criteria for such positions of employment shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Any position the services of which are specialized and qualitative in
nature.
(2) Any position which requires expertise and extensive training.
(3) Any position, the services of which will be required to be performed
by an individual who has a proven reputation in the particular field
of endeavor.
(4) Any position where the talents, skills, services or other important
characteristics of which cannot be reasonably described by written
specifications.
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:14-7 et seq.
§ 61-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-7
60:104
§ 61-8. Job requirement verification.
The Civil Service Commission outlines under each job title specifications,
including, but not limited to, experience, license(s), education, certification,
degree, other knowledge and abilities required when performing necessary
functions of the position. When being considered for employment, the
candidate must submit necessary documentation for Township officials to
verify the accuracy of the candidate's records.
§ 61-9. Acceptance of terms of employment.
All candidates that have been selected for a position with the Township are
encouraged to request and review the Employee Handbook, the Municipal
Code, and information about the municipal benefits offered. Accepting a
position with the Township is an employee's acknowledgment and
agreement as to the Township's conditions of employment.
§ 61-10. Types of employment with Township.
A candidate who has been hired by the Township shall be assigned under
the following categories, in accordance with the Civil Service Commission.
Eligibility and/or membership in a collective bargaining unit shall be based
on employment status and the Civil Service Commission job title "position."
Employees not covered by the provisions of collective bargaining agreement
or employment contract shall fall under the requirements and benefits
outlined within this chapter.
Example: (Status) Permanent, (Position Class) Classified, (Job
Title) Account Clerk, (Position) Nonexempt, (Hired under) Merit.
Status
CSC
Position
Class
CSC Job
Title
Position
Description Hired Under
Temporary Career
Competitive
Specification
Code
Exempt Merit
Provisional Career
Noncompetitive
Nonexempt Elected
(5) Any position, the services of which will be performed by a person
authorized by law to practice a recognized profession or a person
whose practice is regulated by law.
(6) Any position whose performance requires knowledge of an
advanced type in a field of learning acquired by a prolonged formal
course of specialized instruction and study as distinguished from
general academic instruction or apprenticeship and training.
C. Employment residency. A nonresident employee appointed pursuant to
this article shall not be required to become a resident of the Township
as a condition of continued employment.
§ 61-7 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-10
60:105
Example: (Status) Permanent, (Position Class) Classified, (Job
Title) Account Clerk, (Position) Nonexempt, (Hired under) Merit.
Status
CSC
Position
Class
CSC Job
Title
Position
Description Hired Under
Permanent
Part Time
Classified Appointed
Permanent
Full Time
Unclassified Member
Term
§ 61-11. Personnel policy and procedures.
A. The Mayor, working with the Business Administrator, is empowered to
establish and maintain a system of personnel policy and procedures,
collectively known as the "Employee Handbook." As updates are
announced under federal, state or municipal legislation regulating
labor law, they will be reviewed, and amendments may be made from
time to time, as enacted under executive order of the Mayor and/or
Business Administrator or by Council action. A current copy of the
Employee Handbook along with amended sections shall be maintained
in the Office of the Clerk, Administration, published online under the
payroll software for employee access, and provided electronically to
any unpaid member of a board, commission, agency, authority, advisory
committee or other body under the Township Code who is appointed by
the Mayor and or/with Council consent.
B. The Code of Ethics shall be incorporated into the personnel policy and
procedures manual ("Employee Handbook"). The Code of Ethics applies
to any Township elected official, appointee or employee, whether paid
or unpaid, including members of any board, commission, agency,
authority or other body whose members are appointed by the Mayor
and/or Township Council, as listed in the Municipal Code. Amendments
to the Code of Ethics policy shall be recommended by the Board of
Ethics or a Mayor-appointed ad hoc committee, designated to review
the code, and shall be effective only when adopted by resolution of the
Township Council. If any article, section, subsection, clause or phrase of
the Code of Ethics is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions or
provisions of the Code of Ethics.
C. The following personnel matters are addressed within the handbook:
(1) The classification of all Township positions, based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate
provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted
by changed circumstances, including organizational charts with
positions for each municipal department and office;
§ 61-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-11
60:106
(2) A pay plan for all Township positions;
(3) Employee rights;
(4) Code of Ethics;
(5) Financial disclosure;
(6) Policies and procedures regarding affirmative action;
(7) Policies and procedures regarding education and training (required
and requests);
(8) Policies and procedures regarding outside employment;
(9) Policies and procedures regarding performance evaluations;
(10) Policies and procedures regarding the treatment and use of
municipal property;
(11) Policies and procedures regarding standby, on-call and overtime;
(12) Policies and procedures governing relationships within the
organization;
(13) Policies and procedures regarding membership with a volunteer
organization;
(14) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for time
off;
(15) Policies and procedures for a leave of absence (donated leave/
FMLA/military/paid/unpaid);
(16) Policies and procedures for fit-for-duty exams;
(17) Policies and procedures for drug testing;
(18) Policies and procedures for incidents, accidents, and injury;
(19) Policies and procedures regarding employer records and the
dissemination of information (manuals/notifications/updates/job
announcements/promotional announcements/OSHA);
(20) Policies and procedures regarding political campaigning;
(21) Policies and procedures regarding an employee's work under a
grant, or a state or federal reimbursement program;
(22) Policies and procedures regarding an employee's separation from
employment;
(23) Policies and procedures regarding an employee's response and/or
interaction under the Open Public Records Act ("OPRA");
(24) Policies and procedures regarding use of personal social media;
§ 61-11 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-11
60:107
§ 61-12. Duties.
All job titles created under this chapter shall be authorized by municipal
ordinance. As the Township is a member of the Civil Service Commission, a
complete list of respective duties and requirements for each position shall
be found on file with the CSC. After an employee has been hired, it is their
responsibility to meet the continued requirements of the job specification.
See https://info.csc.state.nj.us/TitleList/LocalList.aspx.
§ 61-13. Compensation.
(25) Rules and procedures regarding an employee filing a complaint;
(26) Employee rights to collective bargaining;
(27) Policies and procedures regulating a reduction in force, furlough,
and elimination of position;
(28) The policies and procedures governing persons holding
appointments (seasonal/provisional/permanent/tenured);
(29) Grievance procedures; and
(30) Other practices and procedures necessary or desirable to the
administration of a sound personnel system.
A. All Township employees, except those employees covered by the
provisions of collective bargaining agreement or employment contract,
shall be paid in accordance with the current salary ordinance range, in
the same manner as other officers and employees.
B. All employees and elected public officials who receive compensation
from the Township are mandated to have direct deposit of their
compensation, in accordance with Chapter 28, P.L. 2013, as defined
under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f et seq.
C. Generally, salary adjustments for nonunion employees will be
considered and, if issued, provided for on an annual basis in the month
of January.
D. Removal of longevity. All employees as of December 31, 2019, currently
receiving longevity shall receive a one-time increase in their base pay
by the amount they would have received under a prior ordinance.
Beginning January 1, 2020, longevity will be eliminated and there will
be no further payouts of longevity. If an employee is within 12 months
(after December 31, 2019) of receiving an increase or initial longevity
stipend, that amount will be considered as the current amount of
longevity to be added to the base pay. Employees covered by the
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement are exempted from this
section.
E. Removal of on-call pay. Beginning July 1, 2019, on-call pay will be
eliminated and there will be no further payments for on-call. Employees
§ 61-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-13
60:108
covered by the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement are
exempted from this section.
F. Removal of overtime. Beginning July 1, 2019, executive, administrative,
or information technology positions that are deemed "exempt" shall not
be eligible for overtime; however, they will be eligible to accrue and use
compensatory time. Employees covered by the provisions of a collective
bargaining agreement are exempted from this section.
§ 61-13 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-13
60:109

ARTICLE III
Personnel Benefits: Leave and Granted Time Off
§ 61-14. Holidays.
§ 61-15. Vacation leave.
A. The following official holidays shall be observed by the Township unless
an alternate day or holiday is authorized under a separate agreement.
All full-time employees, except those employees covered by the
provisions of collective bargaining agreements or employment
contracts, shall receive holiday leave in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Martin Luther King Jr. Day.
(3) Presidents' Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) General Election Day.
(10) Veterans Day.
(11) Thanksgiving Day.
(12) Friday after Thanksgiving Day.
(13) Christmas Day.
B. Typically, if a holiday falls on Saturday, it shall be observed on the
preceding Friday. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on
the following Monday.
C. In the event that one of the holidays hereinabove enumerated occurs
during an employee's vacation or while an employee is on sick leave, no
charge therefor will be made against the accrued balance of the
employee's account.
A. Effective January 1, 2020, all provisional or permanent full-time
employees in a paid status, except those covered by the provisions of a
collective bargaining agreement or employment contract, shall receive
vacation leave in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 61-14 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-15
60:111
(1) Up to the first calendar year of employment or portion thereof, the
employee shall receive one day of vacation leave for each complete
month of service up to and including December 31 within that first
calendar year. Thereafter, on January 1 of each year, an employee
shall be granted the following vacation days based on each
completed calendar year.
Years of Service Vacation Leave Days
1 to 5 13
5 to 10 16
10 21
11+ 21, plus 1 additional day for
each 2 years of service, after
year 10, capped at 25 days
(2) The following provisions shall also apply to vacation leave time:
(a) Prior service with the Township or other New Jersey
government entity shall count towards years of service for
vacation entitlement and shall be calculated based on time
served.
(b) Time shall be granted and taken in hours based on an
employee's regular workday.
(c) Time used must be approved in advance by the employee's
direct supervisor in accordance with process outlined within
the Employee Handbook.
(d) When an employee is on an unpaid status, accrual of vacation
time ceases. In the year of an approved unpaid leave of
absence, time shall be prorated.
(e) Unused vacation days carry only to the end of the next
succeeding year. The Business Administrator is granted
authority to permit an exception that permits accumulated
time to be carried past the next succeeding year. However,
there shall be no payment made upon separation for accrued
time past what is authorized under Subsection A(1)
hereinabove.
(f) An employee may surrender and receive payment, at their
current rate of pay, of up to 1/2 of his/her annual allotted
vacation leave. The surrender/payment option must be
requested prior to December 31 of the current year, by written
notice to the Business Administrator.
(g) In the year that an employee discontinues his/her employment
with the Township for any reason, the vacation time allotted on
January 1 of that year shall be prorated to the portion of the
year the employee was employed. If an employee has exceeded
§ 61-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-15
60:112
§ 61-16. Sick leave.
All active employees, except those covered by the provisions of a collective
bargaining agreement or employment contract, shall receive sick leave in
accordance with the following time outlined hereinbelow:
the prorated vacation leave allotted to him/her, then the
employee's final pay shall be adjusted to recoup the value of
any vacation leave used in excess of the prorated vacation
leave available.
(h) When an employee discontinues employment for any reason,
the balance of vacation leave time shall be paid at the rate of
pay the time was earned. For example: If an employee retires
December 31 and, based on years of service, is entitled to 16
days a year. Under a scenario where 20 days of time are to be
paid out, four days shall be at the prior year's rate of pay and
16 days shall be at the current rate of pay.
B. Effective January 1, 2020, employees that have been appointed
permanently to a part-time position shall accrue one hour of earned
vacation time for every 30 hours worked, up to a maximum of 40 hours
in a twelve-month period. Seasonal employees are exempt from this
section.
(1) Time used must be approved in advance by the employee's direct
supervisor in accordance with process outlined within the
Employee Handbook.
(2) At any given time, accrued and unused vacation days shall be
capped at 80 hours.
(3) When an employee discontinues his/her employment for any
reason, the balance of vacation leave time shall be paid at the rate
of pay the time was earned.
A. Up to the first calendar year of employment or portion thereof, all fulltime
employees shall be granted one day of sick leave for each
completed calendar month of service through December 31 of that year.
In each succeeding year of employment, an employee shall be allotted
15 days of sick leave per year on January 1 of each year.
(1) In a year that an employee discontinues his or her employment with
the Township, the 15 sick leave days newly allotted in that year on
January 1 shall be prorated to the portion of the year the employee
is employed. If an employee has exceeded his or her accumulated
sick leave in his or her final year of employment, then the
employee's final pay shall be adjusted to recoup the value of any
sick leave used in excess of the accumulated sick leave available.
(2) Time shall be taken in hours based on an employee's regular
workday.
§ 61-15 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-16
60:113
(3) Notification of time used must be provided in advance of the
workday to the employee's direct supervisor or designee, in
accordance with process outlined within the Employee Handbook.
(4) Unused sick time shall accumulate from year to year.
(5) Upon separation, due to retirement with the New Jersey Division of
Pensions and Benefits, an employee may sell back accumulated sick
leave time at 33% of the hourly rate of pay, at the rate of pay the
time was earned, up to a maximum payment amount of $15,000.
For example: If an employee retires December 31, and based on
time accumulated, is entitled to 45 days, 15 days of time shall be
paid out at the preceding prior year's rate of pay, 15 days shall be
at the prior year's rate of pay, and 15 days shall be at the current
rate of pay.
(6) Annual sell back of sick leave. At the end of any given year, if an
employee has over 30 days of accrued sick time, they may sell back
up to a maximum of five days that year, at their current rate of pay
as of December 31.
(7) Donated sick leave. If at the end of any given year an employee has
contributed time under the donated sick leave policy, and has
between 15 and 30 days of accrued sick time, they may sell back up
to a maximum of five days that year at their current rate of pay as of
December 31.
B. Effective October 29, 2018, employees that have been appointed
permanently to a part-time position shall accrue one hour of earned sick
leave for every 30 hours worked, up to a maximum of 40 hours in a
twelve-month period.
(1) Notification of time used must be provided in advance of the
workday to the employee's direct supervisor or designee, in
accordance with process outlined within the Employee Handbook.
(2) Carryover. Unused sick time shall accumulate from year to year but
shall be capped at 40 hours.
(3) Upon separation, due to retirement with the New Jersey Division of
Pensions and Benefits, an employee may sell back accumulated sick
leave time at 33% of the hourly rate of pay, at the rate of pay the
time was earned, up to a maximum payment for 40 hours.
(4) Annual sell back of sick leave. Permanent part-time positions are
not eligible to sell back accrued sick time.
C. Employees that have been appointed to a seasonal position, or have a
position that does not extend past a one-year appointment, shall accrue
one hour of earned sick leave for every 30 hours worked, up to 40 hours
in a twelve-month period.
§ 61-16 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-16
60:114
§ 61-17. Personal leave.
All permanent full-time employees, except those covered by the provisions
of a collective bargaining agreement or employment contract, shall receive
the equivalent of three personal leave days annually, based on the
employee's routine work schedule. Employees may use their personal leave
without obtaining prior written approval from their supervisor, but
employees are expected to give advance notice to their supervisor,
whenever possible. Personal leave days must be used in the calendar year
given or will be forfeited at year end.
§ 61-18. Bereavement leave.
Bereavement leave refers to the time an employee takes away from work as
a result of the death of a family member or loved one. In addition to personal
leave that can be used for grieving the loss of a loved one, all permanent,
full-time employees, except those covered by the provisions of a collective
bargaining contract, shall receive bereavement leave in accordance with
the following schedule:
(1) There shall be a 120-calendar-day waiting period before an
employee can use accrued sick leave time.
(2) Notification of time used must be provided in advance of the
workday to the employee's direct supervisor or designee, in
accordance with process outlined within the Employee Handbook.
(3) When a seasonal employee discontinues employment with the
Township, there shall be no payment made for accumulated sick
leave time.
(4) If a previous employee is reinstated by the Township within six
months of his/her separation from employment with the Township,
the Township shall reinstate previously accrued earned time, and
the employee shall receive prior credit towards the new 120-day
waiting period, by the total number of calendar days worked by the
employee prior to the separation.
(5) If a previous employee is reinstated by the Township after a break
in employment of more than six months, previous time shall not be
reinstated and the employee will have a zero balance of accrued
sick leave on the first day of reemployment and will not be eligible
to use earned sick leave for 120 days after recommencing
employment.
A. Employees shall be entitled up to five work days off, without loss of pay,
in the event of the death of a following immediate family member:
parent, spouse, sibling, child, grandchildren, stepchildren, foster child
or resource family child, that may or may not reside in the same
residence; or person, partner, or significant individual who resides
permanently in the same residence.
§ 61-16 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-18
60:115
§ 61-19. Jury duty.
All permanent full-time employees, except those covered by the provisions
of a collective bargaining agreement or employment contract, shall be paid
at their regular rate of pay upon presentation of proper evidence of jury
service. The employee shall not be required to remit compensation received
from serving jury duty to the Township. Provisional, seasonal or part-time
employees are not entitled to compensation for jury duty.
§ 61-20. Compensatory time.
§ 61-21. Absence due to injury or disease received in line of duty.
Absence due to injury or occupational disease received in the line of duty
shall not be chargeable to sick or other accrued leave accounts of the
employee; provided, however, that such absence is covered under an active
B. Employees shall be entitled up to three work days off, without loss of
pay, in the event of the death of a following immediate family member:
grandparent, parent-, sibling-, son- or daughter-in-law, or miscarriage
of a child.
C. Employees shall be granted up to one day off, without loss of pay, to
attend a funeral and/or any post-death bereavement ceremony for a
nonimmediate family relative defined as uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, or
cousin.
D. Employees shall be granted up to one day off per calendar year, without
loss of pay, to attend a funeral and/or any post-death bereavement
ceremony of a close, nonfamily individual. This includes a co-worker,
significant other that was residing with an immediate family member,
religious godparent, or friend. Loss of a pet is not covered under
bereavement leave.
A. Under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA),33 certain
employees in managerial, supervisory, administrative, elective or
professional positions are exempt from overtime. The Finance
Department shall maintain a list of exempt positions under the FLSA.
Employees in exempt positions, not eligible to receive overtime
compensation, shall be required to work the normal workweek, plus any
additional hours needed to fulfill their job responsibilities.
B. Any exempt employees working more than 40 hours per week may be
eligible to accrue compensated leave time on an hour-for-hour basis in
lieu of cash payments ("comp time"). Accrual and use of comp time must
be approved by the employee's supervisor (including the Director's own
time), and must be used in accordance with the policies outlined within
the Employee Handbook. Any accrued balances of time not used in
compliance with FLSA will be automatically forfeited.
33.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.
§ 61-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-21
60:116
claim with the Township's insurance fund, and the employee is cooperating
with the prescribed treatment plan.
§ 61-22. Absence due to military purposes.
An employee who is a member of the National Guard or naval militia of
this state or of the military or naval forces of the United States, required
to undergo field training therein, shall be entitled to a leave of absence
"without pay" for the period of such field training. Accrued personal,
vacation or compensation time may be utilized for the leave. Any continued
insurance coverage with a state-administered plan shall be in accordance
with the New Jersey Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 61-23. Approved leave of absence.
Employees are eligible to request in writing a leave of absence from work
for a stated period of time. Whether paid or unpaid, the employee must
conform to the type of leave requested under the state, federal or local
legislation and approved policy (e.g., NJFLA, NJSAFE, FMLA, and donated
time).
§ 61-21 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-23
60:117

ARTICLE IV
Personnel Benefits: Medical
§ 61-24. Health, prescription, and dental benefits.
Employees, except those covered by the provisions of a collective
bargaining agreement or management contract, shall be eligible to receive
medical, prescription and dental benefits as prescribed herein below. The
Township currently participates in the NJDPB State Health Benefits Plan
for medical and prescription. Any determinations issued by the NJDPB
regarding federal or state legislation regarding eligibility that are in conflict
with this article shall supersede this chapter.
A. Full time. All active full-time and permanent employees that work a
regular schedule of more than 30 hours a week shall be eligible to
receive medical, prescription and dental benefits.
B. Multiple positions. An employee holding multiple positions with the
Township at the same time will be considered "full-time" for benefit
eligibility if the employee satisfies the definitions of a full-time
employee in any one of the positions held.
C. Open enrollment period. The month of October is the Township's open
enrollment period when changes can be made to medical and other
benefits, effective January 1 of the following calendar year. Changes
outside this period must be under an approved life event.
D. Substantially similar. Medical, prescription drug coverage and dental
plans offered shall be substantially similar to plans offered to other fulltime
employees covered under a contract.
E. Dental coverage. Beginning January 1, 2020, when an eligible employee
enrolls in a dental plan offered by the Township, the Township shall
contribute 50% annually towards the premium cost of the plan selected.
There shall be no reimbursement for waiving coverage. Coverage shall
be offered to eligible active employees only.
F. Vision. The Township does not offer or participate in an optical
coverage plan.
G. Temporary disability insurance. The Township does not offer or
participate in a short- or long-term disability insurance program,
including plans offered by the New Jersey Department of Labor and
Workforce Development. During open enrollment, an employee may
elect to participate in a voluntary employee funded plan (e.g., Aflac,
Colonial Life).
H. Health and prescription waiver.
(1) The Township offers a conditional opt-out, where employees may
elect to waive their health and prescription benefit coverage, but
§ 61-24 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-24
60:119
only if they provide documentation of alternative health benefit
coverage.
(2) If an employee opts out of coverage, due to coverage in a plan that
is not associated with the State Health Benefits Plan, they will be
eligible to receive a waiver payment.
(3) In such cases, an employee's waiver payment shall be 25% of the
amount saved by the Township (calculated on the "base" health
care plan they would have been eligible for) or $5,000, whichever is
less, after the conclusion of the waived year of coverage.
(4) During the annual renewal period for changes in coverage, an
employee must waive benefits for each calendar year.
(5) If an employee only completes a portion of the calendar year in the
year of a waiver, he or she shall only qualify for a prorated share of
the waived benefit.
(6) If an employee experiences any emergent event which discontinues
his or her coverage in a plan not associated with the State Health
Benefits Plan, he or she may rejoin the Township's plan, if and as
provided by the plan.
(7) It shall be the responsibility of the employee to consult with their
financial advisor as to any IRS or Affordable Care Act reporting or
tax implications when selecting a plan or waiving coverage.
I. Employee contribution.
(1) In accordance with the previous Chapter 78, P.L. 2011, regarding
health-care contributions, an employee's premium contribution
shall be based on the "Year 4" period contribution schedule, as
cited in the legislation.
(2) The Township will pay the employer's obligation cost of said plans,
subject to the employee premium contributions, which are shown
hereinbelow.
(3) An employee's contribution used toward their premium expense for
health coverage shall not be less than 1.5% of the employee's base
salary.
(4) The contribution amount shall be made via payroll deductions,
divided over a twenty-four-pay cycle, leaving two "free" pay periods
a year.
(5) When an active employee is on an approved unpaid leave of
absence; the employee may elect to extend coverage, for a
maximum of nine months, by making arrangements for prepayment
of contributions due, including rate changes. Continued
contribution shall be based on an employee's pre-leave salary. It
shall be the employee's sole responsibility to make continued
§ 61-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-24
60:120
payments while on leave in accordance with previous P.L. 2011, c.
78, and guidelines under NJDPB Fact Sheet #30.
(6) When an active employee is on an approved unpaid leave of
absence for reasons other than illness, continued coverage and
eligibility shall be based on guidelines issued by the NJDPB (i.e.,
FLA, furlough, suspension, NJSAFE, military).
Salary Range
or Pension
Allowance for
Active
Employees
Single
Coverage
Parent/Child
or Emp/Sp/
Prtnr
Coverage
Family
Coverage
Less than
$20,000
4.5% 3.5% 3.0%
$20,000 to
$24,999.99
5.5% 3.5% 3.0%
$25,000 to
$29,999.99
7.5% 4.5% 4.0%
$30,000 to
$34,999.99
10.0% 6.0% 5.0%
$35,000 to
$39,999.99
11.0% 7.0% 6.0%
$40,000 to
$44,999.99
12.0% 8.0% 7.0%
$45,000 to
$49,999.99
14.0% 10.0% 9.0%
$50,000 to
$54,999.99
20.0% 15.0% 12.0%
$55,000 to
$59,999.99
23.0% 17.0% 14.0%
$60,000 to
$64,999.99
27.0% 21.0% 17.0%
$65,000 to
$69,999.99
29.0% 23.0% 19.0%
$70,000 to
$74,999.99
32.0% 26.0% 22.0%
$75,000 to
$79,999.99
33.0% 27.0% 23.0%
$80,000 to
$84,999.99
34.0% 28.0% 24.0%
$85,000 to
$89,999.99
34.0% 30.0% 26.0%
§ 61-24 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-24
60:121
Salary Range
or Pension
Allowance for
Active
Employees
Single
Coverage
Parent/Child
or Emp/Sp/
Prtnr
Coverage
Family
Coverage
$90,000 to
$94,999.99
34.0% 30.0% 28.0%
$95,000 to
$99,999.99
35.0% 30.0% 29.0%
$100,000 to
$109,999.99
35.0% 35.0% 32.0%
$110,000 and
over
35.0% 35.0% 35.0%
J. High-deductible health care plan. When an active employee enrolls in a
high-deductible plan, currently AETNA4000 or NJDIRECT4000, in 2020
or thereafter, the Township will reduce the employee's mandated
percentage contribution specified in the chart by 50% of the amount
shown for each full year the employee remains in the high-deductible
plan.
K. Health savings account (HSA). For active employees who enroll and
remain in a high-deductible plan, and have established an HSA, the
Township will contribute $1,000 into the employee's HSA, to be used by
the employee toward eligible medical expenses. The maximum amounts
and use of the health savings account will be as permitted under federal
Internal Revenue Service regulations.
L. Medical benefits in retirement.
(1) Beginning July 1, 2019, employees who 1) retire from the Township
on an approved disability retirement, or 2) had 20 or more years of
service credit by June 28, 2011, or 3) have 25 or more years of
service credit, have met the required number service years with
the Township per the schedule hereinbelow. Employees that were
eligible for medical benefits until their retirement date, and meet
the eligibility requirements under the State Health Benefits
Program, will be eligible to enroll in a benefit plan under the SHBP
when retiring from the Township, pursuant the current Chapter 48
municipal resolution adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
52:14-17.38.
(2) Eligible employees must enroll in a plan, offered to other retired
employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement, with the
Township's health-care provider (SHBP).
(3) An employee shall be required to pay a percentage of the premium
for the plan they selected, based on their annual pension allowance
per the following schedule:
§ 61-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-24
60:122
Annual
Retirement
Allowance
Range
Single
Coverage
Parent/Child
or Emp/Sp/
Prtnr
Coverage
Family
Coverage
Less than
$20,000
4.5% 3.5% 3.0%
$20,000 to
$24,999.99
5.5% 3.5% 3.0%
$25,000 to
$29,999.99
7.5% 4.5% 4.0%
$30,000 to
$34,999.99
10.0% 6.0% 5.0%
$35,000 to
$39,999.99
11.0% 7.0% 6.0%
$40,000 to
$44,999.99
12.0% 8.0% 7.0%
$45,000 to
$49,999.99
14.0% 10.0% 9.0%
$50,000 to
$54,999.99
20.0% 15.0% 12.0%
$55,000 to
$59,999.99
23.0% 17.0% 14.0%
$60,000 to
$64,999.99
27.0% 21.0% 17.0%
$65,000 to
$69,999.99
29.0% 23.0% 19.0%
$70,000 to
$74,999.99
32.0% 26.0% 22.0%
$75,000 to
$79,999.99
33.0% 27.0% 23.0%
$80,000 to
$84,999.99
34.0% 28.0% 24.0%
$85,000 to
$89,999.99
34.0% 30.0% 26.0%
$90,000 to
$94,999.99
34.0% 30.0% 28.0%
$95,000 to
$99,999.99
35.0% 30.0% 29.0%
$100,000 to
$109,999.99
35.0% 35.0% 32.0%
§ 61-24 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-24
60:123
Annual
Retirement
Allowance
Range
Single
Coverage
Parent/Child
or Emp/Sp/
Prtnr
Coverage
Family
Coverage
$110,000 and
over
35.0% 35.0% 35.0%
(4) An employee's contribution used toward the premium expense for
health coverage shall not be less than 1.5% of the employee's
pension allowance.
(5) The Township shall contribute towards benefits to a retired
employee and their eligible dependents until the retired employee
is no longer eligible to participate under the SHBP due to the
employee's Medicare eligibility, approval of a social security
disability, is deceased or any other scenario where coverage is
terminated under SHBP guidelines, at which time Township
contributions toward retirement health benefits will cease.
(6) The Township shall not contribute towards any continued
dependent coverage once the retired employee is no longer eligible
to participate under the SHBP.
(7) The Township shall not contribute towards dental benefits in
retirement.
(8) The date ranges for eligibility are provided on the chart as follows:
Nonunion Employees - Excluding administrative/appointed titles
cited below. Eligibility requirements on the chart identify, by age,
the required number of years the employee must have been
employed with the Township.
Age Yrs w/Twp Age Yrs w/Twp
55 25 61 19
56 24 62 18
57 23 63 17
58 22 64 16
59 21 65 15
60 20
§ 61-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-24
60:124
§ 61-25. Internal Revenue Code: medical/dependent care spending
accounts.
The following tax-advantage accounts regulated by federal IRS guidelines
are available to eligible employees. If there shall be any contribution offered
by the employer towards an HSA or HRA plan, it will be announced annually
by the Mayor and/or Business Administrator or by Council resolution.
Nonunion Administrative/Appointed Employees - Business
Administrator, Chief Financial Officer, Municipal Clerk, Municipal
Court Administrator, Municipal Department Head,
Superintendent, Director of Public Safety, Deputy Chief of Police,
Qualified Purchasing Agent, Tax Collector, Tax Assessor or
position covered under a Management Agreement. Eligibility
requirements on the chart identify, by age, the required number
of years the employee must have been employed with the
Township.
Age Yrs w/Twp Age Yrs w/Twp
55 15 61 9
56 14 62 8
57 13 63 7
58 12 64 6
59 11 65 5
60 10
A. FSA. The Township has established a flexible spending arrangement
(FSA) that is available on a voluntary basis to eligible employees. An
employee may participate by funding a tax-advantaged account that can
be used to receive reimbursement towards health-care expenses,
including medical, prescription, vision, and dental expenses.
Enrollment into a dependent care plan is also available. When an
employee participates in an FSA, the Township shall be responsible for
paying any administrative fees associated with the plan.
B. HSA. A Health Savings Account is an employee tax-advantaged account
that may be funded by both the Township and the employee. Plans are
available to eligible employees enrolled in a qualifying high-deductible
health-care plan. The account can be used to pay for IRS-defined health
care expenses, including long-term care and certain premium costs.
C. HRA. A health reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded
account that may be used by an employee for eligible medical, dental
and vision expenses.
§ 61-24 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-25
60:125

ARTICLE V
Personnel Benefits: Pension
§ 61-26. Pension.
A. The Township participates in the following state-administered
retirement systems: Public Employees Retirement System (PERS),
Police and Fire Retirement System (PFRS), and the Defined
Contribution Retirement Plan (DCRP). The Township's participation,
and ability to offer an employee continued enrollment, is contingent
upon annual state certification of funding of the retirement system.
Matters such as an employee's eligibility, enrollment, benefit plan,
required contribution, status, loan application, service credit time,
transfers, withdrawal and type of retirement are all regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Pensions and Benefits (NJDPB). No
exceptions can be made by the Township as the employer.
B. Employees enrolled in a pension plan will be issued a Pension Member
ID by the NJDPB, which will be maintained on file in the Municipal
Finance Department. An employee can access their pension account
online by registering through the State Member Benefits Online System
(MBOS). Signing up for the MBOS will require the Pension Member ID
and the employee's social security number. https://www.state.nj.us/
treasury/pensions/documents/pdf/mbos-flier.pdf
C. The Member Benefits Online System (MBOS) gives registered users
internet access to their pension and health benefit account information
and online applications. Some options include:
(1) Retrieving personal benefits statements.
(2) Designating a beneficiary.
(3) Getting a pension loan.
(4) Applying for withdrawal.
(5) Applying for retirement.
(6) Retrieving letters and statements.
D. As the employer, the Township is responsible to make both the required
employer and employee monthly contributions for active employees
receiving compensation via a payroll transaction issued by the
Township.
E. Leave of absence without pay.
(1) Employees that are members of the PERS and PFRS are eligible to
purchase service credit for each official leave of absence without
pay which service time was suspended.
§ 61-26 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-26
60:127
(2) The amount of service credit eligible for purchase shall depend on
the type of leave that is taken.
(3) Conditions that pertain to the purchase of service credit for eligible
leaves of absence shall be in accordance with rules promulgated by
the NJDPB (outlined on Fact Sheet #20 as of February 2019).
(4) For the time an employee fails to make a contribution, the
Township shall not make an employer contribution, and no service
credit time will be accrued on the employee's account.
(5) Employees that are members of the DCRP are not eligible to
purchase any portion of service credit for an official leave of
absence without pay.
F. Pension loan.
(1) Employees that are members of the PERS and PFRS are eligible to
borrow funds against their pension account.
(2) Eligibility and loan terms shall be in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the NJDPB (outlined on Fact Sheet #81 as of
February 2019).
(3) When the employee has a pension loan, the Township shall make
the employee's monthly repayments, based on the certified amount
provided by the NJDPB, for active employees receiving
compensation via a payroll transaction issued by the Township.
(4) If on an approved unpaid leave of absence, the employee must
make regular periodic payments to repay the outstanding loan. If
there is a failure to make required loan repayments for three
consecutive months, when taking a leave of absence without pay,
the NJDBP will issue a letter providing options to pay the
outstanding balance and the process followed for failure to pay. The
Township has no authority to intervene and shall not be liable for
any consequences when an employee on leave fails to make a
payment.
G. Account management. When enrolled in a pension plan, it is an
employee's sole responsibility (active, separated or retired) to manage
their account. This includes making application for pension loans,
verifying status and account accuracy, purchase of service credit,
designating or changing beneficiary information, making application
for a withdrawal or transfer, and making application for retirement.
Information and guidance with pension matters can be found online at
https://www.state.nj.us/treasury/pensions/.
§ 61-26 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-26
60:128
ARTICLE VI
Indemnification of Employees
§ 61-27. Indemnification of employees, appointees and officials.
Pursuant to statutory authority, and subject to and consistent with the
provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act,34 the Township hereby
indemnifies its employees, appointees and officials and former employees,
appointees and officials in accordance with the indemnification provisions
applicable by statute to all municipal employees, except with respect to
liability for any act or omission of a public employee within the scope of
his or her employment in the same manner and to the same extent as a
private individual under like circumstances ("injury" being defined as to
mean death, injury to a person, damage to or loss of property or any other
injury that a person may suffer that would be actionable if inflicted by a
private person).
§ 61-28. Applicability of provisions.
Indemnification under this article shall apply to the following, among other
things (the listing of which is not intended to limit in any way the scope of
indemnification):
§ 61-29. Nonapplicability of article provisions.
Indemnification under this article shall not apply, however, to any liability
for an act or omission constituting a crime, actual fraud, actual malice or
A. Liability for an injury resulting from the exercise of judgment or
discretion vested in an employee, appointee or official or a former
employee, appointee or official.
B. Liability for legislative or judicial action or inaction or administrative
action or inaction of a legislative or judicial nature.
C. Liability for the exercise of discretion in determining whether to seek or
whether to provide the resources necessary for the purchase of
equipment, the construction or maintenance of facilities, the hiring of
personnel and, in general, the provision of adequate governmental
services.
D. Liability for the exercise of discretion when, in the face of competing
demands, an employee, appointee or official determines or a former
employee, appointee or official determined whether and how to utilize
or apply existing resources, including those allocated for equipment,
facilities and personnel.
E. Liability arising out of the acts or omissions of an employee, appointee
or official or a former employee, appointee or official in carrying out his
or her ministerial functions.
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 61-27 OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE § 61-29
60:129
willful misconduct. "Willful misconduct," as used in this article, includes but
is not limited to acting knowingly and clearly outside the scope of one's
authority.
§ 61-30. Provisions to apply to excess of insurance against losses.
The indemnity provided by this article shall apply only in excess of all
insurance, regardless of the ownership of such insurance policy, against any
loss or losses covered by the indemnity provided by this article.
§ 61-31. Scope of defense.
The Township shall defend every employee, appointee and official and
former employee, appointee and official indemnified under the terms of
this article to the greatest extent permitted by law, provided that said
employee, appointee or official or former employee, appointee or official
reasonably cooperates in his or her own defense. Said employee, appointee
or official or former employee, appointee or official may join in his or her
own defense, provided that he or she does so at no cost or expense to the
Township, and provided, further, that the joining in said defense does not
materially interfere with, delay, impede or weaken the defense provided by
the Township under the terms of this article.
§ 61-29 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 61-31
60:130
Chapter 62
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development Committee — See Ch. 21.
Planning Director — See Ch. 65.
Land use — See Ch. 205.
§ 62-1. Creation; members.
This chapter is for the purpose of creating a Department of Planning and
Development, which shall include within it the Planning Director, Zoning
Officers and all Inspectors. The various township officials who are hereafter
listed as members of this Department shall have, as their basic duties, those
duties set forth in the various ordinances of the township creating their
positions.
§ 62-2. Organization of Department.
The organization of the Department shall be as follows:
§ 62-3. Creation of positions. [Amended 8-20-1973; 12-16-1974]
There are hereby created the positions of Assistant Zoning Officer, one
Assistant Building Inspector, Assistant Plumbing Inspector and Assistant
Electrical Inspector. The duties of these officials shall be the same as
set forth in the various ordinances of the township creating the positions
of Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector and Electrical
Inspector. The aforesaid Assistant Building Inspector shall, when directed
by the Planning Director, assist the Housing Inspector.
A. The Director of the Department shall be the Planning Director.
B. Directly responsible to the Planning Director shall be the following:
(1) Chief, Division of Zoning, shall be the Zoning Officer.
(2) Chief, Division of Building Regulations, shall be the Building
Inspector.
(3) Chief, Bureau of Housing, shall be the Housing Inspector.
C. Directly responsible to the Chief, Division of Zoning, shall be the
Assistant Zoning Officer.
D. Directly responsible to the Chief, Division of Building Regulations, shall
be the Plumbing Inspector, Assistant Plumbing Inspector, Electrical
Inspector and Assistant Electrical Inspector.
§ 61-31 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, § 62-3
62:131
Chapter 65
PLANNING DIRECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
Department of Planning and
Development — See Ch. 62.
§ 65-1. Appointment; removal from office.
The Planning Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. The
Planning Director may be removed from office for cause, cause being
defined as the failure to perform the duties of Planning Director, as defined
in this chapter, or mental and/or physical incompetence to perform the
duties of the position of Planning Director. If the Planning Director is to be
removed for cause, he may request a public hearing, which shall be held
not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after his submission of his
request to the Mayor and Council. Within five days after the submission of
a request for public hearing to the Mayor and Council, it shall supply the
Planning Director with a specification of charges.
§ 65-2. Qualifications.
In order to qualify for the position of Planning Director, a person shall hold a
bachelor's degree in planning and urban studies and shall, in addition, have
at least five years' experience in state, regional and municipal planning with
three years in an administrative or supervisory position. Furthermore, the
individual must possess a valid professional planner's license issued by the
State of New Jersey.
§ 65-3. Compensation.
The Planning Director shall receive such compensation as prescribed by
ordinance.
§ 65-4. Duties.
The duties of the Planning Director shall include the following:
A. Serve as technical planning advisor to the Mayor and Council, Planning
Board, Industrial Committee,35 Environmental Committee, Recreation
Committee and Zoning Board; and conduct such studies as shall be
requested and approved by the Mayor and Council.
B. Receive plans of proposed subdivisions of land within the township;
review such plans for conformity to sound planning and design
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Development Committee.
§ 62-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 65-4
65:132
§ 65-5. Responsibilities.
The Planning Director shall be the chief administrative and executive officer
in the Department of Planning and Development. He shall be responsible
for the activities and work assignments of the Department of Planning and
Development and, furthermore, have complete control over the internal
policies, procedures, rules, regulations and organization of the Department
of Planning and Development, subject to all applicable ordinances and
statutes. He shall be responsible for recruiting and hiring personnel for
positions in the Department of Planning and Development and make
decisions in reference to suspensions and other disciplinary actions,
including the termination or dismissal of employees.
§ 65-6. Subordinates.
The staff of the Department of Planning and Development, including
supervisors, inspectors and clerical staff, shall be responsible to the
Director, as established in an ordinance creating the Department of
Planning and Development.
Chapter 69
principles; recommend redesign of subdivisions; and make studies of
land subdivision in an attempt to integrate subdivisions with overall
plans of the township.
C. Receive plans of proposed developments within the township; review
the design of site plans in coordination with surrounding properties;
and recommend the design of site plans.
D. Study and analyze matters, such as but not limited to transportation,
land use, natural and human resources, housing and capital
improvements; and prepare and submit findings and recommendations
to the Planning Board, Mayor and Council, Industrial Committee,36
Environmental Committee and Zoning Board.
E. Secure data and analyze zoning problems for the purpose of making
reports to the Zoning Board.
F. Recommend and assist in the preparation of amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance,37 Master Plan and other
development, conservation and planning regulations and ordinances.
G. Review and analyze the ordinances and plans of surrounding
municipalities, counties and states; analyze and report on proposed
development in adjacent municipalities as it may affect the township;
and coordinate planning, development and conservation programs with
the adjoining municipalities, counties and state.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Development Committee.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 65-4 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 65-6
65:133
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
Safety Committee — See Ch. 76.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 79.
Traffic Safety Committee — See Ch. 91.
Police Department Rules and
Regulations — See Ch. A432.
§ 65-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 65-6
65:134
ARTICLE I
Qualifications of Applicants
[Adopted 4-18-1977; amended in its entirety 9-19-1994]
§ 69-1. Qualifications; residency.
§ 69-2. (Reserved)
A. All applicants for appointment to the Police Department shall be
qualified for appointment as required by law, ordinance and civil
service rules and regulations.
B. All applicants for appointment shall be residents of the Township of
North Brunswick and must maintain continuous residency with the
Township of North Brunswick from the announced closing date of the
Department of Personnel examination up to and including the date of
appointment.
§ 69-1 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-2
65:135

ARTICLE II
Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 4-19-1982]
§ 69-3. Establishment; legislative authority; use only during certain
missions.
§ 69-4. Implementation; required procedures.
A. In cooperation with the New Jersey Civil Defense - Disaster Control
Division, the municipality of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, has
established a CD-DC auxiliary police organization.
B. The CD-DC auxiliary police established in the municipality of North
Brunswick will be used as prescribed by N.J.S.A. App. A:9-1 et seq.
(National Defense Title) and other related orders and directives of the
State Director of Civil Defense - Disaster Control or the Governor of
New Jersey and State Civil Defense Act (P.L. 1942, c. 251, as
amended).38 As prescribed by these statutes, New Jersey Civil Defense -
Disaster Control auxiliary police shall be used only during a properly
declared local emergency or disaster or training mission approved by
the Mayor and in cooperation with the local Civil Defense - Disaster
Control Director under the direct supervision of the Municipal Chief of
Police.
A. The precise implementation of the local auxiliary police will be the
responsibility of the Chief of Police of the municipality wherein the
personnel reside after consultation with the Mayor and the local CD-DC
Director.
B. The assignment of auxiliary police to an emergency, disaster or training
mission will be requested by the Chief of Police or Mayor in cooperation
with the local Civil Defense - Disaster Control Director.
C. Auxiliary police detailed for duty must adhere to the following
procedures before assuming their assignments:
(1) Auxiliary police shall report to police headquarters personally and
log name, date and time of reporting and specific assignment in the
auxiliary police docket.
(2) Upon completion of an assignment, whether an emergency or
training mission, auxiliary police shall sign out personally in the
auxiliary police docket at police headquarters (date and time
completed and signature). Auxiliary police will also note at this
time any unusual circumstances encountered and submit a signed
report on any unusual incident during this tour of duty (activity
report).
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
§ 69-3 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-4
65:137
§ 69-5. Powers and duties.
(3) Auxiliary police properly summoned and assigned to duty are
covered by state statute in case of injury or death during the time of
assignment only.
(4) In the event of an extreme emergency or disaster, every effort will
be made to comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to
auxiliary police activities. But if action has to be taken immediately,
verbal approval should be obtained from the Chief of Police, the
local CD-DC Director or person in charge of the police at the time
of the emergency.
(5) Auxiliary police, when properly assigned, must follow and comply
with all rules and regulations of the Police Department as
prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designated subordinate of
the regular Police Department.
(6) Regular police personnel, regardless of rank, will not relinquish
their authority to supervise to a superior rank member of the
auxiliary police.
(7) No remuneration is paid to auxiliary police for performance of duty,
monetary or otherwise.
A. Auxiliary police, defined N.J.S.A. App. A:9-45 (see Directive No. 28,
revised 10-8-1957 with regard to P.L. 1942, c. 251, amended by P.L.
1939, c. 86). Personnel properly enrolled, trained and certified
according to the orders, rules and regulations of N.J.S.A. App. A:9-45 as
auxiliary police shall have the powers of regular police officers during a
designated emergency or properly assigned training mission only. All
assignments of auxiliary police will be approved by the Chief of Police of
the municipality or authority having this responsibility during an
emergency or disaster or training mission.
B. General operational assignments listed are the municipality's option for
use of CD-DC auxiliary police:
(1) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic control.
(2) Receiving and disseminating warnings.
(3) Disseminating information and instructions to the public as
directed.
(4) Security of governmental buildings within the municipality, federal,
state, county or local, as directed.
(5) Security of essential industries, power sources and
communications.
(6) Assisting in staffing and operating the emergency operating center.
§ 69-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-5
65:138
§ 69-6. Summary of intent.
§ 69-7. Minimum work detail; uniform; Commanding Officer.
(7) Enforcement of law and order as required and/or directed.
(8) Documentation of all tasks initiated or completed and unusual
incidents encountered during assigned duty.
C. Firearms use.
(1) Firearms assignments to auxiliary police will be made at the
discretion of the local Chief of Police.
(2) Assignments may be made under the following conditions:
(a) Personnel shall be properly trained and qualified by a
competent and sanctioned regular police firearms instructor
certified by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
(b) Auxiliary police shall have been properly investigated by
proper authorities with reference to character, medical record
and psychological background.
(c) Auxiliary police must be properly covered by insurance by the
municipality authorizing the use of firearms.
A. Auxiliary police are deemed a necessity to a well-organized Civil
Defense - Disaster Control operation in any municipality. Their
qualifications should meet a minimum standard to enable them to
perform their assignments in a proper manner. The service they
perform is a reflection upon the municipality they serve and the Civil
Defense - Disaster Control Division of the State of New Jersey. Proper
selection and training of auxiliary police is essential for an efficient
operational agency to supplement the regular police force in the event
of any local, state or national emergency.
B. Civil defense police services are built on existing law enforcement
organizations. Through years of law enforcement, America's Police
Departments have developed and used methods and procedures for
handling emergencies of all types. Police problems encountered in civil
defense are closely related to those of peacetime operations but are
multiplied under emergency conditions in direct proportion to the
extent of the emergency. The many police agencies in New Jersey which
participate in law enforcement programs must be ready to mobilize for
civil defense emergencies and to work together as one functioning
organization. To this end, the civil defense policies, administration,
operation and training of police services should be uniform.
A. Auxiliary officers must work a minimum of one four-hour detail every 14
days (104 hours yearly).
§ 69-5 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-7
65:139
B. There not being a specific auxiliary police uniform, North Brunswick
auxiliary police officers will wear the existing reserve police uniform as
determined by the Chief of Police.
C. North Brunswick auxiliary police officers will wear a shoulder patch
indicating their designation as reserve or special police determined by
each officer's level of training and his qualifications.
D. The Chief of Police will appoint a Commanding Officer to be in charge of
all auxiliary reserve/special officers, and to act as his representative in
auxiliary police matters.
§ 69-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-7
65:140
ARTICLE III
Fees
[Adopted 3-7-1983; amended in its entirety 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
§ 69-8. Schedule of fees. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-9]
A. Police reports. [Amended 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02]
(1) Uncertified police reports.
(a) Police reports will only be distributed online though a thirdparty
processing agent or in person.
[1] Online, uncertified copies of police reports are available
for a fee of $5 through a third-party processing agent.
[2] A fee of $2 shall be charged when purchasing an
uncertified copy of a police report as a registered member
with the third party.
[3] Drivers and registered vehicle owners, named in the
report, may apply in person and obtain an uncertified copy
of the police report from the Police Records Bureau at no
charge.
[4] Attorneys, companies, and individuals that are not named
in the report must complete an Open Public Records Act
request form and submit along with payment to obtain an
uncertified copy of the police report from the Police
Records Bureau.
[5] When requesting an uncertified copy of the police report
under the Open Public Records Act request form, the fees
are as follows:
[a] Five cents per page.
[b] If requesting report to be mailed, the delivery/postage
fees shall be included with the request.
(b) Reports obtained in person shall be available no less than
seven days from the date of the incident.
(2) Certified police reports.
(a) Certified police reports are not available online.
(b) The Police Records Bureau will process a certified police
report request by completing the Open Public Records Act
request form along with payment.
(c) When requesting a certified copy of the police report under the
Open Public Records Act Request form, the fees are as follows:
§ 69-8 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-8
65:141
[1] Ten dollars per report.
[2] If requesting report to be mailed, the delivery/postage fees
shall be included with the request.
B. Photograph reproduction: $10 per print.
C. Fingerprinting of North Brunswick residents: $10.
D. Videotape reproduction, audiotape reproduction and CD-Rom
reproduction: $5 per videotape, audiocassette or CD-Rom. [Amended
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02]
E. Local record check: $5, which shall indicate the local records from the
date of residency within the Township of North Brunswick.
F. Criminal history check: $5. [Amended 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02]
G. Discovery:
(1) First three pages: $5 total.
(2) Each additional page: $ 1.
H. Registration of security alarm: one-time registration fee of $5.
I. Permit to purchase a handgun: one-time fee of $2. [Added 4-17-2017
by Ord. No. 17-02]
J. Firearms purchaser identification card: one-time fee of $5. [Added
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02]
§ 69-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-8
65:142
ARTICLE IV
Police Director
[Adopted 7-2-1973; amended in its entirety 9-4-1984]
§ 69-9. Establishment. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
The office of Police Director, which individual shall be charged with the
duties of supervising and establishing the policies for the operation of the
Police Department and such other duties and responsibilities as created by
this article, is hereby established. The Police Director shall constitute the
appropriate authority in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 69-10. Appointment; removal from office.
§ 69-11. Salary. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
The salary of the Police Director shall be as set forth in a Salary Ordinance
adopted by the Township Council as such ordinance shall be amended.
§ 69-12. Supervisory responsibility; appointment. [Amended
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4; 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
A. The Police Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve for
the term of the Mayor.
B. Removal from office.
(1) The Police Director may be removed from office for cause, defined
as:
(a) Failure to perform the duties of Police Director as defined in
this article.
(b) Mental and/or physical incompetence to perform the duties of
the position of Police Director.
(c) Conviction of a felony.
(2) If the Police Director is notified that he is to be removed for cause,
he may request a public hearing which shall be held not earlier
than 15 days nor later than 30 days after his submission of his
request to the office of the Mayor. Within five days after the
submission of a request for public hearing, the specification of
charges shall be supplied to the Police Director.
A. The Director of Police shall be charged with the duties of supervising
and establishing the policies for the operation of the Police Department
and shall be directly responsible to the Mayor of the efficiency and
operation of the Police Department.
§ 69-9 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-12
65:143
§ 69-13. Powers and duties. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4;
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
The Director of Police for the Township of North Brunswick shall be charged
with the duties of supervising the Police Department in all areas and aspects
as it shall impact upon policy and the good order and discipline of the
Department and shall adopt rules and regulations for the Police Department
and establish policies for the daily operation of the Police Department and
the discipline of its members.
§ 69-13.1. Monthly reports to Mayor. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
97-4]
The Director of Police shall submit monthly reports to the Mayor concerning
the operation of the Police Department during the preceding month in such
form as shall be prescribed by the Mayor. The Director shall make such
other reports as may be requested by the Mayor.
§ 69-13.2. Graphic Table of Organization. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-4]
§ 69-13.3. Policies of the Director. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
97-4]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Director of Police shall issue any
operations orders, general orders or standard operating procedures or
policies as the Director deems necessary for the efficiency and operation of
the Police Department.
§ 69-13.4. Emergency directives. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
97-4; amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
Nothing contained herein shall infringe upon or limit the duty and authority
of the Chief of Police to act to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the municipality in an emergency through special emergency directives
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and 40A:14-146.9.
§ 69-13.5. Civilian employees. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
B. The Director of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and shall serve a term of office which is coextensive
with that of the Mayor.
A. A graphic Table of Organization shall be maintained by the Director of
Police to show the divisional structure of the Police Department.
B. The function and duties of each position in the Table of Organization
shall be defined by policies established by the Director of Police.
§ 69-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-13.5
65:144
§ 69-13.6. Police Department rules and regulations and Police
Manual.
A. The Director of Police shall, with the approval and consent of the Mayor
and Township Council, appoint civilian members to the Police
Department to serve in the Central Services Division.
B. Said civilian employees will provide dispatch services, clerical duties
and logistical services in support of the Police Department and shall
perform other duties as specified by the Director.
A. The appropriate authority (Director of Police), pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, is hereby authorized to update, adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and
for the discipline of its members.
B. Said rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of and be binding
upon the entire membership, sworn officers and civilian employees of
the Police Department.
C. Said rules and regulations shall be in manual form and shall be called
the "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department of the Township of
North Brunswick."
D. Each sworn officer and each civilian employee is duty bound to be
thoroughly familiar with the provisions of the Police Manual and rules
and regulations of the Police Department.
§ 69-13.5 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-13.6
65:145

ARTICLE V
Establishment
[Adopted 12-19-1994]
§ 69-14. Creation; statutory purpose. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-4]
There is hereby created in and for the Township of North Brunswick, a
Police Department (previously established in 1949 and revised in 1963)
within the County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-118. This article is intended to ratify the
existence and operation of the Police Department which has historically
operated within and served the Township of North Brunswick and at the
same time satisfy statutory requirements of the legislation as amended in
1981 and 1988.
§ 69-15. Purposes; duties. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
The Police Department shall preserve the peace; protect life and property;
detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance at and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers as well
as perform all other duties and fulfill all other responsibilities normally
associated with the operation of a Police Department.
§ 69-16. Composition. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4;
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
Said Police Department shall consist of one Director of Police, one Chief
of Police, one Deputy Chief of Police and such Captains, Lieutenants,
Sergeants, police officers and civilian employees as deemed necessary and
appropriate by the Director of Police in his discretion and judgment with the
approval of the Mayor and Township Council. The Director of Police and/
or Mayor and the Council may, from time to time, leave one or more of the
above positions vacant, as they see fit. The express purpose for renaming
these offices is to establish a statutory line of authority from all police
employees to a higher elected authority. No personnel may be appointed
to the North Brunswick Police Department until they have satisfied all
statutory requirements and have complied with the selection process and
standards established by the rules and regulations adopted by the
appropriate authority to govern said Police Department.
§ 69-17. Line of authority. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
A. Appropriate authority. The North Brunswick Police Department shall
come under the jurisdiction of the appropriate authority, which is
hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. Said appropriate
authority shall be the Director of Police. The appropriate authority shall
§ 69-14 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-17
65:147
§ 69-17.1. Disciplinary hearings. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
97-4]
§ 69-18. Suspension, removal, fine or reduction in rank.
No member or officer in the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey statutes and the
Police Department's rules and regulations (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147).
be directly responsible to the Mayor of the Township. The Director of
Police, in addition to those powers and duties enumerated in § 69-13
of this chapter, shall be responsible for the operation of the Police
Department pursuant to policies established by said Director and shall
be responsible for the promulgation, updating and/or ratification of the
rules and regulations for police personnel which shall be known as the
"rules and regulations for the Police Department of the Township of
North Brunswick."
B. Hearing authority.
(1) In the event of any disciplinary proceeding against any member of
the Police Department of the Township of North Brunswick, the
appropriate authority or his/her designee shall be the sole hearing
officer and person in charge of all such proceeding.
(2) Nothing herein shall prevent the Director of Police from
designating a hearing officer for the purpose of conducting the
hearing, receiving evidence, preparing a record and submitting
findings and a proposed recommendation of penalty to the
appointing authority established under the rules of the New Jersey
Department of Personnel and the provisions of Title 11 of the New
Jersey Statutes for a final determination of discipline.
C. Charging authority. Only the Chief of Police or his designee may initiate
disciplinary charges against any member of the Police Department
pursuant to the powers vested in said office by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
[Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
A. Any employee seeking to appeal disciplinary charges shall do so in
writing submitted to the Office of the Director of Police. Said appeal
shall be filed, in writing, within five business days, not including
Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, from the date said disciplinary
charges were served upon the employee.
B. The Director of Police or designee shall schedule a hearing no sooner
than 10 calendar days nor later than 30 calendar days from the date of
service of the charges upon the employee.
C. Any preliminary notice of disciplinary action served upon any employee
shall contain the date, time and location of the hearing on the charges.
§ 69-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-19
65:148
§ 69-19. Appointment to Department.
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey statutes. The appropriate authority may also
require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department shall
successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological examination
(N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127).
§ 69-20. Special law enforcement officers.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick may appoint
from time to time special law enforcement officers in accordance with New
Jersey statutes for terms not exceeding one year. They shall possess and
exercise all the powers and duties provided by said statutes during their
term in office but shall not be continued as regular members of the Police
Department and shall not be entitled to tenure. The Director of Police/
Acting Chief may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty
to exercise the same powers and authority as regular members of the Police
Department, including the carrying of firearms and power of arrest (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq.).
§ 69-19 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-20
65:149

ARTICLE VI
Employment by Outside Entities
[Adopted 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1639]
§ 69-21. Policy established.
There is hereby created a procedure for the employment of police officers
by outside entities.
§ 69-22. Statutory authority; contract.
The Attorney General of the State of New Jersey and the Division of Local
Government Services have determined that members of a municipal Police
Department may, during their off-duty hours, engage in police-related
activities for private persons or entities. Pursuant to the laws of the State of
New Jersey, a municipality must agree to implement a system whereby the
off-duty availability of police officers is arranged through a contract directly
with the municipality and the private person or entity.
§ 69-23. Compensation policy; trust fund.
Contracting between the Township and a private person or entity shall
include a plan whereby the compensation for off-duty police-related services
is channeled through the office of the Township Finance Department and
said compensation is placed in a dedicated trust fund to be established
by the Township for that purpose, and that the proceeds of said fund will
be disbursed through the Finance Department to the individual officers
performing such services.
§ 69-24. Assignments.
The Police Director or Chief of Police, or, in the absence of a Chief, the
highest-ranked senior sworn officer, shall be responsible for the assignment
of all extra-duty police-related activities. Said officials shall be authorized
to designate other members of the Police Department, as needed, to assist
in the assignment of extra-duty police-related activities. The specific
procedure for assignment shall be in accordance with the collective
negotiated agreement between the Township and the North Brunswick
Superior Officers' Association, Local No. 160 and/or the North Brunswick
Policeman's Benevolent Association, Local No. 160.
§ 69-25. Contract with private entities; information required.
Any private person or entity that desires to retain the services of police
officers of the Township of North Brunswick for extra-duty work shall be
required to enter into a contract with the Township of North Brunswick.
Said contract shall include, but not be limited to, the nature of duties to
be performed, the location of said duties, the date and hours of service,
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Employment by Outside
Entities, adopted 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7, as amended.
§ 69-21 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-25
65:151
the rate of payment for services to the officers, administrative fees to
the Township and fees, if any, for the use of Township-owned equipment.
The contract may also provide for a deposit to be posted in the trust
account in advance by the entity for services to be performed. The Police
Director or Chief of Police, or, in the absence of a Chief, the highest-ranking
sworn officer, is hereby empowered to execute a contract for extra-duty
police-related activities on behalf of the Township of North Brunswick in
accordance with this article.
§ 69-26. Payment for extra-duty assignments.
All private persons or entities shall be required to make all payments for
extra-duty assignments payable to the Township of North Brunswick. The
Finance Department shall deposit the money collected from said private
persons or entities for payment of the extra-duty officers into a dedicated
trust fund. All members of the Police Department shall be paid for services
performed on the next regular pay date, after receipt and acknowledgement
of payment, processed and verified by the PBA, that it is in accordance with
the agreement.
§ 69-27. Fees.
A. An hourly rate schedule shall be prepared by the Police Director or
Chief of Police, or, in the absence of a Chief, the highest-ranked senior
sworn officer, and submitted to the Mayor for approval with consent by
the Council. The schedule shall be reviewed and recommendations for
adjustment shall be presented to the Council annually at the first
meeting of every year.
B. An administrative fee of 11.5% of the hourly rate shall be added and
remitted to the Township of North Brunswick to cover the additional
cost of employer contributions and insurance, as well as time and
materials expended in the administration of payment to police officers
for extra-duty assignments.
C. An administrative fee of $2 per hour shall be added and remitted to the
North Brunswick Policeman's Benevolent Association (PBA) to cover
the union's administration of contracts, which includes document
preparation, scheduling, billing and management. Said fee is
authorized to be waived from a contract at the discretion of the PBA.
D. When a vehicle is required in the contract, use of a police car shall be
charged at a rate of $8 per hour, and remitted to the Township of North
Brunswick with other municipal fees.
E. The North Brunswick Policeman's Benevolent Association (PBA) or the
North Brunswick Superior Officers' Association (SOA) will negotiate offduty
contracts with the vendor using the current approved rate
schedule. The administrative charge and vehicle fee, if applicable, will
be in addition to the hourly rate. All off-duty contracts negotiated by the
North Brunswick PBA or SOA will be submitted to the Police Director or
§ 69-25 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-27
65:152
§ 69-28. Insurance.
Each private person or entity that shall employ extra-duty officers pursuant
to this chapter will be responsible for maintaining his or her own insurance
coverage. Said insurance coverage shall include, but not be limited to,
general liability and automobile. Proof of said insurance coverage shall be
provided to the Township of North Brunswick prior to the assignment of any
officer(s).
§ 69-29. Emergencies; termination of assignments; payment due.
The Police Director or Chief of Police, or, in the absence of a Chief, the
highest-ranked senior sworn officer, or their designee, shall have the
authority to order any police officer engaged in extra-duty assignments
within the Township of North Brunswick to respond to an emergency
situation within the Township of North Brunswick. Said officials shall also
have the right to order any extra-duty assignment to be terminated
whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to the health, safety
and welfare of the police officer and/or the residents of the Township
of North Brunswick. In any situation where the officer is called to an
emergency situation, a note shall be made of the said emergency situation,
as well as the time said officer was removed from said assignment. In any
situation where an extra-duty officer is called to an emergency situation,
said private person or entity shall not be responsible for the payment of
the officer's hourly rate or administrative fees until such time as said police
officer returns to the assignment with the extra-duty employer.
§ 69-30. Indemnification.
Any private person or entity requesting the services of extra-duty police
officers shall indemnify the Township of North Brunswick for any and all
damages which may arise from the officers' employment by said private
person or entity.
Chief of Police, or, in the absence of a Chief, the highest-ranked senior
sworn officer, for review prior to execution between the North
Brunswick PBA or SOA and the entity. A PBA or SOA designee will
perform administrative duties, including receiving off-duty assignments
from entities, posting and filling assignments, billing entities and
collecting amounts due and depositing with the Financial Office.
§ 69-27 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-30
65:153

ARTICLE VII
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-23]
§ 69-31. Cooperation with other municipalities.
The Township shall hereby cooperate with all other municipalities which
adopt a similar reciprocal ordinance providing for intermunicipal police
assistance in times of emergency.
§ 69-32. Conditions for assistance.
This intermunicipal assistance will be provided if and when the Township
of North Brunswick has an emergency within its boundaries requiring
additional police assistance to protect life and property or to assist in
suppressing a riot or disorder and whenever another municipality, which
has enacted a similar reciprocal ordinance, may experience a similar
emergency requiring additional police assistance.
§ 69-33. Request for assistance.
§ 69-34. Powers and rights while providing assistance.
Members of the North Brunswick Police Department supplying emergency
assistance to another municipality shall have the same powers and authority
as have the members of the Police Department of the municipality in which
said assistance is being rendered. Additionally, said members shall also
have, while so acting, said rights and immunities as they may otherwise
enjoy in the performance of their normal duties within the Township of
North Brunswick.
§ 69-35. Costs.
The Township of North Brunswick shall, upon providing assistance to
another municipality which has enacted a similar intermunicipal assistance
ordinance, assume the cost and expense of providing said personnel and
equipment to the requesting municipality; excepting such instances when
A. The Director of Police of the Township of North Brunswick or the
highest ranking officer on duty at the time is hereby authorized to
request assistance from the Chief/Director of Police or highest ranking
officer on duty of the police departments of other municipalities for
intermunicipal police assistance during and/or after an emergency
situation.
B. The Director of Police of the Township of North Brunswick or the
highest ranking officer on duty at the time shall provide assistance to
another municipality or municipalities making a valid request to supply
such personnel and equipment to the extent possible without
endangering person or property within the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 69-31 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-35
65:155
the requesting municipality receives state or federal aid as reimbursement
or if private concerns are involved and the requesting municipality receives
reimbursement. Therefore, in this event, the costs incurred by the Township
shall be submitted to the municipality which requested assistance for
reimbursement.
§ 69-36. Chief/Director of Police to be senior ranking officer.
At such times that an emergency may occur and intermunicipal police aid
is requested, the Chief/Director of Police of the municipality wherein said
emergency situation exists shall be the senior ranking officer of all members
of any police department rendering assistance within the boundaries of said
municipality.
§ 69-37. Injury or death in performance of duties.
In the event that any member of a police force summoned pursuant to an
agreement to render assistance suffers injury or death in the performance
of his or her duties, he/she or his/her designee or legal representative shall
be entitled to such salary, pension rights, workmen's compensation or other
benefits as would have accrued if such injury or death had occurred in the
performance of his or her normal duties.
§ 69-38. Copies on file.
A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the Municipal Clerk of each
municipality in Middlesex County no later than five business days following
its adoption. The Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick shall maintain a
record of all such similar ordinances adopted by other municipalities.
§ 69-35 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-38
65:156
ARTICLE VIII
Chief of Police
[Adopted 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
§ 69-39. Establishment.
The office of Police Chief, which individual shall be the head of the police
force and be directly responsible to the Director of Police who is the
appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
responsibilities of the Police Department pursuant to policies established by
the Director of Police, is hereby established.
§ 69-40. Appointment; removal from office.
§ 69-41. Salary.
The salary of the Police Chief shall be $60,638 to $99,780. The salary of the
Police Chief shall, nonetheless, be subject to the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-179.
§ 69-42. Supervisory responsibility.
The Police Chief, as the head of the police force, shall be directly
responsible to the Director of Police for the efficiency and routine day-today
operations of said police force.
§ 69-43. Powers and duties.
The Chief of Police shall have and exercise the following authority and
perform the following duties:
A. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor.
B. The Police Chief may be removed from office in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey and by rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and any special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the police
force and its officers and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
police force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his discretion and
supervision.
§ 69-39 PLANNING DIRECTOR § 69-43
65:157
E. Report at least monthly to the Director of Police in such form as shall be
prescribed by the Director of Police on the operation of the force during
the preceding month, which report shall include but not be limited to
reports detailing the status of all internal affairs investigations and
reports detailing the deployment of personnel and all assignments of
personnel and make such other reports as may be requested by the
Director of Police.
§ 69-43 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 69-43
65:158
Chapter 70
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contribution disclosure statements — See Ch.
153.
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 182.
§ 69-43 PURCHASING § 69-43
70:159

ARTICLE I
Public Contracts
[Adopted 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-140]
§ 70-1. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the
Township of North Brunswick (the Township) and any of its purchasing
agents or departments, as the case may be, shall not enter into any
agreement or otherwise contract to procure services from any
professional business entity if such professional business entity has
solicited or made any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution,
including in-kind contributions, to a campaign committee of any
Township candidate or holder of public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of a contract or any Township party
committee or any political action committee (PAC) that is organized
solely for the purpose of promoting or supporting Township municipal
candidates or municipal officeholders in excess of the thresholds
specified in Subsection D within one calendar year immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into
negotiations for or agrees to any contract or agreement with the
Township or any departments thereof, for the rendition of professional
services shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of money,
pledge of contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Township
candidate or holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for
the award of a contract any Township party committee or any political
action committee (PAC) that is organized solely for the purpose of
promoting or supporting Township municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection D,
between the time of first communication between that professional
business entity and the Township regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations or
rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the contract or
agreement.
C. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract shall mean an individual, including the individual's
spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation;
professional corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The
definition of a business entity shall include all principals who own 10%
or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners and
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity, as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Requirements Prior to Award of
Contracts Exempt from Public Bidding, adopted 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-10.
§ 70-1 PURCHASING § 70-1
70:161
D. Any individual meeting the definition of professional business entity
under this article may contribute a maximum of $400 for each election
in any year, for any purpose, to any candidate for Mayor or Council or
$500 for each election in any year to the Township of North Brunswick
party committee or to a PAC referenced in this article without violating
Subsection A of this article. However, any group of individuals meeting
the definition of "professional business entity" under this article,
including such principals, partners and officers of the entity in the
aggregate, may not contribute for any purpose in excess of $2,500 for
each election in any year to all Township candidates and officeholders
with ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, and all
Township political parties and/or PACs referenced in this article
combined, without violating Subsection A of this article.
E. As provided in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20, no individual, either alone or jointly
with one or more other individuals, and no corporation, partnership,
membership organization or other incorporated or unincorporated
association shall loan or advance to any individual, group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, membership organization or other
incorporated or unincorporated association any money or other thing of
value expressly for the purpose of inducing the recipient thereof, or any
other individual, group, corporation, partnership, organization or
association, to make a contribution, either directly or indirectly, of
money or other thing of value to a campaign committee of any Township
candidate or holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for
the award of a contract or any Township party committee or any
political action committee (PAC) that is organized solely for the purpose
of promoting or supporting Township municipal candidates or
municipal officeholders. No person shall contribute, or purport to
contribute, to a campaign committee of any Township candidate or
holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract or any Township party committee or any political action
committee (PAC) that is organized solely for the purpose of promoting
or supporting Township municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders which does not actually belong to him and is not in his full
custody and control; which has been given or furnished to him by any
other person or group for the purpose of making a contribution thereof,
except in the case of group contributions by persons who are members
of the contributing group; or which has been loaned or advanced
expressly for the purpose of inducing the making of a contribution to a
campaign committee of any Township candidate or holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract or any
Township party committee or any political action committee (PAC) that
is organized solely for the purpose of promoting or supporting
Township municipal candidates or municipal officeholders.
F. For purposes of this article, all prohibitions and limitations on
contributions to Township of North Brunswick candidate or holder of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract
§ 70-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 70-1
70:162
§ 70-2. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any Township of
North Brunswick candidate for Mayor or Township Council or Township of
North Brunswick party committee or PAC referenced in this article shall be
deemed a violation of this article, nor shall an agreement be disqualified
thereby, if that contribution was made by the professional business entity
prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 70-3. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
§ 70-4. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Township candidate or officeholder or
Township party committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a
violation of § 70-1 of this article if, within 30 days after the general election,
the professional business entity notifies the Township Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the relevant
shall be applicable, in the case of dual office-holding, to contributions
to or for the benefit of the dual officeholder regardless of office.
G. For purposes of this article, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Township Council of the Township of North Brunswick, if the
contract requires approval or appropriation from the Township
Council.
(2) The Mayor of the Township of North Brunswick, if the contract
requires approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is
responsible for the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services with
any professional business entity and any contract or agreement to
procure services from a professional business entity, the Township or its
purchasing agents and departments, as the case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the professional business entity that the bidder
or offeror has not made a contribution in violation of § 70-1 of this
article and the Municipal Clerk shall certify as to the receipt of such
sworn statement.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation,
proposal process or duration of a contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or
agreement with the Township of North Brunswick, or prior to the
provision of services, and shall be in addition to any other certifications
that may be required by any other provision of law.
§ 70-1 PURCHASING § 70-4
70:163
Township candidate or officeholder, Township political party or PAC
referenced in this article.
§ 70-5. Limitation on employee contributions.
To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, no
Township employee shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of
money, pledge of contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any
Township candidate or holder of public office or to any Township party
committee or to any PAC that is organized for the purpose of promoting
or supporting Township municipal candidates or municipal officeholders in
excess of the thresholds specified in § 70-1D of this article.
§ 70-6. Disclosure required on major subdivision and site plan
applications.
At the time of filing an application for major subdivision and site plan
approval, all applicants therefor shall also file with the Township of North
Brunswick Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, as the case
may be, a disclosure setting forth the amounts of all contributions to any
Township candidate or holder of public office or to any Township party
committee or to any PAC referenced in this article, made by such applicant
within two calendar years of the date of such application.
§ 70-7. Retroactivity of future clarifications adopted.
A. It is anticipated that there may be some professional business entities
which determine to attempt a legalistic adherence to the letter, rather
than the spirit, of this article. It is the declared intent of this municipal
governing body to remain vigilant to recognize such attempts to subvert
the underlying purposes for which this article was adopted. Any
professional business entity which may attempt such creative
subversion does so at its peril. If and in the event creative actions are
taken in order to defeat the purposes of this article, it is the intention of
the governing body to enact appropriate clarification of this article,
which clarification shall be retroactive to the initial effective date of this
article, thereby disqualifying such creative professional business
entities from serving the Township. Changes to this article which are
not for purposes of clarification, but which are amendments to the
provisions hereto, shall become effective upon adoption and publication
according to law.
B. It is the express legislative intent of the governing body of the Township
of North Brunswick to avoid the perception of any improper influence
on local elections. Therefore, to the extent that any portion of provision
of the Ordinance is adjudged by the courts to be invalid, it is the express
hope and desire of the governing body that any professional business
entities seeking public contracts with the Township will voluntarily
comply with this express legislative intent.
§ 70-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 70-8
70:164
§ 70-8. Violations and penalties.
A. All Township of North Brunswick professional service agreements shall
provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government
contract for a professional business entity to violate § 70-1B or to
knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received or
to make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose
of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
B. Any professional business entity as defined in § 70-1C and D who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this article,
or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for
future Township of North Brunswick contracts, agreements or provision
of goods and services for a period of four calendar years from the date
of the violation.
§ 70-8 PURCHASING § 70-8
70:165
Chapter 72
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 72-1. Creation.
The Township of North Brunswick Recreation Advisory Committee is hereby
established.
§ 72-2. Members. [Amended 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
The Committee shall consist of 14 members appointed by the Council, all of
whom shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick, the members
shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided. The terms
of the office of the Committee members shall be for one year, January 1
to December 31. A vacancy on the Committee occurring otherwise than
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment. The Committee shall choose one person
from its membership to serve as Chair.
§ 72-3. Powers of Committee.
The Committee is established to advise the Township Council on the
development or use of parks and recreation facilities, development and
improvement of recreational activities, and the efficient delivery of such
services to the citizens of North Brunswick. The Committee shall have
power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the municipality for recreation purposes and may coordinate its
activities with the activities of official and unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print, and distribute books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary
for its purposes.
§ 72-4. Records and annual reports.
The Committee shall keep records of its meetings and activities and report
to the governing body as the Committee deems advisable and/or as the
governing body shall request. All meetings of the Committee shall be open
to the public and conducted in accordance with the Open Public Meetings
Act.41
§ 72-5. Studies and recommendations.
The annual report of the Committee to the Council shall make
recommendations concerning the use and improvement of recreational
facilities and programs.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 70-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 72-6
72:166
§ 72-6. Appropriations.
The Committee may incur such expenses as it may from time to time
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the governing body or otherwise available to it.
Chapter 74
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
§ 72-6 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 72-6
72:167

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Plan
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-17]
§ 74-1. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 74-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 74-3. Exceptions.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 74-1 hereof
and the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 74-2
hereinabove, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may
determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
A. Business Administrator;
B. Municipal department head;
C. Municipal Court Judges.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Sub-code Inspector; and
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time;
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
§ 74-1 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 74-3
72:169
§ 74-4. Implementation, construal and applicability of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 74-5. Filing of article.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 74-2 hereinabove, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 74-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 74-5
72:170
Chapter 76
SAFETY COMMITTEE
§ 76-1. Creation; membership.
There is hereby created a Safety Committee of the Township of North
Brunswick consisting of four members whose terms of office shall be for a
calendar year and shall run concurrently. The members of the Committee
shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. Vacancies in the Committee
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments and any such
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 76-2. Organization; officers.
The Safety Committee shall elect one of its members upon organizing each
year as Chairman of the Committee, and it may also select such other
officers as it deems necessary.
§ 76-3. Duties.
The duties of the Committee shall consist of furnishing guidelines and
maintaining safety standards for township employees.
§ 76-4. Annual report; advice to Mayor and Council.
The Safety Committee shall report annually to the Mayor and Council as to
its activities. The Safety Committee shall also furnish its opinions and advice
on any particular subjects at the request of the Mayor and Council.
Chapter 79
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 79, Salaries and Compensation, was repealed 6-24-2019
by Ord. No. 19-15. The salaries and compensation of all officers and
employees of the Township of North Brunswick are as set forth in the
annual Salary Ordinance, as amended. The currently effective Salary
Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick is on file in the office
of the Township Clerk and is available for examination during office
hours. See also Ch. 61, Personnel.]
Chapter 83
SEPTEMBER 11TH COMMITTEE
§ 83-1. Creation.
The September 11th Committee is hereby established under the direction
of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services.42
§ 74-5 SAFETY COMMITTEE § 83-2
76:171
§ 83-2. Members.
The Committee shall consist of nine members: five members to be appointed
by the Mayor and four members to be appointed by the Township Council.
All of the members shall be residents of the Township of North Brunswick;
the members shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter
provided. The initial term of members shall be for one, two or three years
to be designated in the initial appointment except that the two members
of the Council shall serve for a one-year term. The terms thereafter shall
be for three years with the exception of the Council members. The initial
appointments shall be made in such manner so that the terms of 1/3 of
the members shall expire each year. A vacancy on the Committee occurring
otherwise than expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as an original appointment. The Committee shall choose
one person from its membership to serve as Chair.
§ 83-3. Records and annual reports.
The September 11th Committee shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and report to the governing body as the Committee deems
advisable and/or as the governing body shall request. The meetings at the
September 11th Committee shall be open to the public and conducted in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.43
§ 83-4. Appropriations.
The Committee may incur such expenses as it may from time to time
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the governing body or otherwise available to it, and there shall be
established in the municipal budget a line item for this Committee.
Chapter 84
SERVICE AWARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
50.
§ 84-1. Establishment of awards program.
There is hereby established a Distinguished Service Awards Program.
42.Editor's Note: Formerly, the Department of Human Services.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 83-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 84-2
84:172
§ 84-2. Annual awards.
Distinguished service awards shall be presented annually in a manner
determined by the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 84-3. Selection of recipients.
The Award recipients shall be selected by the Mayor, Council President and
Council Vice President by consensus or by the Mayor, Council President or
Council Vice President each presenting an equal number of awards.
§ 84-4. Type and number of awards.
The Township Council shall, by resolution, determine the types of awards
and number of awards to be presented.
§ 84-5. Appropriation.
The Township Council shall annually appropriate funds for the
commemoration of such awards.
Chapter 87
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 87, Tax Collector Pension, adopted 4-6-1964, was
repealed 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15. See now Ch. 61, Personnel.]
Chapter 91
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 227.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 311.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 337.
§ 91-1. Composition; appointment; terms and vacancies.
A. There is hereby created a Traffic Safety Committee of the Township of
North Brunswick consisting of seven members who are residents of the
township, the Township Engineer and the Police Traffic Safety Officer
or his designee. [Amended 9-4-1984]
B. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor.
[Amended 9-4-1984]
C. The terms of office shall be for one year each and shall run
concurrently, except that the terms of the members first appointed
under this chapter shall expire December 31, 1983. Vacancies shall be
§ 84-2 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE § 91-1
91:173
§ 91-2. Officers.
The Traffic Safety Committee shall elect one of its members upon
organizing each year as Chairman of the Committee, and it may also select
such other officers as it deems necessary.
§ 91-3. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Committee shall be to review, analyze and make
recommendations on traffic safety programs and improvements that will
benefit the traveling public. The Committee shall engage in and represent
the township on all traffic safety programs at the local, county, state and
federal government levels. The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity
and report to the Mayor and Council on its activities, findings and
recommendations.
Chapter 97
YOUTH COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Human Services
Committees — See Ch. 22.
§ 97-1. Creation.
A North Brunswick Township Youth Council is hereby established under the
joint direction of the Department of Human Services and the Department of
Parks and Recreation.44
§ 97-2. Members.
The Youth Council shall consist of 11 members: six members to be
appointed by the Mayor, and five members to be appointed by the Township
Council. All of the members shall be residents of the Township of North
Brunswick; the members shall serve without compensation except as
hereinafter provided. In addition, the Township Council shall designate one
of its members to serve as an advisor to the Council. The initial term
of members shall be for one, two or three years to be designated in the
initial appointment. The terms thereafter shall be for three years. The initial
filled in the same manner as original appointments, and any such
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. All
original terms shall commence as of the date of the appointment under
this chapter.
44.Editor's Note: Those departments were combined as the Department of Parks, Recreation
and Community Services.
§ 91-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 97-2
97:174
appointments shall be made in such a manner so that the terms of 1/3 of the
members shall expire each year. A vacancy on the Youth Council occurring
otherwise than expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment. The Youth Council shall
choose one person from its membership to serve as Chair.
§ 97-3. Powers.
The Youth Council Committee is established for the purpose of promoting
programs and services for the young people of the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 97-4. Records and annual reports.
The Youth Council shall keep records of its meetings and activities and
report to the governing body as the Youth Council deems advisable and/or
as the governing body shall request. The meetings of the Youth Council shall
be open to the public and conducted in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act.45
§ 97-5. Appropriations.
The Youth Council may incur such expenses as it may from time to time
require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it by the governing body or otherwise available to it, and there shall be
established in the municipal budget a line item for this Youth Council.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 103
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 138.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 165.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusions, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, actuating a device
at the police headquarters and requiring response thereto by the Police
Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 97-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 103-2
103:175
§ 103-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies to any
location in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 103-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and located within the confines of the Police
Department.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm console providing warning of intrusion, holdup, fire, smoke, flood or
other peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall be limited to a member of the
Police Department of the township.
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines transmitting an
alarm directly through a special line in police headquarters.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, and shall include as
well alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant
equipment, but shall not include alarms created by malfunction of the alarm
console.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which when actuated produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console such as a burglar alarm actuating
a bell device.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
§ 103-4. Alarm console.
A. Establishment. The township shall maintain an alarm detecting system
and install it in police headquarters. The township shall connect all
alarms coming into the police station and do routine maintenance on
the console daily.
B. Connection and approval. Any connection to the police alarm console
shall be of a type inspected and approved by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative, and any other person aggrieved by the
decision may appeal the decision in writing within 10 days.
§ 103-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 103-5
103:176
§ 103-5. Conditions for licensing.
§ 103-6. Registration; violations and penalties. [Amended
9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
All alarm devices must be registered within 30 days of installation. Failure
to register a new alarm within 20 days of receipt of a written notice to
register the alarm shall result in the issuance of a summons answerable in
Municipal Court and a fine of $100.
§ 103-7. Dial alarms.
Dial alarm devices shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
A. Local alarms, alarms tied into the police console board and alarms of
the service-company type or variety shall be licensed upon approval of
application for same. In addition, those persons having local alarms
shall be required to leave with the Police Department the name of a
person who can be reached in case of an alarm activation or a break-in.
The equipment shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff device
timed to shut off the alarm in 15 minutes.
B. Any license granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express
condition that the licensee shall indemnify and hold the township
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the
activities of the licensee, its alarm contractor or the alarm console
licensee of the township.
A. All owners of a dial alarm shall license such in the manner set forth in
§ 103-5 of this chapter.
B. No dial alarm device shall be finally licensed until a test alarm has been
made by the owner in conjunction with the Chief of Police or his
representative.
C. No dial alarm device shall be permitted unless of a type approved by the
Chief of Police or his representative in accordance with the rules
promulgated under this chapter. Any such equipment shall have the
approval of the New Jersey Bell Telephone Company or its assessor.
D. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special separate number which
can be obtained from the Chief of Police, and no dial alarm shall be
coded to dial the number of the general police switchboard of the
township.
E. Any dial alarm device shall be coded as well to notify a relative,
neighbor or other third party who will be disclosed in the registration of
the equipment as required by the provisions of this chapter.
F. (Reserved)
G. Owners of dial alarm devices shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in § 103-8.
§ 103-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 103-7
103:177
§ 103-8. False alarms. [Amended 3-4-1985; 9-8-1992]
H. Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general police
number, upon discovery thereof, shall receive notice in writing from the
Chief of Police requiring the owner to comply with the terms of this
chapter, and if the owner fails to do so within 30 days of the receipt of
the notice, he shall then be liable to pay to the township a penalty of
$50.
I. The contents of any record message from a dial alarm device shall be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police; no such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulant of the mechanism; messages shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.
J. There shall be testing of all alarm systems in conjunction with the Police
Department. The Police Department shall be notified prior to and after
all testing. Failure to notify the Police Department shall be considered a
false alarm in accordance with § 103-8 of this chapter.
K. All components of such equipment shall be maintained by the owner in
good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Chief of
Police is then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected
until such time as compliance with current requirements is
reestablished.
L. If an alarm system malfunctions due to weather conditions, which can
be supported by accurate weather data, such condition shall not be
considered a false alarm.
A. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department in a manner to be prescribed
by the Chief of Police or his representative. In addition, in the case of a
false alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made
and keep a record of such alarms on file. For such alarms the following
penalties shall prevail:
(1) For the first through fourth false alarms, inclusive, in any given
calendar year, no penalty shall be imposed.
(2) For the fifth, sixth and seventh false alarms, the penalty shall be
$25 per false alarm.
(3) For the eighth, ninth and 10th false alarms, the penalty shall be $50
per false alarm.
(4) For the 11th false alarm and each subsequent false alarm, the
penalty shall be $100 per false alarm.
§ 103-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 103-8
103:178
§ 103-9. Enforcement.
The Township of North Brunswick Police Department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 106
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 106-1. Legislative authority.
This chapter is for the purpose of fixing license fees and regulating the
sales of alcoholic beverages in the Township of North Brunswick, County of
Middlesex, in accordance with the provisions of an act of the Legislature
entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," pursuant to Chapter 436,
Public Laws 1933,46 as amended and supplemented, and in accordance with
the rules and regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable thereto, affecting
such subject matter, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 106-2. Compliance with provisions.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages otherwise than
as provided in the aforesaid Act or this chapter.
§ 106-3. Administrative authority.
The Mayor and Council of North Brunswick Township shall be the authority
for the administration and the issuance of all licenses hereunder.
§ 106-4. Fees; prerequisites to issuance of licenses.
B. The public schools and other buildings owned and used by the North
Brunswick Township Board of Education shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
A. The fees for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and of
said Act shall be as follows: [Amended 7-5-1966; 9-6-1977;
9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-9; 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12]
(1) For plenary retail consumption licenses, the annual fee shall be
$2,500. For businesses that are paying less than $2,500 as of the
effective date of this chapter, their annual fee shall be equal to the
lesser of 120% of the prior year's fee or $2,500.
(2) For plenary retail distribution licenses, the annual fee shall be
$2,500. For businesses that are paying less than $2,500 as of the
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 103-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 106-4
103:179
§ 106-5. Number of licenses restricted. [Amended 12-21-1970;
2-1-1971; 9-2-1986; 6-1-1987; 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-32; 7-6-2004
by Ord. No. 04-15]
§ 106-6. Hours. [Amended 4-16-1968]
effective date of this chapter, their annual fee shall be equal to the
lesser of 120% of the prior year's fee or $2,500.
(3) The fee for a club license issued under the provisions of this
chapter and the Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages shall be the
sum of $180 per annum.
B. No license shall be issued except after written application has been
presented by the said proposed licensee upon forms furnished by the
Mayor and Council and after publication of notice and as otherwise
required by said Act and this chapter.
A. Not more than 17 plenary retail consumption licenses, not more than
five plenary retail distribution licenses and not more than three club
licenses shall be issued and outstanding at the same time in the
Township of North Brunswick.
B. Not more than four plenary retail consumption licenses and not more
than one plenary retail distribution license shall be issued for or
transferred to premises located on Livingston Avenue and Livingston
Avenue Extension (or within 200 feet of either property line of said
Livingston Avenue and Livingston Avenue Extension) between the City
of New Brunswick and the Township of North Brunswick boundary line
and the intersection of Livingston Avenue Extension and Route 1, North
Brunswick Township.
C. Not more than one retail alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to
any person in the Township of North Brunswick, and said license shall
cover only the licensed premises.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no alcoholic beverage shall be sold,
served or delivered, nor shall any licensee permit the sale, service or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, upon the
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any
day of the week except Sunday, on which said day the prohibition
imposed in this section shall be between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon, and provided further that on any New Year's Day it shall be
lawful to make sale of intoxicating beverages until the hour of 5:00 a.m.
on said New Year's Day.
B. Furthermore, the licensed premises must be closed, and no person
other than the licensee and his employees is permitted to enter or
remain thereon, except restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, etc.,
clubs, bona fide hotels and motels and all other establishments where
§ 106-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 106-6
103:180
§ 106-7. Rules and regulations.
§ 106-8. Service in side rooms or back rooms prohibited.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room of premises
operated under a plenary consumption license which is not open to the use
of the public generally.
§ 106-9. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for violation of the
provisions of the Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, passed December 6,
1933, as amended and supplemented, or of any of the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 106-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 106-11. Consumption and possession of alcohol by underage
persons on private property. [Added 2-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
the principal business or activity is other than the sale of alcoholic
beverages, during the hours herein mentioned.
C. The hours aforementioned shall be construed to indicate standard time
or daylight saving time during such period when each may be in effect
in the Township of North Brunswick.
A. No sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises shall be made on credit, nor shall any sales of any alcoholic
beverages be made to any minor, mental defective, habitual drunkard
or to any person apparently intoxicated, provided that the prohibition
against sales on credit shall not apply to club licensees nor holders of
plenary retail distribution licenses.
B. No licensee shall permit or suffer minors, mental defectives, habitual
drunkards or intoxicated persons to congregate in or about the licensed
premises.
C. No licensee shall keep a disorderly house nor suffer any person to
gamble in said place for money or the value of money.
§ 106-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 106-11
103:181
Chapter 109
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who is qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — An underage person's parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle,
sibling, first cousin or closer relative by blood, marriage or adoption
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Violations; exceptions. Any person under the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages who, without legal authority, knowingly
possesses, orders, purchases, serves or consumes alcoholic beverages
or who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages within the
municipal boundary of the Township of North Brunswick shall be in
violation of this section and subject to the penalties hereof. This section
shall not apply to an underage person consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages. This section shall not apply to any underage person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or post
secondary educational institution; however, this section shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section,
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. Penalties; fines.
(1) The fine for such an offense under this section shall be $250 for a
first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
(2) The court may further suspend or postpone, for six months, the
driving privileges of the defendant, in addition to the fine
authorized for this offense. If a person at the time of the imposition
of such sentence is less then 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the
day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months
after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If a person at the time
of the imposition of such sentence under this section has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately
collect the license and forward same to the State Motor Vehicle
Commission along with the report.
§ 106-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 106-11
109:182
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exhibitions, shows and theatrical
places — See Ch. 168.
Land use — See Ch. 205.
§ 109-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Amusement Device
Ordinance."
§ 109-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
JUKEBOX — Any music-vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic video
games, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under
whatever name they may be indicated.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION — Includes the
following: any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any
such machine; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place
of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the
person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine;
provided, however, that the payment of any fee by any person, firm,
corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed a
compliance with this section of this chapter.
§ 109-3. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary
to law or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 109-4. License required.
Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public patronage
or keeping for operation any jukebox, electronic video game or mechanical
amusement device, as herein defined by § 109-2, shall be required to obtain
§ 106-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 109-4
109:183
a license from the Township of North Brunswick upon payment of a license
fee. Application for such license shall be made to the Township Clerk upon
a form to be supplied by the Township Clerk for that purpose.
§ 109-5. Application for license.
§ 109-6. License fees; expiration.
A. The application for such license shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, date and place of birth, and
whether or not the applicant is an individual, partnership or
corporation.
(2) The age of the applicant, of each partner, if a partnership, and of
each of the principal officers of the corporation, if the applicant is a
corporation. The corporation or partnership shall list the names
and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock
or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may
be.
(3) The criminal record of the applicant, if any, setting forth the date or
dates of conviction, the nature of the violation and the jurisdiction
in which the violation occurred. If the applicant is a partnership,
the same information shall be supplied for each partner, and, if the
applicant is a corporation, this information shall be supplied for
each of the principal officers of said corporation.
(4) A description of the machine to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
(5) The street number and description of the area where the machines
or devices are to be operated, stating the floor or floors of the
premises and attaching a sketch showing the rooms or areas
involved. Such sketch shall be drawn to scale, with the scale set
forth on the sketch, and shall designate all exits, windows and
storage spaces to be used in the operation.
B. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 18
years of age.
A. Fees for the operation of mechanical amusement devices are specified
in Chapter 212, Licensed Occupations. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-10]
B. License fees shall become payable to the Township Clerk on the first
day of August in each year, and all such licenses shall expire on the 31st
day of July in each year. All licenses issued between the first day of
January and the first day of August following in any year shall be issued
for 1/2 the required fee. All licenses issued between the first day of
August and the first day of January following in any year shall be issued
for the full license fee.
§ 109-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-6
109:184
§ 109-7. Review of application; determination.
All applications to operate and maintain for operation mechanical
amusement devices as defined in § 109-2 of this chapter shall be referred
to the Zoning Officer for review and determination as to its conformity with
the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick.47
§ 109-8. Investigation; approval or disapproval.
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police officer
designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct and supervise the use of amusement games as he
considers necessary for the protection of the public. He shall communicate
his findings, in writing, to the Clerk within a reasonable time after the
application has been filed. If the Chief of Police decides that the applicant's
character, ability or business responsibility are unsatisfactory or the
products, services or activity are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove
the application; the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license and shall so notify
the applicant. Otherwise, the Clerk shall issue the license immediately,
provided that the required license fees have been paid except in cases
where approval of the Mayor and Council is required. In the event of the
refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may appeal to the Mayor
and Council for a hearing.
§ 109-9. Maintenance of public records.
The Township Clerk shall maintain records of all persons and devices
licensed or denied same, pursuant to this chapter. Such records shall
contain the applications and other information relating to ownership,
placement, maintenance, use and operation of such devices and shall be
open to inspection of the public for good cause at reasonable times and shall
constitute public records. Extracts thereof may be certified by the Township
Clerk for use as legal evidence.
§ 109-10. Transfer of licenses; no refund after revocation.
A new license issued pursuant to the provision of this chapter shall be
required to transfer the rights to use, operate and maintain existing
licensed mechanical amusement devices, provided that the location of the
originally licensed mechanical amusement device is not changed. The
license fee for the transfer from one license to another shall equal 10%
of the annual license fee established herein. Thereafter, upon renewal of
C. Exempted from said fees shall be any group, agency, organization or
club recognized as a nonprofit and/or tax-exempt entity.
D. A new license fee shall not be required for the replacement or
substitution of one mechanical amusement device for another.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 109-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 109-10
109:185
said license, the annual fee shall be paid in full. Any change of location of
any such mechanical amusement device from the premises of any license
shall automatically revoke such license. In such cases, application for a
new license must be made, and no fees paid for revoked licenses shall be
refunded.
§ 109-11. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
A. Any license issued by the township may be suspended or revoked by the
Mayor and Council after notice and a hearing for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) The licensee has violated any ordinance of the township or any law
of the State of New Jersey or of the United States, which violation
reflects unfavorably on the fitness of such licensee to be so
licensed.
(4) Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself, his
agents or employees in a manner that constitutes a breach of the
peace or a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
(5) Habitual conduct of the users of the licensed game in any unlawful
manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a
menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
B. Notice of hearing. Notice of hearing for the revocation or suspension of
a license shall be given, in writing, by the Clerk. The notice shall
specifically set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation
or suspension is based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be
served by mailing a copy of the notice to the licensee at his last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Hearing; determination. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the
right to appear and to be heard to be represented by an attorney, to
present witnesses in his own behalf, to cross-examine opposing
witnesses and have a permanent record made of the proceedings at his
own expense. The Mayor and Council shall revoke or suspend the
license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the
licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
D. Reinstatement of revoked licenses. The Mayor and Council may issue
another license to a person whose license has been revoked or denied
as provided in this section if after hearing it is satisfied by clear and
convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation or denial
will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose license has been
§ 109-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 109-11
109:186
§ 109-12. General provisions.
§ 109-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
revoked or denied nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly,
shall be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
A. No more than four mechanical amusement devices and/or licenses shall
be located or issued to any one legally established business use in the
Township of North Brunswick except as provided in § 109-12B below.
B. The licensing of premises for more than four mechanical amusement
devices shall only be permitted in the C-2 Zone as provided in the
Township Land Use Ordinance.48 Any business use located in the C-2
Zone containing more than four mechanical amusement devices shall
be considered a commercial recreational use as defined in the Township
Land Use Ordinance.
C. No licensee shall permit any person using an amusement game to
operate the same for any gambling purpose prohibited by law. In the
event that it is determined judicially or by admission of the licensee that
any commercial amusement device is being operated as a gambling
device, the machine may be confiscated and destroyed or sold at public
auction, and the license of the licensee may be revoked after a hearing.
D. Either the licensee or an adult agent or employee of the licensee shall
be present and supervise the use of any amusement game by a minor
under the age of 16 years.
E. No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit the playing of
mechanical amusement devices within 600 feet of any church, public or
parochial school or playground.
F. The licensee shall, at all times, control the sound so as not to cause
disturbance or nuisance to others in the vicinity of the machines. The
licensee shall not, at any time, place a jukebox so that the sound is
disturbing to the public in the street or to other persons occupying the
building in the immediate vicinity.
G. The applicant shall submit plans to the Construction Official or other
designated township official demonstrating that the building or place
where the machine is to be located is properly insulated to prevent
noise of both the patrons and the machines from disturbing or entering
adjacent buildings at the location. Furthermore, he shall offer proof
that the location will conform with all state noise level regulations.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205.
§ 109-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 109-13
109:187
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 113
ASSESSMENTS FOR SEWER IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 274.
Sewers — See Ch. 276.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
421.
§ 113-1. Authorization to make assessments.
When a main sewer or drain or an outlet or connecting sewer, either
within or without the Township of North Brunswick, or any improvement or
addition to a sewerage system, has been or shall hereafter be constructed
by the Township of North Brunswick, and the benefits thereof shall be
extended to real property in the Township of North Brunswick by the
subsequent construction of any lateral sewer or sewers, drain or drains, and
the Township of North Brunswick has paid or is obligated to pay for such
main sewer or drain or outlet or connecting sewer, or any improvement
or addition to the sewerage system or any part of the cost thereof, out
of general funds, either because such work has been done at the general
expense or because the assessments therefor did not equal the total cost
thereof, such real property to which the benefits thereof shall have been
extended may be assessed therefor to an amount not exceeding the amount
of the benefits actually received by such real property notwithstanding that
the Township of North Brunswick shall have paid such indebtedness or
part thereof either in whole or in part. Such assessment may be made in
connection with and as part of the assessment for such lateral sewer or
drain, or as an independent assessment, and shall be made and collected
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq. Such assessment with interest
thereon as collected from time to time shall be placed in the surplus
revenue account of the Township of North Brunswick and controlled by the
provisions of Chapter 2 of this title.
§ 113-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all improvements of the nature described
in § 113-1 which have already been constructed, which may be in the
process of being constructed and which may be constructed in the future.
Chapter 116
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 109-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 116-1
113:188
§ 116-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate auctioneers and public
auction sales in order to protect the public against fraud at public sales, to
fix the fees of such licenses, which are hereby imposed for revenue, and to
protect the public health and welfare.
§ 116-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any public auction sale within
the Township of North Brunswick without first obtaining a license and
paying the license fee hereinafter prescribed.
§ 116-3. License application.
Any person desiring a license to conduct a public auction sale shall file with
the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick an application therefor, which
shall contain the following information, to wit:
§ 116-4. Bond required.
Before the license as herein provided shall be issued, the applicant shall
execute and deliver to the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick a good
and sufficient bond with good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the
Mayor and Council, in the amount of $2,500, which bond shall remain in
force for one year and shall be conditioned to indemnify and to pay said
municipality for any loss sustained or any penalties or costs incurred for the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 116-5. Sanitary facilities required.
Before the license as herein provided shall be issued, the applicant shall
provide adequate sanitary facilities for his own agents, servants or
employees and for patrons and public attending said auction, and shall
obtain a certificate under the hand and seal of the Secretary of the Board
of Health of said township to the effect that said sanitary facilities are
adequate for the protection of the health and welfare of the public.
§ 116-6. Parking facilities.
Before the license as herein provided shall be issued, the applicant shall
make adequate provision for parking facilities for vehicles used in and
about said public auction sale and vehicles owned or operated by persons
attending said auction sale, with due regard to the safety of pedestrians
and the traveling public, and shall obtain from the Commissioner of Police
of said township a certificate to the effect that adequate precautions have
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The location or address of the place or places where the public auction
sale will be held, together with a metes and bounds description of said
premises, setting forth the area thereof.
§ 116-1 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 116-6
116:189
or will be taken to assure and protect the health, welfare and safety of
the aforesaid agents, servants and employees of said licensee, pedestrians,
patrons and the traveling public.
§ 116-7. Prominent display of license.
Every person holding a license under this chapter shall be required to
prominently display the same at the location of the public auction sale and
while engaged in the business licensed.
§ 116-8. License fees.
The license fee shall be $2,500 per year, which sum shall be payable upon
the issuance of said license. In addition to said license fee, an additional
license fee of $100 shall be levied for each 1,000 square feet used for
storage, sale or parking or for any other purpose in connection with said
auction business in excess of 10,000 square feet.
§ 116-9. Hours of public auctions; conduct on Sunday prohibited.
No public auction sale shall take place, be held or conducted by any person
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following morning,
provided, however, that no auction shall take place, be held or conducted by
any person on Sunday.
§ 116-10. Deception, fraudulent representation.
No licensee or his agents, servants or employees shall publish any false
statement or make any fraudulent representation to endorse the sale or
purchase of any goods, wares or merchandise that may be offered at any
public auction sale.
§ 116-11. Exceptions; special permits.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor include any auction
sale conducted under the judicial authority of any court of the State of New
Jersey or of the United States, nor to a special auction not conducted as a
regular business for the sale of assets of any business or estate wherein the
auction shall not be continued for a period of more than six days. Special
permits may be issued by the Clerk for such purpose, and no fee shall be
charged therefor.
§ 116-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association or their agents.
§ 116-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 116-13
116:190
§ 116-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 116-14. Revocation of license.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to revoke any license after
notice and hearing for sufficient cause, which, among other things, shall be:
Chapter 119
AUTOMOTIVE AND FARM EQUIPMENT SALES
§ 119-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, partnership, firm or
corporation to engage in the business of selling or exchanging any new or
used motor vehicle, new or used farm equipment or farm machinery upon
any open lot in the Township of North Brunswick without first obtaining a
license therefor as herein provided.
§ 119-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
BUSINESS OF SELLING OR EXCHANGING NEW OR USED MOTOR
VEHICLES, FARM EQUIPMENT OR FARM MACHINERY — The offering of
motor vehicles, farm equipment or farm machinery for sale or exchange
by exhibiting, advertising, storing, parking, locating or keeping such motor
vehicles, farm equipment or farm machinery, whether new or used, upon
an open lot with the intent to sell or exchange either new or used motor
vehicles or new or used farm equipment or farm machinery.
OPEN LOT — Any lot, tract or parcel of land not enclosed in a substantial,
permanent building, and shall not include any lot, tract or parcel of land
A. The making of a false application.
B. The perpetration of a fraud upon any person buying goods, wares or
merchandise at a public auction sale.
C. The failure to perform the acts required of the licensee hereunder.
D. The conviction of the licensee of any crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 116-13 AUTOMOTIVE AND FARM EQUIPMENT SALES § 119-2
119:191
upon which is erected a substantial, permanent building used as a public
garage wherein is conducted the public business of motor vehicle repair
or storage of motor vehicles, but shall include any lot, tract or parcel of
land adjacent to the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which such garage or
building is erected.
§ 119-3. Application for license; issuance.
§ 119-4. License fee.
The annual license fee for the license aforesaid shall be:
§ 119-5. Assignment or transfer of license.
No license issued hereunder shall be assigned unless application therefor
is made to the Mayor and Council and its approval obtained, and no license
shall be transferred to a location different from that for which issued unless
A. Application for licenses to conduct the business of selling or exchanging
such motor vehicles, farm equipment or farm machinery upon an open
lot shall be accompanied by the license fees hereinafter stated. Such
application shall set forth: the full name or names of the applicant or
applicants, with his, her, their or its post office address; an accurate
description of the open lot whereon the business is to be conducted,
including a sketch of such location; the number of square feet to be
devoted to such business; the name or names of the owner or owners of
such open lot, with his, her, their or its post office address; and such
other related information as may be required by the Township Clerk.
B. If no legal reasons appear why such license should not issue, and if the
applicant shall have paid the license fee therefor, the Township Clerk
shall issue such license under his hand and the seal of the township,
which license shall bear the date of its issue and shall expire one year
thereafter. The said license may, however, be issued on a calendar year
basis, with an apportionment of the license fee for the remaining
portion of the calendar year during which original application for
license may be made.
A. For each open lot having a frontage on any street or highway of less
than 300 linear feet and having an area of not more than 5,000 square
feet, $300.
B. For each open lot having a frontage on any street or highway of less
than 300 linear feet and having an area of more than 5,000 square feet
but not exceeding 30,000 square feet, $400.
C. For each open lot having a frontage on any street or highway of less
than 300 linear feet and having an area of more than 30,000 square feet
but less than 90,000 square feet, $500.
D. For each open lot having a frontage on any street or highway in excess
of 300 linear feet or an area in excess of 90,000 square feet, $850.
§ 119-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 119-5
119:192
application therefor is made to the Mayor and Council and its approval
obtained.
§ 119-6. Location restricted.
No motor vehicle or farm equipment or farm machinery shall be exhibited,
stored, parked, located or kept, under the license issued hereunder, except
upon the premises described in the application therefor, and this shall not
be construed to include the sidewalk or street or streets upon which said
premises abut.
§ 119-7. Exception as to license fee.
No license fee shall be charged for any lot not over 1,500 square feet in
area which is used in connection with a bona fide garage building and as
part of the business thereof for the storage or repair of motor vehicles;
provided, however, that all such motor vehicles so stored on such lot with
the intent to sell or exchange shall have been taken into the possession of
the proprietor of said garage by reason of lien created under the New Jersey
Garage Keepers Lien Act. The proprietor of such garage shall be required
to apply for a license, however, and establish facts and conditions set forth
in this section, whereupon a license shall be issued without payment of fee
as hereinbefore provided.
§ 119-8. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue for the Township
of North Brunswick as well as for the regulation and control of the business
to be licensed hereunder.
§ 119-9. Power to suspend or revoke license.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick may suspend
or revoke at any time any license issued hereunder after public hearing, of
which five days' notice in writing shall be given to said licensee by serving
the same personally upon him, her or them or by mailing the same to
the address shown in the application for such license, if the licensee shall
have used or permitted to be used the licensed premises for any improper,
immoral or illegal business or purpose, or if the licensee shall fail to keep
the licensed premises in a clean, safe, sanitary and proper condition, or if
such licensee shall practice misrepresentation or operate in a manner so
as to be fraudulent to the public or violate the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance49 or any other ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 119-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 119-5 AUTOMOTIVE AND FARM EQUIPMENT SALES § 119-10
119:193
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 123
BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS
§ 123-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
BARBERSHOP — Any and all premises upon which is conducted one or any
combination of the following practices when done upon the scalp, face or
neck for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease or physical
or mental ailments, and when done for payment either directly or indirectly
or without payment for the public generally: shaving or trimming the beard
or cutting the hair; giving facial and scalp massage or treatment with
oils, creams, lotions or other preparations, either by hand or mechanical
appliances; singeing, shampooing or dyeing the hair or applying hair tonics;
applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, powders, oils, clays or lotions
to scalp, face or neck. The term "barbershop" shall not include beauty shops
limited to the practice of hair and beauty culture and catering to female
persons and as further defined in N.J.R.S. 45:4A-5.
§ 123-2. Filing of medical certificate; health certificate required.
No person shall engage as an operator in the business of a barbershop,
nor shall any person employ any other person as an operator in connection
with the business of a barbershop, in the township, unless every such
person, whether employer or employee, shall have previously filed with the
Secretary of the Board of Health of the Township of North Brunswick a
medical certificate from a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in
the State of New Jersey, setting forth that such person, both employer and
employee, is free from tuberculosis, syphilis and any other contagious or
communicable disease, and unless all such persons shall have obtained from
the Board the customary health certificate.
§ 123-3. Medical certificate forms.
The medical certificate referred to in the preceding section shall be filled
out and completed upon forms to be supplied by the Board and, when filed,
shall be effective for the balance of the calendar year of issuance.
§ 123-4. State certificate in lieu of medical certificate.
In lieu of the medical certificate required in this chapter, satisfactory
evidence may be furnished that a similar examination or certificate has
§ 119-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 123-4
123:194
been had or obtained by or from the State of New Jersey, and in such
case the effective period shall be concurrent with that provided in the state
certificate.
§ 123-5. Prominent display of health certificate.
Every health certificate, as issued, shall be prominently displayed at all
times in the place where the person to whom the same has been so issued
is employed or engaged in the business aforesaid.
§ 123-6. Lighting, ventilation and cleanliness.
All barbershops shall be well lighted and ventilated, and all furniture,
equipment, tools and utensils therein and the floors, walls and ceilings
thereof shall at all times be kept clean.
§ 123-7. Operational requirements.
It shall be unlawful to own, manage, operate or control any barbershop
except under the following conditions:
A. There shall be readily available at such shop, school or college an
adequate supply of hot and cold water, and where a public water supply
under pressure and a sewerage system is available, there shall be
provided in such barbershop a supply of hot and cold running water
under pressure.
B. No towel shall be used on any patron which has been used upon another
patron unless such towel shall have been relaundered and thoroughly
dried, and no towel shall be used on any patron which has been placed
in a steamer or sterilizer.
C. The headrest of a barber chair shall be covered with a clean covering
such as a towel or paper before being used by any patron.
D. There shall be placed about the neck of each patron served a clean
towel or other clean material to prevent the cut hair from touching the
skin of the patron.
E. Any tool or part thereof which comes into contact with the head, face or
neck of a patron, such as razors, scissors, tweezers, combs and parts of
vibrators, shall be immersed in boiling water or in alcohol of a strength
of 70% or higher or treated by some other equally effective method
before being used on each patron.
F. Any shaving mug and shaving brush shall be thoroughly rinsed in hot
water immediately before use in serving a patron.
G. If any cuspidor is provided, it shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once
each day and there shall be kept in such cuspidor a disinfecting
solution.
§ 123-4 BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS § 123-7
123:195
§ 123-8. Wearing apparel.
Attendants, while attending any patron, shall wear clean outer garments.
§ 123-9. Clean hands.
Immediately before serving a patron, all attendants shall thoroughly wash
their hands with soap and water.
§ 123-10. Drinking cups.
No common drinking cup or glass shall be maintained, kept or used.
§ 123-11. Hours of operation.
No barbershop shall open for business earlier than 8:30 a.m., nor shall
any barbershop close later than 6:00 p.m. throughout the year, except
on Saturdays and days preceding the following named legal holidays, to
wit: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Decoration Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, when they shall close not
later than 7:00 p.m.
§ 123-12. Prohibited business days.
All shops shall remain closed on the first day of the week, commonly called
Sunday, the above-mentioned legal holidays and Wednesday of each week,
excepting the Wednesday of the weeks in which the above-mentioned legal
holidays occur.
§ 123-13. Regulations applicable to nonbusiness hours.
During the hours and on the days when barbershops are closed under the
provisions of this chapter, the entire interior of the shop shall be open to
H. At least two receptacles for soiled towels and waste shall be provided.
Only used towels shall be deposited in one, and wastes such as used
shaving paper shall be deposited in the other.
I. No styptic pencils, finger bowls, sponge, lump alum or powder puff shall
be used except those of the individual applicator type.
J. No room used as a barbershop shall be used as a sleeping room nor be
located in any sleeping room, food store, restaurant or lunchroom
unless separated therefrom by a substantial partition extending from
floor to ceiling.
K. There shall be at least 78 square feet of floor space in every barbershop
having one barber chair, and there shall be at least 60 square feet of
floor space for each additional barber chair.
L. Any barbershop maintaining toilet facilities for public use shall
maintain such facilities in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 123-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 123-13
123:196
full view from the public street; and no other business shall be conducted
in said shop during the hours and on the days when said barbershops are
closed under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 123-14. Health regulations.
All premises hereunder shall be subject to such conditions, restrictions,
rules and regulations as the Board of Health of the Township of North
Brunswick may see fit to impose in order to protect the health of the
township.
§ 123-15. License fee. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-11]
The fee for the operation of a barbershop is specified in Chapter 212,
Licensed Occupations.
§ 123-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 128
BICYCLES
§ 128-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to encourage the safe and proper operation
of bicycles on the streets of the Township of North Brunswick, particularly
by children, by furthering the programs established by the township police,
schools and civic groups to train children in the safe operation of bicycles,
and by providing a means of identifying the owners and operators of
bicycles who violate the standards set forth in this chapter governing the
operation of bicycles.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
BICYCLE — A two-wheeled, chain-driven vehicle propelled entirely by
means of the physical efforts of the person riding it.
§ 128-3. Registration required; registration tags.
§ 123-13 BICYCLES § 128-3
128:197
A. Registration required. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any
street or other public highway within the Township of North Brunswick
unless it has been registered and a registration tag is attached to such
bicycle as hereinafter provided. No person, firm or corporation shall
rent or hire out for use a bicycle unless it has been registered and a
registration tag is attached to such bicycle as hereinafter provided.
B. Application information. Application for the registration of a bicycle
shall be made to the North Brunswick Township Police Department50 in
writing upon a form provided by the Department.
C. Inspection of bicycle. Before a registration is issued, the bicycle for
which it is intended shall be inspected by a member of the Police
Department or other person or persons designated by the Chief of
Police or Police Commissioner, at such place as shall be designated
thereby. No registration shall be issued for a bicycle which has any
mechanical defect which would render the bicycle unsafe to operate. A
bicycle shall be conclusively presumed unsafe to operate if not
maintained and equipped in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-10 et seq.
D. Registration card. Upon passing inspection hereunder, each bicycle
shall be registered and assigned a registration number, which shall be
entered on a registration card issued to and signed by the owner of the
bicycle and the person inspecting the bicycle. The registration card
shall also contain the name and address of the owner of the bicycle for
which it is issued and an identification of the bicycle by make, model,
color and serial number, if any.
E. Registration tag. Each bicycle registered hereunder shall be issued a
registration tag containing the registration number of the bicycle for
which it is issued.
F. Display of registration tag. The registration tag shall be securely
fastened to the frame of the bicycle for which it is issued, in such a
manner that it is readily visible. The willful or malicious removal,
destruction, mutilation or alteration of such tag once attached, except
by proper authority or for purpose of surrendering same as provided in
§ 128-4C of this chapter, shall be a violation of this chapter.
G. Term of registration; annual inspection. The registration card and tag
issued hereunder shall be valid for so long as the registered bicycle
remains in the ownership of the owner initially registering the bicycle;
except, however, that each bicycle registered hereunder shall be
inspected annually within 10 days of the anniversary date of
registration hereunder. Application for said annual inspection shall be
made to the North Brunswick Township Police Department, and such
inspections shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Administration of Government.
§ 128-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 128-3
128:198
§ 128-4. Transfer of bicycles.
§ 128-5. Regulations.
All persons operating bicycles on the streets or other public highways in
the Township of North Brunswick shall conform to all applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey and ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 128-6. Enforcement.
Subsection C of this section. No fee shall be charged for the issuance of
a registration card or tag nor for any inspection required hereunder.
H. Transferability. No registration card or tag shall be transferred from
one person to another or from one bicycle to another unless reissued by
the Police Department.
A. Report required. Any person transferring ownership of a new or used
bicycle to another within the Township of North Brunswick, whether by
sale, gift or otherwise, shall report that fact to the Police Department
within five business days after the actual transfer.
B. Information. The report of transfer shall be made upon forms furnished
by the township and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person transferring ownership of the
bicycle.
(2) The name, address and age of the person to whom ownership of the
bicycle was transferred.
(3) A description of the bicycle, including its make, model, color and
serial number, if any.
(4) If the bicycle was previously registered, its registration number.
C. Surrender of registration. When ownership of any bicycle which has
previously been registered is transferred to another person, the person
transferring ownership shall remove the registration tag from the
bicycle and shall return it and the registration card to the Police
Department within five business days of the actual transfer.
A. Inspection of bicycles. Any police officer may inspect any bicycle at any
time if he has reason to believe that it has not been validly registered,
does not have its registration tag properly attached or has a mechanical
defect which renders that bicycle unsafe to operate.
B. Impounding of unsafe bicycles. If a police officer determines that a
bicycle is so defective or unsafe as to constitute a danger to the safety
of the person operating it or to others, he may impound the bicycle
immediately. A bicycle that has been impounded shall not be released
until the registered owner has given satisfactory proof that the defects
§ 128-3 BICYCLES § 128-6
128:199
§ 128-7. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed by law for a violation
of this chapter, the Police Commissioner, upon receiving information that
any person under the age of 16 has been accused of violating any provision
of this chapter, shall require that person to appear before him or his
appointed representative for a hearing. The accused person shall be notified
of the time and place of the hearing, of the time and place of the alleged
offense and of the general nature of the acts constituting the alleged
offense. Notice shall be served on the accused person not less than five days
before the date of the hearing and shall be in writing, but no special form
shall be required. At the hearing, the accused shall enjoy the same rights as
a person charged before the Judge with a violation of the laws of the State
of New Jersey. If the Police Commissioner or his appointed representative
is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the accused is guilty as
charged, he may prohibit the accused from operating a bicycle for whatever
period that he, in his discretion, deems just; such period, however, shall
not exceed three months, except where the offender has been found guilty
of a flagrant or repeated violation of this chapter, in which case he may
be permanently prohibited from operating a bicycle within the Township of
North Brunswick.
Chapter 131
BINGO AND RAFFLES
§ 131-1. Conduct of bingo on Sunday authorized.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, which provides for legalized games of
chance, there is hereby authorized, in the Township of North Brunswick, the
conduct of the legalized game of chance known as "bingo" on the first day
of the week, commonly known as Sunday.
that led to the impounding will be corrected prior to the bicycle's again
being operated in the township.
C. Violation in general. Any person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter who:
(1) Fails to register a bicycle owned by him and operated on the streets
or public highways of the Township of North Brunswick.
(2) Fails to report the transfer of ownership of a bicycle as provided in
§ 128-4A.
(3) Knowingly operates or permits the operation of a bicycle owned by
him which is unregistered or which has a mechanical defect
rendering the bicycle unsafe to operate.
§ 128-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 131-2
131:200
§ 131-2. License requirement.
Any license for conducting such game shall specifically provide for the
conduct of such game on Sunday in accordance with the statute.
§ 131-3. Bingo and raffle license approval authority. [Added
3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-06]
The Township Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick is hereby
authorized and delegated the authority as the issuing authority to approve
the granting of bingo and raffle licenses to he held in the Township of North
Brunswick.
Chapter 135
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243. Brush, grass and weeds (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 375.
§ 131-2 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 131-3
135:201

ARTICLE I
Growth Along Roadways
[Adopted 7-5-1966]
§ 135-1. Duty to cut and remove.
The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the limits of the Township of
North Brunswick shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of
two roadways, at a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be
determined necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
safety, within 10 days after notice to cut and remove the same.
§ 135-2. Service of notice.
Such notice to cut and remove objectionable brush, hedges and other
plant life shall be given by the Township Clerk to the owner or tenant by
registered mail to the last known post office address.
§ 135-3. Determination as to recipients of notice.
The Mayor and Council shall from time to time determine by resolution as
to whom such notice shall be given pursuant to this Article.
§ 135-4. Failure to comply.
In the event of the failure of any owner or tenant to keep all brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25
feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/
2 feet after written notice thereof, the Township of North Brunswick may
proceed to cause the cutting and removal of such brush, hedges and other
plant life under the direction of the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers.
§ 135-5. Lien for abatement.
In any case where the township has cut and removed brush, hedges and
other plant life, the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers shall thereafter
certify to the Mayor and Council the cost thereof, and if the amount so
certified is by resolution of the Mayor and Council determined to be correct
and reasonable, the Township Clerk shall forthwith deliver a certified copy
of said resolution to the Tax Collector. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands from which the brush, hedges and
other plant life were cut and removed, and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes, and shall be
collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes, as
authorized by Sections 40:48-2.26 and 40:48-2.27 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey.
§ 135-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 135-6
135:203
§ 135-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.51
51.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Growth on Public and Private Property, adopted 11-17-1969,
which immediately followed this section, was superseded 11-16-1981. For current
provisions, see Ch. 375, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 135-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 135-6
135:204
Chapter 138
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 138-1. Purpose; exception.
§ 138-2. Closing hours, personnel and security requirements.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited shall
be open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Eastern standard
time (2300 to 0500 hours) unless:
§ 138-3. Window sign restrictions applicable to convenience stores.
[Added 9-7-1993]
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited in the interest of the protection of the employees,
patrons and law enforcement officers. It has been determined that
unprotected and understaffed business and commercial enterprises are
prey to the criminal element in our society during the late night and
early morning hours and that certain security devices must be provided
in order to protect the general public who use these establishments.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor
include any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or
permitted to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws
of the United States or the State of New Jersey or other municipal
ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
A. There are two employees on continuous duty in that part of the business
or commercial establishment to which the public is invited; and
B. In addition thereto, the business or commercial establishment shall
employ a security officer or the premises has in operation a security
device approved by the Chief of Police of the Township of North
Brunswick which may consist of a silent and/or audible burglar alarm
connected to a central security monitoring system designed to activate
police response; a closed-circuit television connected to a central
security monitoring system designed to activate police response; a
closed-circuit television connected to a central security monitoring
system designed to activate police response or such other device which
can be activated instantaneously to notify law enforcement officers that
a crime or disorderly persons activity is in progress.
A. The placement of window signs and interior floor displays which
obstruct the window area shall be restricted in convenience stores in
accordance with this section in order to assure adequate visibility of
cash registers from outside the building.
§ 135-6 BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL § 138-3
138:205
§ 138-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
Chapter 143
CANVASSING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawking and peddling — See Ch. 188. Licensed occupations — See Ch. 212.
B. Restrictions affecting window visibility shall apply to businesses where
the cash register is located so as to be visible from outside the building,
and shall apply only from three feet to six feet above the first floor
elevation.
C. Within any five-foot measurement of horizontal window space, the
business must maintain two consecutive feet of open and unobstructed
window area.
D. Restrictions shall not apply to open lettering printed on windows as
long as the lettering does not obstruct vision into the store.
§ 138-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 138-4
143:206
ARTICLE I
Permits; Regulations
[Adopted 8-2-1954]
§ 143-1. Permit required.
No person, except as in this Article provided, shall canvass, solicit or call
from house to house in the township without having first reported to and
received a permit from the Chief of Police.
§ 143-2. Application for permit. [Amended 2-21-1973; 10-15-1973]
Before the permit required by the preceding section may be issued, the
canvasser or solicitor shall make an application in writing to the Chief of
Police, giving the following information: full name and address; age, height
and weight; place of birth; fingerprints; length and place of residence;
whether or not previously arrested or convicted of a crime; by whom
employed and address of employer; a description of the project for which he
is canvassing or soliciting. Each application shall require a fee of $10. In the
event the applicant is a member or representative of an organization which
shall have more than one application filed, then in that event only the first
application shall require the fee of $10. No additional fees shall be required
for additional applications for a period of one year, which shall run from the
time the first application is filed.
§ 143-3. Photographs. [Amended 2-21-1973]
Each applicant shall supply three photographs, two inches wide by two
inches high, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant, before a
permit shall be issued, and one photograph shall be attached to the permit.
§ 143-4. Authority to issue or refuse permits.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to grant the permit required by
§ 143-1 of this chapter. Such officer shall refuse to issue a permit in all cases
where the application, upon its face or upon further investigation, to be
made at the discretion of such officer, shows that the canvasser or solicitor
is not of good character or that he is canvassing for a project that is not free
from fraud.
§ 143-5. Permit to specify duration.
Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall specify the
number of hours or days that the permit will be in effect.
§ 143-6. Revocation.
The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter for failure or refusal on the part of the permittee to observe the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
§ 143-1 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 143-7
143:207
§ 143-7. Hours; exhibition of permit. [Amended 2-21-1973]
No person shall canvass or solicit within the township except between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. A permit with photograph attached shall
be worn on lapel area by the permittee at all times while canvassing and
soliciting. The permittee shall exhibit his permit to any police officer or
other person on request. On expiration of the permit, the holder thereof
shall surrender the same to the Chief of Police.
§ 143-8. Nonapplicability.
This Article shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery of goods,
wares or merchandise or other articles or things in the regular course of
business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive same
nor any person engaged in activities for or on behalf of any volunteer
fire company, first aid squad, charitable, religious, civic or political
organization.
§ 143-8.1. Soliciting for charitable purposes.52 [Added 11-19-1973]
§ 143-8.2. Do Not Drop Registry; Do Not Knock Registry;
distribution of unsolicited or nonsubscribed materials prohibited.
[Added 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 06-39]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, organizations and
persons soliciting for charitable purposes at public premises, which
shall include retail store areas, shall be permitted to solicit from the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on said public premises. Said
organizations and persons shall not be required to pay a fee for said
solicitations, but each organization shall be required to apply to the
Township Clerk at least 21 days before the first day of solicitation for a
permit. Upon receipt of an application for solicitation, the Township
Clerk shall immediately refer said application to the Chief of Police,
who shall review said application. Said application shall include within
it the names of all organizations and persons who shall solicit. The
application shall also include the times and places when solicitations
shall be made.
B. No permit fee shall be charged.
C. No permit for solicitation shall be issued without the approval of the
Police Chief and the Mayor and Council.
A. Do Not Drop Registry. There is hereby established a "Do Not Drop
Registry" to be maintained in the Office of the Township Clerk. The
purpose of the Do Not Drop Registry is to permit residents to bar the
receipt of unsolicited or nonsubscribed printed materials at their
properties. Residents may register for such list by personal delivery,
regular mail or e-mail to the Township Clerk. After registration on the
52.Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter, Charitable Solicitation.
§ 143-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 143-8.2
143:208
Do Not Drop Registry, it shall be a violation of the terms of this section
to distribute such unsolicited or nonsubscribed materials to any
registered person and/or such person's property. No circulars,
publications, handbills, brochures, shoppers or flyers, whether of a
commercial, religious or charitable nature, shall be distributed to any
properties which have been listed with the Do Not Drop Registry, to be
maintained at the Township Clerk's office.
B. Distribution of unsolicited or nonsubscribed materials. It shall be
unlawful to place upon, deliver, deposit, throw upon, leave or abandon
within or upon any private property or public ways adjacent to private
property any circulars, publications, handbills, brochures, shoppers or
flyers, or other unsolicited commercial matter, printed or otherwise, of
every kind or nature whatsoever.
C. Do Not Knock Registry. There is hereby established a "Do Not Knock
Registry" to be maintained in the Office of the Township Clerk. The
purpose of the Do Not Knock Registry is to permit residents to bar any
commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking taking place by foot,
wagon, motor vehicle or any other conveyance on a door-to-door basis.
Residents may register for such list by personal delivery, regular mail or
e-mail to the Township Clerk. After registration on the Do Not Knock
Registry, it shall be a violation of the terms of this section to visit any
residences for commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking to any
registered person and/or such person's property. No commercial
solicitation, peddling or hawking of any nature or kind whatsoever shall
be permitted on any properties which have been listed with the Do Not
Knock Registry, to be maintained at the Township Clerk's office.
D. Commercial solicitation and peddling. It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking
without first having obtained a license and/or permit therefor pursuant
to Chapter 188 of the Code of the Township of North Brunswick,
Hawking and Peddling. It shall be a violation of this section to
undertake commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking of any nature
or kind whatsoever on any properties which have been listed with the
Do Not Knock Registry. Commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking
shall mean any personal traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any
other conveyance from place to place or door to door or from street to
street taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of books, wares,
merchandise, personal property or any nature whatsoever for future or
present delivery or for services to be performed and shall also include
persons undertaking polling activities for commercial purposes.
E. Exceptions. These provisions shall not be applicable to the delivery or
personal solicitation of:
(1) Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of
the United States Postal Service;
§ 143-8.2 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 143-8.2
143:209
§ 143-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
(2) Parcels, packages and materials delivered by a commercially
recognized courier service or overnight express delivery agency,
such as, by way of example, Federal Express or United Parcel
Service;
(3) Newspapers and other publications and periodicals if subscribed to
by the owner or occupant of the recipient premises, provided same
are placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose, or, in
the absence of such receptacle, tightly wrapped to prevent blowing
or scattering upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas;
(4) Delivery of laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food
products and commercial product sampling by agreement with or
invitation of the owner or occupant of the recipient premises;
(5) Personal delivery or drop off of noncommercial handbills of a
political, charitable, or religious nature whose distribution is or
may be protected by constitutional rights of free speech, provided
that same are packaged and placed in such a manner as not to blow
and scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas; and
(6) Hawkers and peddlers licensed pursuant to Chapter 188 of the
Code of the Township of North Brunswick, who abide by all
provisions of the Do Not Knock and Do Not Drop Registries.
§ 143-8.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 143-9
143:210
ARTICLE II
Charitable Solicitation
[Adopted 9-7-1965]
§ 143-10. Definitions.
Whenever used in this Article, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
CHARITABLE — Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
welfare, benevolent, nonprofit educational, civic, nonprofit and fraternal.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes the words alms, food, clothing, money,
subscription, ticket, chance, pledge, property or any donation of any of the
foregoing or any of the above under the guise of a loan of money or property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society,
organization or league, and includes any trustees, receiver, assignee,
manager, agent or other similar representative thereof. The word "person"
shall also include the singular and plural.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request directly or indirectly of money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value which will be
used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are herein
defined. The foregoing terms shall also include the practice of passing or
leaving envelopes or containers in any location within the township.
§ 143-11. Permit required.
No person or organization shall solicit contributions for any charitable or
religious purpose, other than from their active membership and other than
solicitation by school children when approved by school authority, within
the Township of North Brunswick, without the issuance of a written permit,
which shall be obtained in the manner hereinafter set forth.
§ 143-12. Application; contents.
A. An application for a permit to solicit shall be made in person to the
officer in charge at police headquarters, upon a form provided by the
township, which shall read substantially as follows:
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO SOLICIT CONTRIBUTIONS
ALL QUESTIONS MUST BE ANSWERED.
Full name:
Address:
Age: Height: Weight:
Hair: Eyes: Sex:
Place of birth: Date of Birth:
How many years have you lived at the above address:
§ 143-10 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 143-12
143:211
Previous address: Years there:
Have you ever been arrested for commission of a crime
If so, state facts of same:
Name of person or organization represented: (If applicant is not an
individual, the names and addresses of applicant's principal officers
and managers)
Purpose of solicitation
Name and address of person or persons who will be in direct charge of
conducting the solicitation:
(Attach list of names and addresses of all sponsors, promoters and
solicitors connected with said solicitation.)
Outline the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation:
The date when such solicitation is proposed to be made, giving the
commencement and the termination dates: (.)
Outline the proposed disbursement of the funds to be collected,
including overhead, administration, publicity, advertising and the
allocation of funds to the cause for which the solicitation is being
made:
CERTIFICATION
I do solemnly declare and certify under the penalties of the law, that
the foregoing answers are true and correct, and I do certify that if the
permit herein requested is granted, it will not be used or represented
in any way as an endorsement by the Township of North Brunswick or
by any department or officer thereof.
Name of Organization Applicant
Dated:
WITNESS:
Signature of Managing Officer
If Individual Sign Here
§ 143-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 143-12
143:212
§ 143-13. Issuance of permit; term and conditions.
After due investigation and after fingerprinting the person executing the
application, and upon being satisfied that the applicant is soliciting for a
project free from fraud; that all the statements made in the application
are true; that every member, manager, officer, solicitor or agent of the
applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity;
that the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible
and reliable persons; that the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent
transaction or enterprise; and that the solicitation is prompted solely by
a desire to finance the charitable or religious cause described in the
application and will not be conducted for private profit, said officer shall
have the power to issue the permit requested. Said permit shall specify the
number of hours or days the permit will be effective. Under no condition
shall the same be valid for more than 60 days. The permit shall not be
transferable. No permit shall be issued to any applicant within 45 days of
the commencement of a previous solicitation by the applicant or another
permittee, unless specifically authorized by the Mayor and Council.
§ 143-14. Credentials required by solicitors.
All applicants to whom permits have been issued shall furnish proper
credentials to their agents and solicitors. Such credentials shall include the
name of the permittee, the date, a statement describing the permittee's
charitable or religious activities, a description of the purpose of the
solicitation, the signature of the managing officer of the permittee, and the
name, address, signature and solicitor's number of the solicitor to whom
such credentials are issued, and the specific period of time during which
said solicitor is authorized to solicit. A copy of such credentials, less the
signature, must be filed with the officer in charge at police headquarters
prior to commencement of the solicitation. No a person shall solicit under
any permit granted without the credentials required by this subsection in
his possession. Said credentials must be shown upon request to any person
being solicited and to any police officer of the township. Said credentials
shall be accompanied by a badge bearing the words "Registered Charitable
Solicitor, Township of North Brunswick." Said badge shall bear a serial
number corresponding with the solicitor's number on file with the officer
in charge at police headquarters. Said solicitor shall, at all times when
engaged in soliciting, wear said badge in such a way so that the same
may be easily discernible. Said badge shall be furnished by the Police
B. The applicant shall also furnish such supplemental information or data
as may be reasonably required by the officer in charge at police
headquarters in order for said officer to determine the kind and
character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is
in the interest of and not inimical to the public welfare. Said application
shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the time when the permit applied
for shall become effective, provided, however, that the Chief of Police
may, after investigation, upon good cause shown, allow the filing of an
application within a shorter period of time.
§ 143-12 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 143-14
143:213
Department upon receiving a deposit of $1 per badge, which will be
returned when said badge is surrendered.
§ 143-15. Denial of permit.
Within 30 days after an application is filed, the Chief of Police shall inform
the applicant in writing whether or not the application has been granted.
Within five days after receiving notification by registered mail that his
application for a permit to solicit has been denied, with the reasons for
the denial set forth in said notification, any applicant may file a written
request for a public hearing on the application before the Police Committee,
together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the
Chief of Police based his denial of the application. Upon the filing of such a
request, the Police Committee shall fix a time and place for the hearing and
shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held within five days
after the request is filed. Within 10 days after the conclusion of the hearing,
the Police Committee shall render a written decision either granting or
denying the application for a permit.
§ 143-16. Restrictions on conduct; hours; special permission.
No soliciting shall be conducted except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on each weekday and between 1:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Sundays, unless special permission is granted by the Mayor and Council.
No permittee shall solicit in an unlawful manner nor in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace nor in such a manner as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. No permittee
shall accost anyone against his or her will or desire.
§ 143-17. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the Chief of Police has knowledge,
that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this Article
has violated any of the provisions of this Article or that any promoter,
agent or solicitor of a permittee has misrepresented the purpose of the
solicitation, the Chief of Police shall immediately suspend the permit and
give the permittee written notice by registered mail of a hearing to be held
within five days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit
should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts upon
which the Chief of Police has acted in suspending the permit. If, after such
hearing, the Chief of Police finds that the Article has been violated or the
purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, he shall, within two
days after the hearing, revoke the permit and give the applicant written
notice of the revocation and the reasons therefor. If, after such hearing,
the Chief of Police finds that the Article has not been violated and the
purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, he shall, within two
days after the hearing, give the permittee a written statement canceling
the suspension of the permit. The permittee is hereby granted the right
to appeal to the Police Committee from any action of the Chief of Police
which results in revocation, provided he files a notice of appeal in writing,
§ 143-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 143-17
143:214
containing grounds for appeal, with the Township Clerk within 10 days after
receipt of written notice of the revocation. The Police Committee shall fix
a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof.
Said hearing shall be held within 10 days after the filing of the aforesaid
notice or appeal. Within 10 days after conclusion of the hearing, the Police
Committee shall render a written decision either confirming or reversing
the decision of the Chief of Police.
§ 143-18. Misrepresentation, deception or fraud unlawful.
No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose
by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social
condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other
misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any
contribution for any purpose in the Township of North Brunswick or in any
application or report filed under this section.
§ 143-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or filing or causing
to be filed an application for a permit hereunder containing a false or
fraudulent statement shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine
not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both.
§ 143-17 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 143-19
143:215
Chapter 145
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 143.
§ 145-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the rules and regulations
governing the use and placement of charitable clothing bins for solicitation
throughout the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIN or CHARITABLE CLOTHING BIN — Receptacle used to place clothing
solicited for charitable purposes under this chapter.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 145-3. Placement and use for solicitation purposes.
A. Permit required. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, no person shall place, use, or employ a charitable clothing bin,
for solicitation purposes, unless a permit, valid for a specified time, has
been obtained from the Department of Community Development.
B. Refusal of permit. The Department of Community Development shall
not grant an application for a permit to place, use, or employ a
charitable clothing bin if it determines that the placement of such bin
may constitute a hazard to the public safety and welfare or is not
authorized in the zone. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited
to, the placement of a charitable clothing bin within 100 yards of any
place which stores or sells large amounts of fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases.
C. Placement restrictions. Charitable clothing bins may only be placed,
used or employed in the C-2 General Commercial District. Charitable
clothing bins may not be placed, used or employed in any other zone
districts within the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 143-19 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 145-3
143:216
§ 145-4. Information to be displayed on exterior of bin.
D. Permit application. In applying for such a permit, the applicant shall
provide:
(1) A description of the proposed location, as precise as may be
practicable, of each charitable clothing bin, and each bin location
shall be the subject of a separate application; and
(2) The manner in which the applicant anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected by the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent; and
(3) The name, street address (no post office box numbers) and
telephone number of the bona fide office of the applicant or any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected by the bin may be contacted during normal
business hours concerning the applicant or entity; and
(4) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
E. Permits to be renewed annually. Permits for charitable clothing bins are
to be effective on an annual basis, commencing as of January 1 and
expiring as of December 31 of each year. Any persons desiring to renew
their permit shall annually, in the month of December, apply for and
procure from the Department of Community Development a renewal
permit therefor as set forth in § 145-6 hereinbelow.
A. The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed
on the exterior of each charitable clothing bin:
(1) The name and street address (no post office box numbers) of the
permittee and of any other entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donations collected by the bin;
(2) The telephone number at the permittee's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected by the bin;
(3) In cases where an entity other than the permittee owns the bin and
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
by the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected by the
bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an
entity other than the permittee that owns the bin and identifying all
such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Department of Community Development in the most recent permit
§ 145-3 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 145-4
143:217
§ 145-5. Fees.
A nonrefundable fee of $25 shall be charged per each application for a
permit under this chapter to offset the costs involved in enforcing the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.
§ 145-6. Renewal permit.
§ 145-7. Offices of applicant and related entities.
The applicant and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected by the bin shall maintain a bona fide
office where a representative of the applicant or other entity, respectively,
may be contacted during normal business hours for the purpose of offering
or renewal application, indicating the manner in which the
permittee anticipates any clothing or other donations collected by
the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or spent.
B. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the charitable clothing bin,
in addition to the other information required pursuant to this § 145-4.
A. An expiring permit for a charitable clothing bin may be renewed upon
application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by the
Department of Community Development for such renewal. However, no
more than $25 shall be charged for a permit regarding the same bin.
Such renewal application shall include:
(1) A description, as precise as may be practicable, of the proposed
location of the charitable clothing bin or, if the renewal applicant
intends to move such bin, the new location where the bin shall be
situated after the renewal is granted, together with written consent
from the property owner to place the bin on his property during the
renewal period.
(2) The manner in which the renewal applicant has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations collected by the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the renewal applicant
anticipates that it shall make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal.
(3) The name, street address (no post office box numbers) and
telephone number of the renewal applicant's bona fide office or of
any entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected by the bin, and of any entities which may do so
during the period covered by the renewal.
B. All renewal permittees shall abide by the provisions pursuant to § 145-4
hereinabove.
§ 145-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 145-7
143:218
information concerning the applicant or other entity. For the purposes of
this subsection, an answering machine or service unrelated to the applicant
does not constitute a bona fide office.
§ 145-8. Maintenance; violations and penalties.
§ 145-9. Complaints.
§ 145-10. Additional penalties; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by this chapter
and the laws of this state, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter which results in seizure of the charitable clothing bin shall be:
A. The applicant and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected by a bin shall maintain the bin and
area surrounding the bin so that such area remains clean, neat and free
of debris, garbage, clothing and other items.
B. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this § 145-8 shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of
the Municipal Court. The continuation of such violation on each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
A. Any complaints received regarding any charitable clothing bin shall be
reviewed and investigated by the Department of Community
Development within 30 days of receipt. Whenever it appears to the
Department of Community Development that a person has engaged in,
or is engaging in, any act or practice in violation of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61,
the permittee shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is
not rectified or a hearing with the Department of Community
Development is not requested within 45 days, such charitable clothing
bin shall be seized or removed at the expense of the permittee, and any
clothing or other donations collected by the bin will be sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of in accordance with law. In addition to
any other means used to notify the permittee who placed the bin, such
warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the permittee does not rectify the violation or request
a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, the Department
of Community Development may seize the said bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the permittee, and may sell at public auction
or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations collected by
such bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected by the
bin shall be paid to the Township of North Brunswick's Chief Financial
Officer.
§ 145-7 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 145-10
143:219
Chapter 147
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction work restrictions — See Ch. 149.
Contractor registration — See Ch. 151.
Dwellings unit for human habitation — See
Ch. 161.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 176.
Housing standards — See Ch. 197.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 274.
Sewers — See Ch. 276.
Water — See Ch. 352.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
421.
§ 147-1. Enforcing agency.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $2,000 for each such violation. The
Department of Community Development may bring this action in the
Municipal Court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq., and any
penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Township of North
Brunswick's Chief Financial Officer; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a charitable clothing bin for
solicitation purposes set forth herein. An applicant disqualified from
placing, using, or employing a charitable clothing bin may apply to the
Department of Community Development to have that applicant's
eligibility restored. The Department of Community Development may
restore the eligibility of an applicant who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
regulations or has no fraudulent intentions.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of North Brunswick a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Division of Inspections" consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Assistant Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
Official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the Division of Inspections related to Uniform
Construction Code activities. Directly responsible to the Construction
Official shall be the various subcode officials established herein. The
§ 145-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-1
143:220
§ 147-2. Certificates of occupancy and certificates of continued
occupancy. [Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1854]
Construction Official shall be directly responsible to the head of the
department as assigned by the Mayor and Council. The duties of the
Construction Official and subcode officials shall be consistent with the
State Uniform Construction Code Act and the rules and regulations of
the Commissioner of the State Department of Community Affairs and as
set forth in the various ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,53 as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. Certificate of occupancy (CO). Pursuant to the provisions of § 205-138B
of the Code of the Township of North Brunswick, a certificate of
occupancy is required as a precondition for the occupancy of any new
building, structure, or land and must be issued by the Construction
Official with the approval given by the Zoning Officer. In addition, the
Fire Marshal shall issue a fire certificate of compliance permit for all
new nonresidential uses other than one- and two-family homes.
B. Certificate of continued occupancy required (CCO).
(1) A certificate of continued occupancy is the document issued by the
Township of North Brunswick upon the determination that a
dwelling is fit for human habitation in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, ordinances of the
Township of North Brunswick, and the rules, regulations and laws
of the State of New Jersey.
(2) No owner, agent or broker shall sell, transfer or grant with right of
occupancy, whether or not for consideration, any residential
dwelling, unit or premises on which a building is located and used
for human occupancy, unless a certificate of continued occupancy is
first obtained from the Construction Code Official by use of the
appropriate application and fees provided herein. The owner shall
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 147-2 and 147-3 as §§ 147-3 and
147-4, respectively.
§ 147-1 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 147-2
143:221
afford the Construction Official the opportunity to inspect the
structure and premises and shall consent to inspection.
(3) The owner of the residential dwelling unit is hereby charged with
the responsibility for making written application in accordance
with this section for a CCO. The buyer of such dwelling unit may
waive the seller's responsibility and assume the same; provided,
however, that such waiver shall be in writing, which said waiver
shall further state that the buyer is fully aware that he, she or it is
assuming responsibility for obtaining a CCO pursuant to this
section, and provided further that such written waiver shall be filed
with the Construction Official.
(4) The Construction Official shall issue a residential certificate of
continued occupancy, provided that there are no violations of law
or orders of the Construction Official, in consultation with the
Zoning Officer, and it is established after site inspection and
investigation of available municipal records that the alleged use of
the building or structure has lawfully existed. The certificate shall
evidence only that a general inspection of the visible parts of the
building or structure has been made and that no violations of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14, as amended (Construction Permits When
Required), and N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.18, as amended (Inspections), have
been determined to exist, no conditions of violation of N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.32, as amended (Unsafe Structures), or unsafe conditions
have been observed and no violations of the Code of the Township
of North Brunswick have been found to exist.
(5) If the Construction Official, as the result of a permit records search
and a general inspection of visible parts of the structure, finds any
violation as set forth in Subsection B(4), he shall notify the owner of
the violation, in writing, by mail, or by delivering the notice to the
owner or his agent. The notice shall identify the premises and
specify the violations and any remedial action, along with
compliance date. The notice will require the owner to satisfy the
violations, file any necessary permits as required, and state that
failure to correct the violations within the time specified shall
result in fines as prescribed in the Uniform Construction Code.
(6) A certificate of continued occupancy shall be effective for a period
of 120 days. One administrative extension of not more than 30 days
may be granted by the Construction Official. If a dwelling fails to
sell, transfer or grant with right of occupancy within this period,
and the dwelling remains for sale, the owner shall make written
application and obtain a new CCO.
(7) If the application for a certificate states that the dwelling unit is not
intended for residential occupancy or human habitation, the
Construction Official may waive the requirement for a certificate of
continued occupancy.
§ 147-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 147-3
143:222
§ 147-3. Fees. [Amended 3-4-1985; 3-17-1986; 4-20-1992; 9-2-2003
by Ord. No. 03-27; 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-13; 4-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-06; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-18]
The Township of North Brunswick shall charge fees in accordance with
fees established in the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 and 5:23A-1 et seq.), specifically Subsection 5:23-4.20
(Department Fees), adopted and supplemented pursuant to the Department
of Community Development Fee Schedule as adopted by resolution of the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 147-4. Waiver of building permit fees. [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-8]
A. Certificate of occupancy. The fee for a certificate of occupancy (CO)
shall be 5% of the permit fee. The minimum fee shall be $100 for R-5
Residential Use Group and $200 for all other use groups. The fee for the
certificate of occupancy must be paid prior to the issuance of a
temporary or final certificate of occupancy. If the temporary certificate
of occupancy expires prior to the issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy, a fee of 50% of the original certificate of occupancy will be
required.
B. Certificate of continued occupancy. The fee for a certificate of
continued occupancy (CCO) for detached residential dwellings
(including one-, two-, three-, and four-family dwellings) shall be $150.
The fee for a certificate of occupancy for attached multifamily
dwellings, commonly referred to as "townhomes" or "condominiums,"
shall be $125.
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit.
C. "Disabled person" means a person who has a total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of this
state who is disabled pursuant the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C.
§ 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a 60% disability or higher pursuant
to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans Act. For
purposes of this subsection, "blindness" means central visual acuity of
20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye
§ 147-3 CANVASSING AND SOLICITING § 147-4
143:223
Chapter 149
CONSTRUCTION WORK RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147. Licensed occupations — See Ch. 212.
§ 149-1. Hours.
The excavation, grading, paving, erection, demolition, alteration or repair
of any premises, street, building or structure is prohibited at any time on
Sundays, or other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays or between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all other days,
except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only in accordance with an approval first obtained from the
Township Engineer, related to land clearing and grading, drainage, sewer
and water utilities and public improvement work, or from the Township
Construction Official as to other work. Such approval may be granted for
a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to interior or exterior repairs
or to interior alterations, the work for which is actually performed by a
homeowner or occupant, personally, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. upon residential premises, provided that the work shall be
done without undue noise or disturbance of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual fields subtends an angle no greater than
20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or
less.
D. No volunteer fire company and no volunteer first-aid and rescue squad
shall be charged an enforcing agency fee for any plan review,
construction permit, certificate of occupancy, demolition permit,
moving of building permit, elevator permit or sign permit. [Added
1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-1]
E. No person shall be charged a construction permit fee or enforcing
agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement to a service line repair due to a leak that is required to be
repaired under the Township's Meter Replacement Program for the
remainder of calendar year 2019 and for calendar year 2020. [Added
9-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-26]
§ 147-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 149-2
149:224
§ 149-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $500, and each day in which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation or offense.
§ 149-3. Enforcement.
The Department of Public Safety of the Township of North Brunswick,
the Construction Official, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Township
Engineer are hereby authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to make and sign complaints.
Chapter 151
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147. Construction work restrictions — See Ch. 149.
§ 151-1. Purpose.
This chapter is designed to provide protection to township residents who
require the services of a home improvement contractor. It will help to
ensure that these contractors are qualified to do the work, possess adequate
insurance and perform their services in a professional manner. In addition,
it provides a mechanism whereby building contractors that are found to be
unscrupulous or unprofessional can be denied the privilege of performing
their service in the township.
§ 151-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS — Any person(s) who construct,
demolish, repair, replace, remodel, alter, convert, rehabilitate, renovate,
modernize, improve or add to any land or building, or that portion which
is used or designed for use as a residence or dwelling place. It shall
include but not be limited to the construction of swimming pools, driveways,
terraces, patios, porches, garages, gazebos, basements, decks, windows,
doors, cabinets, closets, kitchens, bathrooms, fire protection devices, alarm
systems, water softeners, heaters, purifiers, solar heating or heat sinks,
aluminum and vinyl siding, underground sprinkler systems, carpentry,
masonry, roofing and other improvements to structures or upon land that is
adjacent to a residence.
§ 151-3. Registration required.
§ 149-2 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION § 151-3
151:225
§ 151-4. Exceptions.
Individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, contractors and
subcontractors required to be registered by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the New Home Warranty and Builders Registration Act, N.J.S.A.
46:3B-1 et seq., shall not be required to be registered under the provisions
of this chapter to engage in the construction of new homes. Electricians and
plumbers who are licensed by the State of New Jersey are also exempted
from registration when performing work permitted by their license.
§ 151-5. Application requirements.
Application for registration shall be accomplished by completing the home
improvement contractor registration form and filing it along with a copy of
the contractor's insurance certificate for liability coverage and the fee with
the Department of Inspections. The application shall supply the following:
A. Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation involved in providing
home improvement contractor services as described in § 151-2 above
for which a building permit is required shall register with the township
prior to undertaking any such work. Individual property owners who
are performing the construction themselves on property they own shall
not be required to register as a home improvement contractor for work
they do on their own premises. However, if the property owner uses the
services of a contractor or subcontractor, the contractor or
subcontractor shall be registered under the provisions of this section.
B. The home improvement contractor's registration is valid from the date
of issuance through January 31 of the following year. This registration
shall cover all employees, and the contractor shall be responsible for
the quality of work performed by his/her employees and
subcontractors.
A. Registration fee. An annual fee of $25 shall be filed with the initial
application or application renewal.
B. Insurance certificate. This insurance shall provide liability coverage for
property and completed operations and bodily injury to third parties of
at least $500,000. A valid insurance certificate must be maintained at
all times for the registration to be valid.
C. Application information.55
(1) Name and address of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership,
the names and addresses of all partners; if a corporation, the
names and addresses of all officers, directors and persons holding
10% or more of the issued outstanding stock.
(2) The type of work customarily performed by the applicant.
55.Editor's Note: The application form is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 151-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 151-5
151:226
§ 151-6. Enforcement agent.
The Enforcement agent for the purposes of this chapter shall be the
Township Construction Official or his/her designee.
§ 151-7. Denial or revocation of registration.
§ 151-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations and penalties shall be as follows:
(3) A statement as to whether the applicant or any person named in
Subsection C(1) of this section has ever been cited for violating any
building code, and if so, the date and the subject of the citation, the
nature of the citation and the penalty imposed.
(4) Names of the last three townships where work requiring a building
permit was performed.
A. The Enforcement Agent may deny or revoke a registration in any case
where the applicant has made any materially false statement on the
application. Denial or revocation may also occur if the applicant does
not present evidence of valid insurance when requested or if the
insurance coverage expires and is not immediately renewed.
Furthermore, the Enforcement Agent may deny or revoke an
application if the applicant has been or is found to be guilty of repeated
or continued violation of any municipal or state building code.
B. The Enforcement Agent shall serve the applicant with a written notice
of the denial or revocation. The applicant will have five business days to
file an appeal of the revocation or denial with the Enforcement Agent.
The Enforcement Agent or his designee will hear the appeal within
three business days from the date the appeal is filed.
C. If the appeal decision upholds the denial or revocation of registration, a
further appeal to the Township Council may be filed with the office of
the Township Clerk within 10 business days of the second rejection. The
Township Council must hear the second appeal within 30 days from the
date the letter of second appeal is filed with the Township Clerk's office.
The Township Council shall render a decision within 15 days of the date
of the hearing.
A. First violation: issue a stop-work order until a valid insurance
certificate is presented to the Enforcement Agent.
B. Second violation within 12 months: Issue a stop-work order and a fine of
$100.
C. Third violation within 12 months: a fine of $100 for each day work
proceeds without a valid insurance certificate.
§ 151-5 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION § 151-9
151:227
§ 151-9. Complaints.
Any complaints filed against the applicant shall contain the name of the
applicant, date of occurrence, a description of the complaint, name and
address of the person filing the complaint and the signature of the person(s)
filing the complaint. Complaints shall be held on file with the registration
for a period of five years and may be used in consideration of renewal or
revocation while they are on file.
Chapter 153
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 182. Land use — See Ch. 205.
§ 153-1. Purpose.
A. Whereas municipal master plans include well-thought-out, long-term
decisions about the development capacity of community; and
B. Whereas municipal master plans are implemented through the
enactment of local land use ordinances; and
C. Whereas deviations from these local ordinances by way of variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:550-70(d) and N.J.S.A. 40:550-70(c) as well as
exceptions and waivers pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 provide
opportunities for significant private gain; and
D. Whereas openness in government and a fair and impartial variance,
waiver and exception application process is crucial to assuring the
continuing integrity of the municipal Master Pan, its implementing
ordinances and the integrity of the variance application process; and
E. Whereas disclosure of political contributions by property owners,
developers and professionals will enhance the Township's existing
commitment to openness in government and provide further
guarantees for a fair and impartial variance, waiver and exception
application process; and
F. Whereas disclosure of political contributions by property owners,
developers and professionals will effectuate the purposes of the
municipal Land Use Law to promote morals and the general welfare;
G. Therefore, it is accordingly found and determined that the paramount
public interest in enhancing the Township's commitment to openness in
government, in providing further guarantees for a fair and impartial
variance, waiver and exception application process, and in promoting
morals and the general welfare through the integrity of the municipal
§ 151-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 153-1
153:228
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — The list of submission requirements adopted
by ordinance and provided by the municipal agency to a developer pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:550-10.3.56
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, gift, subscription, advance or transfer of
money or other thing of value, including any item of real property or
personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including services
provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a part or all
of their time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization), made
to or on behalf of any candidate or candidate committee, joint candidates
committee or political committee, continuing political committee or political
party committee and any pledge, promise or other commitment or
assumption of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports
required under the provisions of the ordinance, any such commitment or
assumption shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the dots when
such commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date, and the recipient of any and all contributions made to or on
behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee,
political committee, continuing political committee or political party
committee of, or pertaining to, this municipality, made up to one year
prior to filing the variance application and/or during the pendency of the
application process, and required to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44A-1 et seq.
DEVELOPER — A developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e., the legal
or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included
in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required to be
licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies legal representation, expert
testimony or written reports in support of an application. Professionals shall
include both any individuals supplying the representation, testimonies or
reports and the firms or entities in which said individuals practice.
§ 153-3. Disclosure requirements for variance applicants.
planning process requires the supplementation of the municipal
application checklist to mandate the listing of specified political
contributions made by property owners, developers and the
professionals whose services they use in applications for major
variances, waivers and exceptions.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Appendixes.
§ 153-1 CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS § 153-3
153:229
A. Disclosure requirements:
(1) Any applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) or a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) in conjunction with any
application for a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision
pursuant to local ordinance or a site plan not considered a minor
site plan pursuant to local ordinance, as well as any application for
a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision pursuant to local
ordinance or site plan not considered a minor site plan pursuant to
local ordinance requiring waivers or exceptions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, shall include in the application contribution
disclosure statements for all developers; all associates of said
developers who would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2; and all professionals who represent
any such developer or provide testimony, plans, or reports in
support of said variance waiver or exception and who have an
enforceable proprietary interest in the property or development
which is the subject of the application or whose fee in whole or in
part is contingent upon the outcome of the application. Regardless
of whether the owner of the property which is the subject of the
variance application falls in any of the categories established in the
preceding sentence, the application shall include in the application
a contribution disclosure statement for said owner.
(2) During the pendency of the application process until final site plan
approval is granted, any person required to comply with this
chapter shall amend its contribution disclosure statements to
include continuing disclosure of all contributions within the scope
of the disclosure requirement of the above paragraph.
B. Inclusion of contribution disclosure statements as an element of the
application checklist.
(1) An application checklist ordinance is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require that the contribution disclosure
statements specified in Subsection A of this section be submitted by
the applicant for all applications for variance relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c) or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and
subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
(2) The municipal planning board and board of adjustment shall amend
its application checklist for variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d) as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c)
or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and subdivision
approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance to include the contribution
disclosure statements specified in Subsection A of this section.
§ 153-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 153-3
153:230
Chapter 154
(RESERVED)
Chapter 157
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN-OPERATED
§ 157-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING — The cleaning of textiles, fabrics,
garments or other articles by the use of any solvent other than water in a
dry-cleaning unit used or designed to be used by the general public. For the
purposes of this definition, the phrase "used by the general public" shall be
deemed to refer to the insertion of such textiles, fabrics, garments or other
articles into a dry-cleaning unit or the removal of the same from such unit
by a person or persons other than an owner, operator or employee of the
dry-cleaning establishment.
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — The Township Health Officer or his designated
representative.
SOLVENT — The fluid used in the dry-cleaning unit.
§ 157-2. Installation requirements.
All installations of coin-operated dry-cleaning units must meet the
requirements of all state and township regulations.
§ 157-3. Solvent specifications.
The solvent used in said units shall be the cleaning fluid specified by the
equipment manufacturer and shall be free of additives to mask the odor. It
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency until
the required contribution disclosure statements are submitted.
C. Availability of the disclosure statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the administrative officer
for review by any member of the public.
D. Intent of the disclosure statement. It is the intent of this chapter that
the disclosure statement shall serve to inform the public and not serve
as evidence relevant to the decision criteria for variance applications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) as well as for relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:550-70(c) or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan
and subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
§ 153-3 (RESERVED) § 157-3
154:231
shall be classified as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and shall not
be more toxic than perchlorethylene.
§ 157-4. Placement of machines.
Only the front of the dry-cleaning machine shall extend into the customer
area. The remainder of each machine shall be separated from the customer
area by solid partition. This partition may be constructed as a non-loadbearing
double-faced wall structure to extend from floor to ceiling. Access
door to the enclosure back of the machines shall be self-closing, metal-clad
and locked to prevent access from the customer area.
§ 157-5. Heating equipment restrictions.
The enclosure for the machines shall not be interconnected with that of
heating devices requiring air for combustion, such as gas dryers, water
heaters and boiler-heating plants. This heating equipment must obtain air
for combustion from the outside atmosphere.
§ 157-6. Adequate ventilation.
All portions of the coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall be
adequately ventilated.
§ 157-7. Plans and specifications to accompany application.
When application for a license to operate a coin-operated dry-cleaning
establishment is made, such application shall be accompanied by four sets
of plans and specifications showing building outline, all equipment to be
used and installation details thereof.
§ 157-8. Supervision; age restrictions; spotting equipment.
No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used by the general public
unless under the continual direct supervision of a competent attendant. The
attendant shall not be less than 21 years of age. No coin-operated drycleaning
machine shall be used by any person who is less than 17 years
of age. A suitable sign of such age restriction shall be prominently posted.
No person shall use spotting equipment containing flammable material in a
coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning establishment.
§ 157-9. Safety latches.
All coin-operated dry-cleaning machines shall be fitted with a device which
would prevent the opening of the door of any machine while such machine
is in operation and until all solvent vapors have been removed from any
textile, fabric, garment or other article being cleaned and from the drum in
which the same shall be placed.
§ 157-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 157-10
157:232
§ 157-10. Drainage pipes; opening valves.
No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used unless directly behind
any such machine there shall be quick-opening valves and pipes to a buried
drain tank outside of the building of sufficient size to accept all solvent
contained in all coin-operated dry-cleaning machines in the establishment.
The quick-opening valves and pipes shall be so arranged as to cause solvent
to drain into such tank by means of gravity flow. The machines shall be
installed on a concrete base, around the edge of which there shall be a fourinch
dike making a reservoir to contain any liquids that may leak out of the
machines. The reservoir shall drain directly to pipes leading into the buried
drain tank above referred to.
§ 157-11. Sources of danger to be inaccessible to public.
In any coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment, solvent storage tanks,
vaporproof power box or boxes and other sources of danger shall be so
situated as to be inaccessible to the general public.
§ 157-12. Exits.
All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall have two exits which
shall be at least 25 feet apart from each other and shall lead directly into
the street or to an area outside of the building leading to the street.
§ 157-13. Filter residue; use of respirators by maintenance
personnel.
Filter residue and other residue containing solvent shall be disposed of so as
not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A locked, covered metal container
shall be used for temporary storage in a covered shed of noncombustible
construction outside the building. A respirator, approved by the United
States Bureau of Mines as affording protection against organic solvent
vapors, shall be provided for and used by maintenance personnel during
the correction of leakages, cleaning of the system, removal of lint and muck
bags and at all times when the odor of solvent is noticeable.
§ 157-14. Exhausts.
All exhausts shall be under positive pressure. The terminal of any exhaust
shall be at least 10 feet from any window or ventilating window if said
ventilating window or ventilating opening lies on the same plane as the
exhaust terminal. When the ventilating window or other ventilating
openings lie on a plane which faces in the direction of the exhaust terminal,
such terminal shall be at least 10 feet away from the same. All direct
equipment exhausts or vents shall be provided with mesh lint arrestors,
which shall be kept clean, unless lint traps are provided on the dry-cleaning
unit. The total exhaust capability of all exhaust devices used shall have a
minimum capacity of 400 cubic feet per minute per machine for normal use
and 1,000 cubic feet per minute for emergency use. The rated capacities of
the exhaust fans shall appear on the equipment or its nameplate.
§ 157-10 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 157-15
157:233
§ 157-15. Rest rooms.
Each coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall provide for customer
use a men's and women's rest room, each with toilet facilities.
§ 157-16. Prohibited hours of operation.
No such dry-cleaning establishment shall permit the placing of articles to
be cleaned in any machine before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. All such
establishments shall be closed on Sundays.
§ 157-17. Warning and operation signs posted.
Each coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall contain indoor signs
prominently displayed warning the customers of the dangers of excessive
solvent inhalation and skin irritation from the unevaporated dry-cleaning
solvent. A step-by-step readily legible instruction list for operation of the
machines shall be posted in a conspicuous location near the machine in
the customer area. These instructions shall include a list of items not to
be dry-cleaned in coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning machines, such
as those made partly or completely of plastic, rubber, leather, paper, fur,
angora, urethane.
§ 157-18. Connection to township water supply.
If the machine is connected to the township water supply, it shall be
equipped with an air duct or properly installed vacuum breaker in the water
supply line upstream from the condenser. There shall be no control valves
downstream from the vacuum breaker. The waste water shall discharge
through an air gap.
§ 157-19. Disposal and storage of filter residue.
Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be stored and
disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. It shall be
unlawful to permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer
system of the township. Tightly covered metal containers shall be used
for temporary storage of such waste. Such containers shall bear labels
indicating the contents and dangers involved in handling and shall be
locked if in an unenclosed place.
§ 157-20. Sanitary conditions, lighting, plumbing, electrical
installations.
The entire premises of such establishment and all machines used therein
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Each machine shall be
inspected each day it is in operation and kept in good repair by maintenance
personnel. A record shall be kept in the maintenance area of all inspections
and repairs made. The floor shall be kept clean and dry. The premises shall
be adequately ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial
light. The walls of said premises shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint,
§ 157-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 157-20
157:234
cement or other impervious material. The floor covering in the customer
area shall be made of a material resistant to the solvents used in the
machines. All plumbing work shall at all times conform to the provisions of
the Plumbing Code of the Township of North Brunswick, and all electrical
installations shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical
Code and shall always be kept in a good condition and state of repair. The
customer area shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher approved for use
against electrical or oil fires by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
§ 157-21. License required; fee; expiration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any coin-operated drycleaning
establishment in the Township of North Brunswick without first
obtaining a license therefor. Application for such license shall be filed with
the Township Clerk. Said application shall state the name and address of
the owner or person, firm or corporation who will operate the dry-cleaning
establishment; the name, address and authorized officer of the firm engaged
to install the equipment and the name or names of maintenance personnel
and their telephone numbers (the Township Clerk shall be notified of
changes in the names and telephone numbers of maintenance personnel);
the exact location of the premises, the size thereof and the number of coinoperated
dry-cleaning machines, with make and model numbers, which are
to be installed. The application shall have the consent of the owner of the
premises attached thereto. No license shall be issued unless the premises
comply in all respects with fire,57 health, plumbing and zoning regulations58
of the township. The annual license fee for the full year shall be $25;
provided, however, that an additional fee of $5 shall be paid for each selfservice
machine installed. Each license shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
§ 157-22. Suspension, revocation.
Any license granted hereunder may be suspended or revoked at any time by
the Mayor and Council upon conviction of the holder thereof of a violation
of any provision of this chapter.
§ 157-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 157-20 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 157-23
157:235
Chapter 158
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 191.
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
Separate stormwater sewer system — See Ch.
276, Art. III.
§ 158-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "North Brunswick
Dumpster Regulations Ordinance."
§ 158-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to law in order to provide regulations for
the use of commercial, construction and property maintenance dumpsters
within the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 158-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL DUMPSTER — A container or debris-transfer body
commonly used for the placing or collection of solid waste, garbage, trash
and/or other refuse for removal and hauling by private haulers.
CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER — A container or debris-transfer body
commonly used for the placing or collection of construction materials and/
or building materials during construction, renovation or demolition for use
at commercial or residential construction sites to be removed by a private
hauler. Construction dumpsters are not to be used for household garbage,
solid waste or matter of a putrescent or putrescible nature.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Lumber, shingles, wallboard or other
materials or debris generated by a project.
CURBSIDE — A location in the public right-of-way in proximity to the curb
or in a similar area where a curb does not exist or in an alternate location
as determined by the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or
her designee.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Zoning Officer or his or her designee
shall have the primary responsibility for enforcement of the terms of the
provisions of this chapter with respect to commercial dumpsters. The
Director of the Department of Community Development or his or her
designee shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of the terms of
§ 157-23 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-3
157:236
the provisions of this chapter with respect to construction dumpsters. The
Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her designee shall have
primary responsibility for enforcement of the terms of the provisions of this
chapter with respect to property maintenance dumpsters. The Township
Police Department and the Director of the Department of Community
Development, or their designees, shall have secondary authority to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter and to issue summonses for any
violations under this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person or firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or entity of any type or formation.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DUMPSTER — A roll-off dumpster used for
the removal of personal property or other goods, landscape material and
household items. Property maintenance dumpsters are not to be used for
the removal of construction and building materials, refuse, debris,
household garbage, solid waste or matter of a putrescent or putrescible
nature.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DUMPSTER RENTED FROM THE TOWNSHIP
— A roll-off dumpster used for the personal property or other goods, yard
waste, recyclable and household items which is rented from the Township.
Property maintenance dumpsters rented from the Township are not to be
used for the removal of construction and building materials, tree stumps,
refuse, debris, household garbage, solid waste, stone, soil, concrete,
asphalt, railroad ties or matters of a putrescent or putrescible nature.
PUBLIC AREA — Any public street, sidewalk, highway, lane, alley, parking
lot or other public place or right-of-way in any zone within the Township.
ROLL-OFFS — A container or debris-transfer body commonly used for the
placing or collection of solid waste, garbage, trash and/or other refuse and/
or building materials during construction, renovation or demolition, which
does not use a sealed lid and is "rolled" off and onto a collection vehicle.
§ 158-4. Commercial dumpsters.
A. Regulations of use. No person shall place or permit or cause to be
placed on any public street or sidewalk, whether in a residential or
nonresidential zone, or in any other public right-of-way or public area of
the Township, a commercial dumpster or similar container commonly
used for the collection of solid waste, garbage, trash or other refuse.
B. Permits. No permit shall be required for the use of a commercial
dumpster by a commercial enterprise except as set forth in § 158-4C(1)
hereinbelow.
C. Location, placement and conditions.
(1) No commercial dumpsters shall be placed on properties which are
or have been the subject of development applications (i.e.,
subdivision or site plan applications) other than those which have
been approved and authorized by the appropriate land use agency.
§ 158-3 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 158-4
157:237
§ 158-5. Construction dumpsters.
If a commercial dumpster is to be placed on property that is not
or has not been the subject of a development application, then a
commercial dumpster may only be placed on the property upon
securing a permit for same from the Zoning Officer.
(a) Planking or other wood sheeting of sufficient size is required to
be placed under the wheels or road contact areas to protect the
roadway from damage. If the dumpster has wheels, they must
be chocked to prevent movement.
(b) All dumpsters shall be fitted with reflectors on all sides in order
to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1a.
(c) No dumpster shall be permitted in an area accessible to the
public where the placement interferes with the free and safe
flow of traffic or which otherwise stands in a hazardous
location.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, commercial dumpsters must
be sealed at all times and roll-offs shall not be used as
commercial dumpsters under any circumstances.
(2) Upon removal of any commercial dumpster, the area accessible to
the public shall be swept clean of all loose debris and restored to its
former condition.
(3) Commercial dumpsters shall at all times be kept in good repair and
shall be structurally sound and leakproof and shall be constructed
to stand firmly upright.
A. Regulations of use. No person shall place or permit or cause to be
placed on any public street or sidewalk, whether in a residential or
nonresidential zone, or in the public right-of-way or publicly owned
property, or any other public right-of-way or public area in the
Township, a construction dumpster or roll-off or similar container
except in compliance with this chapter.
B. Notice. Written notification to the Construction Official must be given at
least 48 hours prior to the placement or utilization of a construction
dumpster, whether in a public right-of-way, public area or private area.
C. Permits. No person shall place or utilize a construction dumpster or
roll-off or permit or cause a construction dumpster or roll-off to be
placed or utilized in a public right-of-way or a public area in the
Township without first having obtained a permit from the Construction
Official therefor.
D. Application for permit; fees; term; regulations.
(1) Any person seeking to place, cause or permit to be placed or to
utilize a construction dumpster in the public right-of-way or
§ 158-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-5
157:238
publicly owned property or public right-of-way or public area in the
Township shall do so only after having obtained a permit from the
Construction Official. In order to obtain such permit, an application
for a permit on a form to be furnished by the Construction Official
shall be filed and the appropriate fee shall be paid.
(2) The application shall require that the applicant specify the exact
proposed location of the construction dumpster, the size and
capacity thereof, the length of time that said use is required and the
contemplated use of the construction dumpster.
(3) The fee for obtaining a permit to place a construction dumpster in a
public right-of-way or a public area shall be $50. The permit shall
be valid for a period of 10 days and may be renewed for no more
than three additional ten-day periods for a supplementary charge
of $150 for each such additional ten-day period.
(4) No construction dumpster shall be placed in any area for more than
five business days prior to commencement of construction or
demolition and shall not remain therein for more than five business
days subsequent to the completion of such construction or
demolition or the expiration of the permit required herein.
(5) No permit for placement in a public right-of-way or a public area
shall be issued if the Township Police Department determines that
the issuance of such permit will constitute a danger to the public
safety or unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(6) A permit for placement in a public right-of-way or a public area may
be revoked at any time during its term or any extensions thereof if
the placement or use of such construction dumpster constitutes a
hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the
Township or for any other reason constitutes a nuisance.
E. Location, placement and conditions.
(1) No construction dumpster shall be placed in a public right-of-way
or a public area unless it is determined by the Construction Official
or his designee that there is not sufficient room on the private
property on which to place the construction dumpster so that the
construction dumpster is required to be placed in a public right-ofway
or a public area. No construction dumpster placed on private
property shall impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
safety sight lines. Construction dumpsters may be placed in public
rights-of-way or public areas only upon the determination of the
Construction Official or his designee that there is no safe or
practical place where the dumpster may be placed other than in the
public right-of-way or a public area.
(a) Planking or other wood sheeting of sufficient size is required to
be placed under the wheels or road contact areas to protect the
§ 158-5 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 158-5
157:239
§ 158-6. Property maintenance dumpsters.
roadway from damage. If the dumpster has wheels, they must
be chocked to prevent movement.
(b) All dumpsters shall be fitted with reflectors on all sides in order
to comply with the terms of N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1a.
(c) No dumpster shall be permitted in a public right-of-way or a
public area where the placement interferes with the free and
safe flow of traffic or which otherwise stands in a hazardous
location.
(d) No dumpster shall be placed less than five feet from the
property line.
(2) Upon removal of the construction dumpster, the public right-of-way
or the public area shall be swept clean of all loose debris and
restored to its former condition in accordance with the standards of
the Township's Department of Public Works.
(3) Construction dumpsters shall at all times be kept in good repair
and shall be structurally sound and leakproof and shall be
constructed to stand firmly upright.
A. Regulations of use. No person shall place or permit or cause to be
placed on any public street or sidewalk, whether in a residential or
nonresidential zone, or in any public right-of-way in the Township, a
property maintenance dumpster or roll-off or similar container
commonly used for the collection of personal property or other goods
and household items except in compliance with this chapter.
B. Rental. Property maintenance dumpsters are available for rent from the
Department of Public Works for a fee of $400 for a period of seven days.
Property maintenance dumpsters rented from the Department of Public
Works shall not be used for stone, soil, concrete, asphalt or railroad
ties, construction materials and other materials noted in the definition
above.59 All renters shall be required to execute a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement as a condition of such rental.
C. Permits.
(1) No person shall place or utilize a privately obtained property
maintenance dumpster or roll-off or permit or cause a property
maintenance dumpster or roll-off to be placed or utilized in the
public right-of-way in the Township without first having obtained a
permit from the Director of the Department of Public Works or his
designee therefor.
59.Editor's Note: See § 158-3.
§ 158-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-6
157:240
(2) A property maintenance dumpster or roll-off which has been rented
from the Township may be placed or utilized in the public right-ofway
in the Township without a separate permit; provided, however,
that same has been approved, in writing, by the Director of the
Department of Public Works and has also been approved by the
Township Police Department and Zoning Officer.
D. Application for permit; fees; term; regulations.
(1) Any person seeking to place, cause or permit to be placed or to
utilize a privately obtained property maintenance dumpster in the
public right-of-way in the Township shall do so only after having
obtained a permit from the Director of the Department of Public
Works or his designee. In order to obtain such permit, an
application for a permit on a form to be furnished by the Director of
the Department of Public Works or his designee shall be filed and
the appropriate fee shall be paid.
(2) The application shall require that the applicant specify the exact
proposed location of the property maintenance dumpster, the size
and capacity thereof, the length of time that said use is required
and the contemplated use of the property maintenance dumpster.
(3) The fee for obtaining a permit to place a privately obtained
property maintenance dumpster in the public right-of-way shall be
$50. The permit shall be valid for a period of 10 days and may be
renewed (subject to availability) for additional ten-day periods for
an additional fee of $150 for each additional ten-day period.
(4) No property maintenance dumpster of any kind, whether privately
obtained or rented from the Township, shall be placed on any given
property for more than two thirty-day periods, (i.e., 60 days in
total).
(5) No permit for placement in the public right-of-way or a public area
shall be issued if the Township Police Department determines that
the issuance of such permit will constitute a danger to the public
safety or unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(6) A permit for placement in the public right-of-way or a public area
may be revoked at any time during its term or any extensions
thereof if the placement or use of such property maintenance
dumpster constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of
the citizens of the Township or for any other reason constitutes a
nuisance.
(7) Any property maintenance dumpster rented from the Township
found to have the lessee disposing inappropriate materials into a
property maintenance dumpster shall be billed for any and all costs
incurred by the Township for the removal and disposal of such
inappropriate materials. Should such lessee fail to reimburse the
§ 158-6 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 158-6
157:241
§ 158-7. Forcible removal.
Township for the removal of such inappropriate materials, such
costs shall be assessed against said lessee pursuant to § 158-8
herein.
E. Location, placement and conditions.
(1) No property maintenance dumpster shall be placed in a public
right-of-way or a public area unless it is determined by the Zoning
Officer or his designee that there is not sufficient room on the
private property on which to place the property maintenance
dumpster so that the property maintenance dumpster is required to
be placed in a public right-of-way or a public area. No property
maintenance dumpster placed on private property shall impede the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or safety sight lines. Property
maintenance dumpsters may be placed in public rights-of-way or
public areas only upon the determination of the Zoning Officer or
his designee that there is no safe or practical place where the
dumpster may be placed other than in the public right-of-way or a
public area.
(a) Planking or other wood sheeting of sufficient size is required to
be placed under the wheels or road contact areas to protect the
roadway from damage. If the dumpster has wheels, they must
be chocked to prevent movement.
(b) All dumpsters shall be fitted with reflectors on all sides in order
to comply with the terms of N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1a.
(c) No dumpster shall be permitted in a public right-of-way or a
public area where the placement interferes with the free and
safe flow of traffic or which otherwise stands in a hazardous
location.
(d) No dumpster shall be placed less than five feet from the
property line.
(2) Upon removal of property maintenance dumpsters, the public
right-of-way or the public area shall be swept clean of all loose
debris and restored to its former condition in accordance with the
standards of the Township's Department of Public Works.
(3) Property maintenance dumpsters shall at all times be kept in good
repair and shall be structurally sound and leakproof and shall be
constructed to stand firmly upright.
A. If any construction dumpster remains in excess of 30 days after
construction work is discontinued, on any type of property in any zone,
said construction dumpster shall be deemed a nuisance and a hazard to
the public safety, health and welfare, and any enforcement authority or
designee hereunder may provide for the removal of such construction
§ 158-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-7
157:242
§ 158-8. Assessment for Township's cost of removal; liens.
Upon removal of any type of dumpster by the Township as provided in
§ 158-7 or the failure of any lessor to reimburse the Township for the costs
of removal of inappropriate materials pursuant to § 158-6D(7), such costs
shall be charged as a special tax against the owner of the lands where the
dumpster was located. The amount thereof shall thereupon become a lien
and tax upon lands and shall be added to and become part of the taxes
next to be levied and assessed upon such lands by the Tax Collector's office.
Said amount shall bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes. The
Township shall have the right to bring a summary action for collection of
such costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred, in the Superior
Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Middlesex County.
§ 158-9. Enforcement.
The appropriate enforcement authority, or his designee, shall be primarily
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and shall
dumpster after 48 hours' notice of said violation, at the cost and
expense of the permit holder, or, in the case of a construction dumpster
placed on private property, the construction dumpster renter or lessee.
The permit holder of such construction dumpster, or, in the case of
a construction dumpster placed on private property, the construction
dumpster renter or lessee, shall pay the reasonable costs of such
removal.
B. If any property maintenance dumpster remains in excess of the
authorized period of use (i.e., in excess of 60 days), the said property
maintenance dumpster shall be deemed a nuisance and a hazard to the
public safety, health and welfare, and any enforcement authority or
designee hereunder may provide for the removal of such property
maintenance dumpster after 48 hours' notice of said violation, at the
cost and expense of the permit holder, or, as applicable, renter. The
permit holder or renter, as applicable, shall pay the reasonable costs of
such removal.
C. If any dumpster shall be found to be overflowing, on any type of
property in any zone, the dumpster shall be deemed a nuisance and a
hazard to the public safety, health and welfare, and any enforcement
authority or designee hereunder may provide for the removal of such
dumpster at the cost and expense of the permit holder, if applicable, or,
in the case of a dumpster placed on private property, the dumpster
renter or lessee. Any person holding a permit to use a dumpster,
whether for a construction dumpster or a property maintenance
dumpster, or, in the case of a construction or property maintenance
dumpster placed on private property or a commercial dumpster, the
dumpster renter or lessee, shall pay the reasonable costs of such
removal.
§ 158-7 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 158-9
157:243
cause prosecutions for violations thereof to be instituted before the
Municipal Court with all reasonable dispatch. The Township Police
Department or the Director of the Department of Community Development
or the Director of the Department of Public Works, or their designees, shall
have concurrent authority to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
The appropriate enforcement authority shall not be required to serve a
violation notice or like correspondence to violators of the provisions of this
chapter and shall have the right to immediately issue summonses to any
violators of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-10. Employee report of noncompliance.
Any Township employee who observes noncompliance with any of the
regulations of this chapter shall immediately notify the Department of
Community Development, the Township Police Department or the
Department of Public Works.
§ 158-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 158-12. Prevention of discharge into municipal separate storm
sewer system and New Jersey State waters. [Added 8-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-17]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. The Township shall, upon a second or subsequent violation of any
provision of this chapter within the same calendar year, have the right,
but not the obligation, to cause the removal of the dumpster and to
charge the costs of same against the violator pursuant to the terms and
conditions of § 158-8 herein.
C. The imposition and collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions
of this § 158-11 shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Township
to collect the cost of removal as provided in § 158-8 herein.
D. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues pursuant to this Chapter 158.
A. All dumpsters and refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to
stormwater shall be covered at all times. Any spilling, dumping,
leaking, or other discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from
dumpsters to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated
by the Township and/or the waters of the State of New Jersey are
hereby prohibited.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
§ 158-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 158-12
157:244
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of North Brunswick or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject to
municipal jurisdiction or entity of any type or formation now known or
hereinafter devised.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
C. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster shall ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse
container or dumpster shall ensure that such container or dumpster
does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of North Brunswick.
D. Exceptions to prohibition:
(1) Permitted temporary demolition containers;
(2) Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
(3) Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
(4) Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit; and
(5) Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, and
white goods placed curbside for pickup).
E. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced concurrently by the
Township of North Brunswick Police Department, the Township Code
§ 158-12 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN- § 158-12
157:245
Chapter 161
DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 197. Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
§ 161-1. Enforcement officer. [Amended 5-1-1972]
The Housing Inspector of the Township of North Brunswick is hereby
designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter,
and he shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 161-2. Conditions rendering dwellings unfit. [Amended 5-1-1972]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Housing Inspector of the Township
of North Brunswick may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are
dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
dwelling or the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the
Township of North Brunswick; such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing
the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects or uncleanliness.
§ 161-3. Acceptance of standards; copies on file.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1),
the New Jersey State Housing Code as approved by the Departments of
Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the office
of the Secretary of State is hereby accepted, adopted and established as
a standard to be used as a guide in determining the fitness of a building
for human habitation or occupancy or use. Three copies of the New Jersey
State Housing Code have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick and are available to all persons desiring to
use and/or examine same.
§ 161-4. Complaints. [Amended 5-1-1972]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector of the Township of
North Brunswick by a public authority, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or
Enforcement Officer and the Director of the Department of Public
Works, or his or her designee.
F. Penalties. Any persons adjudged to be in violation of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 158-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 161-4
161:246
by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation, as herein defined, or whenever it appears to the
Housing Inspector (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation, as herein defined, he shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Housing Inspector (or his designated agent) at a place therein
fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint, that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right
to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise
and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint, and that
the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Housing Inspector.
§ 161-5. Order of removal, repair, vacation; enforcement. [Amended
5-1-1972]
A. If, after such notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector determines that
the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
(1) The repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be
set forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to
have said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order.
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time
specified in the order, that the owner remove or demolish the said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of
removal.
(3) That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
building, the Housing Inspector may cause such building to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed, and that
the Housing Inspector may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and
unlawful."
(4) That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to removal or
demolish the building, the Housing Inspector may cause such
building to be removed or demolished or may contract for the
§ 161-4 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN § 161-5
161:247
§ 161-6. Service of complaints and orders. [Amended 5-1-1972]
removal or demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt
of bids therefor.
(5) That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in
favor of the municipality, and such cost of such repairs, alterations
or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining
after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of
materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the
real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Housing Inspector, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits of if the sum of
the total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Housing Inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or judgment of such Court; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of
the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
A. Complaints or orders issued by the Housing Inspector pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by said Housing Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the said Housing Inspector shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the
County of Middlesex.
B. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of
§ 161-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 161-6
161:248
§ 161-7. Powers of Housing Inspector to enforce provisions.
[Amended 5-1-1972]
The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers
in addition to others herein granted:
§ 161-8. Powers to be supplemental to existing powers.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the township or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and
the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred upon the township by any other law or ordinance.
Chapter 164
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer Fire Department — See Ch. 32. Alarm systems — See Ch. 103.
§ 164-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words have been defined, unless the context
otherwise indicates:
such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer of the county in which the dwelling is
located.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Township of North
Brunswick in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for
human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 161-6 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN § 164-1
161:249
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) — Under New Jersey's EMS system,
the second level of a two-tiered response system, usually provided by a
paramedic, for critical or life-threatening emergencies, medication
administration, and advanced care under the command of a physician.
This tier is mandated by state law to be provided by hospitals through a
certificate of need. The State Commissioner of Health is responsible for
designating providers to serve a region, where they interface with local BLS
agencies.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) — Under New Jersey's EMS system, the first
level of a two-tiered response system, usually provided by an emergency
medical technician ("EMT"), that responds to all emergencies, administers
first aid and CPR and provides medical transport. Operated in accordance
with the standards set forth under N.J.A.C. 8:40-1.1 et seq., agencies can
be funded from a combination of donations, insurance billing and public
funding.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE SERVICE — An entity that has a
valid license to provide prehospital basic support care and/or provide BLS
interfacility transfers.
CERTIFICATE OF NEED — The formal written approval of the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to construct or expand a healthcare
facility or to institute a new health-care service, in accordance with
requirements set forth under Hospital and Ambulatory Care Rules N.J.A.C.
8:33-1.1 et seq.
COSTS — All expenses incurred by an emergency services provider,
including but not limited to the following: actual labor costs of personnel,
workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative
overhead; costs of equipment operation; cost of materials; the cost of any
outside contract for labor and materials; and any other reasonably related
costs. The expense of an emergency response shall also include reasonable
attorney fees and any costs incurred in collecting those charges.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — An advanced level of prehospital,
interhospital, and emergency service care, which includes basic life support
functions, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation, telemetered
electrocardiography, administration of anti-arrhythmic agents, intravenous
therapy, administration of specific medications, drugs and solutions, use
of adjunctive ventilation devices, trauma care and other techniques and
procedures authorized in writing by the Commissioner of the New Jersey
State Department of Health and Senior Services, or as such term is
otherwise defined in N.J.S.A. 26:2K-7 et seq., and applicable regulations
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDER (EMS) — Any agency that
is incorporated to provide basic life support ("BLS") emergency medical
services as its primary function.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — Providing, sending, or utilizing, through any
means, emergency medical services, rescue services, or related services,
and personnel by an emergency services provider, which may be initiated
§ 164-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 164-1
161:250
at the request of the North Brunswick Emergency Dispatch Center, to an
incident which actually threatens or is believed to threaten, directly or
indirectly, the health, safety, or welfare of individuals or property within
the Township, or the public's health, safety, or welfare within the Township.
Such incidents shall include, but are specifically not limited to, vehicular
accidents, fires, individual medical emergencies, emergency medical
coverage during fire response activities or any hazardous condition which
threatens the property or the life or liberty of individuals within the
Township of North Brunswick.
MATERIALS — All materials, including but not limited to medical
equipment, drugs, protective clothing and equipment, medical supplies,
vehicles, and any other equipment or materials used during an emergency
response.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL ("OIG") EXCLUSION LIST — The OIG's
list of excluded individuals/entities that provides information to the heathcare
industry, patients and the public regarding individuals and entities
currently excluded from Medicare, Medicaid, and all other federal healthcare
programs.
PERSON — Any public or private corporation, company, association, society,
firm, partnership, joint stock company, individual, or other entity.
§ 164-2. EMS engagement and laws.
The following laws shall be enforced under this chapter:
§ 164-3. Emergency medical services.
A. N.J.S.A. 40:5-2 et seq. — Contributions to first aid, ambulance and
rescue squads. Any county or municipality may make a voluntary
contribution of not more than $70,000 annually to any duly
incorporated first aid and emergency or volunteer ambulance or rescue
squad association of the county; or of any municipality therein,
rendering service generally throughout the county, or any of the
municipalities thereof. In addition, if any such associations experience
extraordinary need, the county or municipality may contribute an
additional amount of not more than $35,000 annually; provided,
however, that the need for such additional funds is established by the
association and is directly related to the performance of said
association's duties.
B. N.J.A.C. 8:33-1.1 et seq. — Hospital and ambulatory care rules.
C. New Jersey Highway Traffic Safety Act60 — enacted to reduce traffic
accidents as well as the number of deaths and injuries. Under the Act,
municipalities shall have the right to receive information on EMS
providers' certifications and ambulance inspections from the
organizations providing the service.
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 27:5F-18 et seq.
§ 164-1 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN § 164-3
161:251
§ 164-4. Territory serviced.
To be considered for receiving a municipal contribution in any given year,
an EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community, must
respond and provide service within the Township in such a manner that
other areas or municipalities are secondary and identified as a mutual aid
response.
§ 164-5. Reports.
Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community, will be
required to submit quarterly, at the request of Township officials, reports
concerning the operation of services provided. Such reports will include but
not be limited to detailing the following:
A. For the purpose of the following sections herein, an EMS provider shall
mean any agency that is incorporated to provide basic life support
("BLS") as its primary service.
B. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
must provide emergency medical response services to all persons
within the Township equally, regardless of the ability to pay.
C. Said services will be provided in accordance with all applicable rules,
regulations, standards and laws of the State of New Jersey and any
administrative agency having necessary and proper jurisdiction to
promulgate and adopt rules and regulations applicable to the provision
of such services and other applicable activities.
D. Township officials will not take any action to direct members of an EMS
provider at any emergency scene.
E. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
will be required to work in cooperation with the North Brunswick Fire
Department, Police Department and the Office of Emergency
Management.
F. The EMS provider will be responsible for having properly trained crew
members that are able to promote teamwork while working at an
emergency scene.
A. Number of emergency response calls.
B. Types of emergency response calls.
C. Total hours of billable service performed.
D. Number of mutual aid calls provided and received.
E. Response times.
F. Number of patients served and destinations (identified by municipal
official/emergency volunteer/resident or nonresident).
§ 164-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 164-5
161:252
§ 164-6. Equipment.
§ 164-7. Maintenance and repair.
Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community, shall be
responsible for the payment of all costs related to the proper maintenance
and repair of all emergency medical and rescue response equipment and
apparatus used by the provider.
§ 164-8. Insurance.
§ 164-9. Fuel.
G. Listing of standby service provided.
H. Listing of special events covered, conducted and/or having provided
participation.
A. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
shall operate and utilize any and all equipment and apparatus in its
possession for civic purposes, including emergency medical and rescue
response services, in accordance with any rules or regulations that may
be adopted from time to time by the Township.
B. The EMS provider will maintain and operate the vehicles and
equipment in its possession in a safe manner and will take all necessary
steps to ensure the proper training of members for the safe operation of
equipment.
C. All vehicles operated by an EMS provider will be prominently and
similarly marked and identified as an emergency service vehicle.
A. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
shall be able to demonstrate they have adequate insurance coverage, as
may be legally required, including but not limited to the following
policies: commercial auto, accident and sickness, workers'
compensation for paid staff, general liability and a portfolio insurance
protection plan designed for an emergency service organization.
B. Coverage shall be adequate to insure the EMS provider against liability
or claims arising out of, occasioned by or resulting from any accident,
personal injury or damage to property arising out of the performance of
emergency medical and rescue response services.
C. The limits of said policies shall be in amounts deemed appropriate by
the Township's Risk Manager and the Joint Insurance Fund the
Township participates in.
A. Any EMS provider shall be responsible to pay for all fuel consumed in
the operation of emergency service vehicles while performing
emergency medical and rescue response services.
§ 164-5 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN § 164-9
161:253
§ 164-10. Annual accounting.
Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community, shall
submit annually a copy of the agency's financial documents to the Township
Business Administrator, setting out and describing their financial condition
to the satisfaction of the Township Business Administrator. The accounting
shall report on the prior year's fiscal activity.
§ 164-11. Medical billing.
B. Should the EMS provider utilize a municipal fueling station, the
Township shall invoice the provider for the consumption based on the
municipality's actual fuel cost.
C. The EMS provider shall not be charged administrative or usage fees.
A. Person causing incident liable for cost. Any person who causes, by act
or omission, or is otherwise responsible for, the incident which caused
the emergency response, including the owner of real or personal
property from which the incident occurs, shall be liable for the payment
of all costs incurred by an EMS provider as a result of such emergency
response.
B. Schedule of fees, costs, and expenses. The EMS provider shall be
responsible for establishing a fee schedule for any fees, costs, and
expenses, collectively known as "charges" or "billing rate schedule."
C. Collection of fees, costs, and expenses. The charges shall be recovered
directly by the EMS provider by direct billing, or by an attorney,
collection service, or other agency contracted with and by the EMS
provider for the collection of such sums. In addition to these charges,
the EMS provider shall also be authorized to collect reasonable interest
and administration expenses involved in collecting said charges.
D. A current copy of the billing rate schedule shall be provided and on file
with the Township.
E. The EMS provider must receive approval from the Mayor and/or
Township Business Administrator for collection language that is to
appear on a resident's statement.
F. Enforcement. In the event that any insurance carrier (including
Medicare/Medicaid) or person fails to pay any bill or invoice within 30
days of the mailing or delivery of such notice of charges, and is not a
municipal resident, the EMS provider shall directly, or any attorney,
collection service, or other agency contracted with and by the EMS
provider, who mailed or delivered the bill or invoice may, file a civil
action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of
any amounts due to the EMS provider, together with any statutory
interest, court costs, collection and/or administration fees, and
reasonable attorneys' fees. The remedies provided herein shall be in
§ 164-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 164-11
161:254
§ 164-12. Municipal contributions.
addition to any other relief, remedies, or penalties that may be
appropriate and provided by law.
G. If the EMS provider receives a municipal stipend, this shall represent
the uncollected, out-of-pocket copayment on behalf of a bona fide
municipal resident, and the provider will send a written notification to
the resident of the account when it has been satisfied.
A. The Township shall include within its annual municipal budget, at
minimum, $105,000 as a municipal contribution stipend to be divided
and distributed to EMS providers that primarily are incorporated to
service North Brunswick.
B. Funding will be distributed on a quarterly basis, minus any amounts
due payable to the Township for fuel or other municipal fees.
C. The municipal contribution shall serve as payment to the EMS provider
in a lump sum representing all uncollected, deductible and out-ofpocket
amounts owed to the provider at the end of any calendar year,
for basic life support emergency ambulance services received by bona
fide Township residents in the previous calendar year. A provider
accepting this contribution has been recognized as being acceptable
under applicable federal law by the Office of Inspector General, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services ("OIG"), pursuant to OIG
Advisory Opinion 14-09 for Township residents.
D. The municipal contribution shall also serve as payment to the EMS
provider in a lump sum representing amounts owed to the EMS
provider for basic life support emergency ambulance services received
by North Brunswick municipal officials and emergency volunteer staff,
when services were provided as the result of a work-related event.
E. For an EMS provider that is physically located within the municipality,
the Township shall waive property taxes annually, as a municipal
contribution to the EMS provider, regardless of whether they are
incorporated as volunteer or nonprofit, so long as they are primarily
incorporated to service North Brunswick.
F. For an EMS provider that is physically located within the municipality,
the Township shall waive municipal water and sewer charges, as a
municipal contribution to the EMS provider, so long as they are
primarily incorporated to service North Brunswick.
G. For an EMS provider that is physically located within the municipality,
the Township shall waive refuse and recycling charges, as a municipal
contribution to the EMS provider, so long as they are primarily
incorporated to service North Brunswick. Excluded from municipal
disposal shall be any construction debris, medical waste, biohazardous
containers, needles or pharmaceutical waste.
§ 164-11 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN § 164-12
161:255
§ 164-13. Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 164-14. Membership.
H. For an EMS provider that is physically located within the municipality,
the Township shall provide snow removal services for their parking lot
and as an assist in transport efforts, as a municipal contribution to the
EMS provider, so long as they are primarily incorporated to service
North Brunswick.
I. The Township shall budget, at minimum, $25,000 annually, to be paid
on a dollar-for-dollar basis, based on the EMS fee schedule, when the
EMS provider attends a municipal or school-sponsored event within the
Township.
J. The Township shall budget, and provide a workers' compensation policy
for volunteer members of an EMS provider primarily incorporated to
service North Brunswick. It shall be incumbent upon the EMS provider
to maintain an up-to-date member list with the municipal official
designated to oversee the policy, and to ensure coverage of their
volunteer staff.
K. EMS providers that primarily are incorporated to service North
Brunswick shall be able to submit capital funding requests to the
municipality in April of each fiscal year. While no commitment will made
in advance for approval of funding, providers will be given
consideration each year based on the needs of their organization and
that of the municipality.
A. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
shall provide the Township Emergency Management Coordinator with a
current copy of its Standard Operating Guidelines for inclusion in the
Township Emergency Operations Plan and will provide, as updated,
Standard Operating Guidelines for inclusion in the plan, from time to
time, as such are modified.
B. The EMS provider designee may be required to meet quarterly, or as
determined by the Township officials to review the coordination and
delivery of emergency services (Police, Fire, OEM) and the coordination
of emergency preparedness.
A. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
shall conduct criminal background checks, to be performed by the New
Jersey State Police, on all prospective members before a person can
provide service to the community and be admitted to membership in the
EMS provider's agency.
B. The EMS provider will verify that no prospective or current members
are included within the list of excluded individuals and entities
published by the OIG (the "OIG exclusion list"). Any individual whose
§ 164-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 164-14
161:256
§ 164-15. Applicability of article provisions.
Indemnification against the Township under this article shall apply to the
following, among other things (the listing of which is not intended to limit
in any way the scope of indemnification):
§ 164-16. Nonapplicability of article provisions.
Indemnification under this article shall not apply, however, to any liability
for an act or omission constituting a crime, actual fraud, actual malice or
willful misconduct. "Willful misconduct," as used in this article, includes but
is not limited to acting knowingly and clearly outside the scope of one's
authority.
§ 164-17. Provisions to apply to excess of insurance against losses.
The indemnity provided by this article shall apply only in excess of all
insurance, regardless of the ownership of such insurance, against any loss
or losses covered by the indemnity provided by this article.
Chapter 165
EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC
§ 165-1. Power to impose regulations by proclamation.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor, or in the event of his absence,
disability or other inability to act, the Mayor and Council by a majority
vote determines that, an emergency exists as a result of mob action or
name appears on the OIG exclusion list will not be allowed to
participate as a member of the EMS provider.
C. Any EMS provider, when servicing the North Brunswick community,
shall annually provide the Township with updated rosters detailing the
names and titles for each EMS provider member.
D. The EMS provider shall notify the Township and/or any Public Safety
Director, as may be appointed from time to time, and OEM when
changes to the membership roster occur.
A. Liability for an injury or death resulting from the exercise of judgment
or discretion vested in an emergency medical provider.
B. Liability for the exercise of discretion in determining whether to seek or
whether to provide the resources necessary for the purchase of
equipment, the construction or maintenance of facilities, the hiring of
personnel and, in general, for the provision of providing adequate
emergency medical services.
C. Liability arising out of the acts or omissions of an emergency medical
provider in carrying out his or her ministerial functions.
§ 164-14 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 165-1
165:257
other civil disobedience, including riot, rout or unlawful assembly, or there
is real and present danger thereof, causing or likely to cause danger of
injury to or damages to persons or property, he shall have the power to
impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations deemed by
him necessary to preserve the peace and order of the township:
§ 165-2. When proclamation of emergency to become effective.
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance to news media or immediate dissemination to the public,
its posting on a bulletin board in the Municipal Building and, where feasible,
by public-address systems throughout the township.
§ 165-3. Duration, extension of emergency.
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof or upon
the issuance of a proclamation declaring an emergency no longer exists,
whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency may be
extended for such additional comparable periods of time as determined
necessary by the Mayor of the township.
§ 165-4. Prohibited acts during emergencies.
During the period of such emergency, the following regulations shall be
observed:
A. To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the township, thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith
remove themselves from the public streets, areas, parks or other public
places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance
operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining
essential public services, firemen and township-authorized or -
requested law enforcement officers and personnel shall be exempted
from such curfew.
B. To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within
the township for the period of the emergency, such businesses to
include, but not limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors or firearms
or ammunition.
C. To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
D. To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the township to assist in preserving and
keeping the peace within the township.
E. Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary in his judgment
for the protection of life and property.
§ 165-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 165-4
165:258
§ 165-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 166
PARADES, SPECIAL EVENTS AND SIMILAR ASSEMBLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 69.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 106.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 109.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 116.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 131.
Exhibitions, shows, theatrical places — See
Ch. 168.
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 238.
A. No person shall make, carry, possess or use any type of Molotov
cocktail, gasoline or petroleum base firebomb or other incendiary
missile.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or
public place or in any motor vehicle driven or parked thereon.
C. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick or weapon
or other object capable of being used as a weapon unlawfully against
the persons or property of another, provided that anything herein
contained shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or other person
engaged lawfully in enforcing the emergency restrictions.
D. No person shall carry or transport gasoline or other flammable or
combustible liquid products in any container other than a gasoline tank
properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
E. No person shall intercept or interfere with police and/or fire radio
broadcasts.
§ 165-4 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 165-5
165:259

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Application Required
§ 166-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings
set forth below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES — Fees due by the applicant prior to hosting a
special event, which are based on the type of event being hosted and
permits needed, including but not limited to the following; health inspection
fees, Fire Official fees (fireworks), alcohol sales areas (beer gardens), and
use of municipal parks or property.
ADMISSION FEE — Fee or admission amount that is charged (or voluntary
contributions solicited) for participation in the special event.
APPLICATION FEE — Nonrefundable municipal fee included with an
application that is required to reimburse the Township for its reasonable
and necessary costs in receiving, processing and reviewing event
applications.
CLERK — The Municipal Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick.
EVENT CATEGORY — As used in this chapter, shall mean and include
the type of event being hosted, including but not limited to the following:
community, parade, commercial, flash mob, athletic/sporting event, or
scholar competition event. Application fees, administrative fees and
municipal fees will vary by type of event.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The head of the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Township
of North Brunswick.
MAJOR (LARGE) EVENT — Greater than 1,000 attendees/participants.
MINOR (SMALL) EVENT — Fewer than 1,000 attendees/participants.
MUNICIPAL FEES — Fees for the planned or unplanned use of municipal
resources required to conduct or to continue to host a special event which
is the responsibility of the applicant (fire, refuse and recycling, park staff,
water/sewer, inspection fees, Office of Emergency Management, vendor
fees, and regular police duty).
OTHER FEES — Fees for the planned or unplanned related costs associated
with a special event, including, but not limited to, off-duty Police services,
ambulance and first aid, municipal, state or federal fines assessed,
insurance premiums, bonding costs, nonrefundable deposits, late fees and
private property agreement fees.
PARADE — Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, assembly, pageant,
automobile road rally, motorcycle race or enduro, bicycle race, rally, tour, or
similar function, procession, foot race, marathon or the like, of any kind or
any similar display, or horse rides or events, in or upon any street, park or
other public place under Township jurisdiction.
§ 166-1 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-1
165:261
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including a charitable, religious,
membership, hospital or not-for-profit corporation.
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT — Any planned special event not hosted by the
municipality that anticipates a large gathering, including but not limited
to the following: a circus, carnival, fair, festival/celebration, concert,
exhibition, car show, parade/procession, expo, fundraiser, scholar event
competition, multi-team organized sporting event, run/walk/bike/triathlon,
hobby event.
SPECIAL EVENT — As used in this chapter, shall mean and include any
organized event with 50 or more persons, planned to assemble in unison.
Excluded from this definition are events within the scope of a parks facility
use permit or agreement, events organized under a school or county
approval process, and events included under a private property permit
or other land use approval (church/hotel), intended to take place for a
specified time, not exceeding 30 days. Said event may or may not take
place entirely or partly upon Township property, including a sidewalk, street
or right-of-way which is intended to draw participants, spectators or the
general public.
SPORTING EVENT — As used in this chapter, shall be defined as an event
where an element of sport is the focus of the competition or celebration,
involving competitors and spectators who have gathered to participate, or
watch, the event.
§ 166-2. Events that require making application to Township.
A. No person shall engage in, organize, participate in, form or start any
parade, function or event unless a special event application has been
made and approved by the Township. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to ensure all event-related activities comply with local, state
and federal laws.
B. Application for approval of a special event must be made to the
Township under any one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) When a special event, as defined in this chapter, is to be held on (or
partially on) municipal property that is anticipated to exceed 50
participants;
(2) When a special event, as defined in this chapter, is to be held on or
off municipal property that is anticipated to exceed 1,000
participants;
(3) When a special event, as defined in this chapter, exceeds the
participants cited (50/1,000) and includes any of the following
activities: prepared food that is being given or sold to the general
public, raffles are conducted, entertainment is provided, open to
the public is the sale or consumption of alcohol under a temporary
permit, music or sound amplification is used, fair or craft show
§ 166-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-2
165:262
sales, amusement rides and/or inflatable amusement devices are
included with entertainment, a band has been scheduled to play,
and/or farm animals are present;
(4) When a sporting, educational or recreational event, not sponsored
by the Township or North Brunswick Board of Education, is
anticipated to exceed the participants cited (50/1,000), at any given
time during the program, with interactive opening ceremonies,
closing ceremonies and structured sporting events;
(5) When a special event, as defined in this chapter, has an identifiable
term, not exceeding 30 days;
(6) When the event has an impact on municipal services, including, but
not limited to, fire, police, public works and emergency services;
(7) When a special event is reoccurring, a new application must be
made each time.
C. Exceptions for making application. Events excluded from this chapter
are:
(1) Processions and gatherings coordinated for the purpose of a
funeral.
(2) Processions and gatherings coordinated for the purpose of a
wedding.
(3) Students going to and from school events or participating in sports
or educational activities under the immediate supervision of the
North Brunswick Board of Education.
(4) When the event or activity falls under an existing or separate
municipal agreement or facility use agreement.
(5) When participation exceeds 1,000 attendees from an existing North
Brunswick company gathered during the course of its business.
(6) When participation exceeds 50, but is less than 1,000 attendees,
from an existing North Brunswick residence as part of a family
gathering endorsed by the property owner.
(7) Municipal sponsored events (example: Heritage Day, Memorial
Day).
(8) Processions sponsored, sanctioned or approved by a governmental
agency, including but not limited to the Township Council, North
Brunswick Board of Education, or Fire Department, acting within
the scope of its functions.
(9) Processions and gatherings arising out of labor disputes.
(10) Processions and gatherings sponsored by houses of worship for the
purpose of a religious ceremony.
§ 166-2 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-2
165:263
(11) Advocacy groups that are gathered to protest in a peaceful manner.
D. Exceptions for making application - events regulated by state or federal
guidelines:
(1) Demonstrations, rallies or actions that could incite violence of any
kind.
(2) Flash mob events that are not organized in a formal manner and do
not have municipal approval in advance.
(3) Events occurring on municipal property that may promote the
hatred or derision of any group and may be likely or intended to
cause unreasonable danger to the health or safety of any person or
targeted group of people.
§ 166-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-2
165:264
ARTICLE II
Processes for Application, Review, Approval and Appeal
§ 166-3. Application process.
§ 166-4. Review process.
A. To request a special event permit, the event organizer must make
application to the Township. Application forms are available in the
office of the Municipal Clerk and can be downloaded from the
Township's website at www.northbrunswicknj.gov.
B. The event organizer shall be responsible for making application, which
shall be submitted to the office of the Municipal Clerk, along with any
nonrefundable application fee(s).
C. To allow time for the Municipal Clerk to disseminate to the various
departments for review and comment, the application, along with
supporting documents, must be submitted under the following timeline:
(1) At least 120 days prior to the event for large events (greater than
1,000 attendees).
(2) At least 90 days prior to the event, if the event is taking place for
the first time or has significantly changed since the last time the
event was held (greater than 50, but fewer than 1,000 attendees).
(3) At least 60 days prior to the event, if the event is an annual event
and has no significant changes (greater than 50, but fewer than
1,000 attendees).
D. Failure to submit a timely application may result in the event not
receiving approval before the event date(s).
E. The event organizer shall provide a clear description of the special
event in their application, along with completing the checklist, in
addition to the following, if applicable:
(1) The name of the event;
(2) Special event application form and checklist;
(3) Application fee;
(4) Detailed narrative of cause, event type, and date(s); and
(5) The location with site plan or route map.
A. Based on the initial inquiry, application and information provided, the
Municipal Clerk will circulate the request for a special event permit to
the applicable departments for review and recommendations. The event
organizer may be contacted by municipal officials to meet and/or
provide additional information as part of the approval process,
including but not limited to the following, as applicable:
§ 166-3 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-4
165:265
(1) The date(s) and hours of setup, operation (including any rain
dates), and dismantling;
(2) Sketches of the event location with a plan layout;
(3) The total anticipated participation volume, along with the
maximum estimated attendance at any one time;
(4) Type of event category;
(5) Activities to be provided at the event;
(6) The budget (including a copy of the admission fee schedule and
vendor agreements);
(7) A list of food service providers and tent vendors;
(8) Traffic control plan;
(9) Parking management plan;
(10) Security plan;
(11) Communication plan;
(12) Copy of the policy for handling a missing child or person with
intellectual disability;
(13) Medical plan;
(14) Janitorial and cleanup plan during and after event;
(15) Building permitting (electrical/fire/plumbing);
(16) Provisions for potable water;
(17) Provisions for fire prevention and safety;
(18) ADA compliance;
(19) Inclement weather plan;
(20) Event cancellation plan;
(21) Noise control plan (amplified sound or music entertainment);
(22) Notification plan for entities that may be impacted by the event;
(23) Restoration and cleanup plan (including street sweeping, if
applicable);
(24) Environmental impact plan that identifies method of disposal for
recycling, solid waste, portable restrooms and sanitation
equipment;
(25) Transportation plan;
§ 166-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-4
165:266
(26) A copy of the event schedule, flyer, content marketing and/or
advertisement;
(27) A copy of signage that will be used;
(28) A copy of event staff contact information;
(29) Copy of bonding or other guarantee arrangement;
(30) Copy of insurance and endorsement coverage;
(31) Responses to requests for clarification;
(32) Supplemental documentation;
(33) Acknowledgement and agreement to financial responsibility for
municipal fees;
(34) Proof that payment (or provisions for payment) has been made for
any municipal or nonmunicipal agreement that requires fees paid
by the applicant in advance; and
(35) Council-approved certification of municipal contribution if
requesting for waiver of municipal fees.
B. Event organizers may be required to file for permits, enter into
agreements and/or supply documents required by local, state or federal
rules and regulations as a condition of approval, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) General:
(a) Special events agreement;
(b) Business or merchant license;
(c) Temporary retail food establishment or catering approval;
(d) Supply copy of any waiver and release of liability forms;
(e) Consent letter from property owner if private property is used;
(f) Board approval or zoning variance;
(g) Health inspection permit; and
(h) Raffle/bingo permit.
(2) Public safety:
(a) Contract for police off-duty;
(b) Camera/drone/security surveillance agreement with Police
Department;
(c) Street or road closure permit;
§ 166-4 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-4
165:267
§ 166-5. Approval process.
(d) Emergency medical services provider agreement;
(e) Alcohol-special occasion permit;
(f) Lyft/Uber/or other on-demand transportation company
contract; and
(g) Tow trucking agreement.
(3) Fire Official:
(a) Food preparation using an open flame;
(b) Tent/stage setup;
(c) Fire inspections and/or permit;
(d) Fireworks/pyrotechnics permit;
(e) Electrical/generator use and/or hookup;
(f) Emergency management plan; and
(g) Permit from the Bureau of Fire Prevention for the use of tents
or various cooking devices.
(4) Public Works:
(a) Street cleaning;
(b) Trash/recycling receptacles;
(c) Trash/recycling removal;
(d) Barricades and postings; and
(e) Porta potties.
(5) Parks:
(a) Use of municipal facilities agreement.
(6) Building construction:
(a) Electrical/generator use and/or hookup; and
(b) Building permit(s).
A. When the event organizer has met all application requirements, and the
Municipal Clerk has received an approved sign-off from the various
municipal departments, the Mayor and/or Business Administrator is
empowered to approve applications that have a sixty- or ninety-day
permit process.
§ 166-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-5
165:268
§ 166-6. Appeal process.
B. Applications with a 120-day permit process shall be approved by
resolution of the governing body.
C. After the approval of an application, a one-time special event permit will
be issued by the office of the Municipal Clerk to the event organizer.
A. Upon receiving a notice of a permit denial from the Municipal Clerk, the
applicant shall be able to request a public hearing to appeal the
decision in front of the Township Council, which shall serve collectively
as the hearing panel, no later than 10 days from the date of the denial
letter.
B. During the hearing, the applicant may be required to modify the
application, provide supplemental information, or agree to additional
terms, as a condition of approval from the appeal process.
C. In the event the application is denied after an appeal hearing, the
applicant must cancel the event.
D. The Township shall not be liable, when denying an application or an
appeal, for any fees incurred by the applicant due to nonrefundable
deposits, cancellation fees, application costs and labor and material
expended.
§ 166-5 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-6
165:269

ARTICLE III
Waivers and Compliance
§ 166-7. Waiver for municipal fees.
A. During the application process, upon receiving from the Township a
statement of the financial responsibility for municipal services
requested or required, the applicant shall be able to request a waiver,
based on value or category of municipal services provided.
(1) Example No. 1, "Value" — The total for municipal services is
anticipated to be $10,000. The applicant proposes to provide a
piece of parks equipment to the Township valued at $4,000. The
statement of financial responsibility would be reduced to $6,000.
(2) Example No. 2, "Category" — The total for municipal services is
anticipated to be $10,000. Included in the total cost is $2,000 for
the refuse and recycling services. The applicant proposes to have a
nonmunicipal provider such as Waste Management provide refuse
and recycling services. The statement of financial responsibility
will be reduced to $8,000. During the event, should the
nonmunicipal provider fail to perform services, and the
municipality is required to take command of the service, the fee for
the category will be reinstated, regardless of any out-of-pocket fees
the applicant may have incurred with the nonmunicipal provider.
B. To be considered for a waiver, the application must be completed and
approved as-is or as-modified by the Township Council prior to
receiving permit approval.
(1) Example - The applicant shall not wait until after the event to make
a request to the Township Council for municipal fees to be forgiven.
C. The following are situations where an applicant can apply for a waiver
of municipal fees.
(1) Use of nonmunicipal resources.
(a) To be considered for a waiver of a municipal fee, the
application must include a certification, signed and approved
by the respective municipal department head, that the services
procured by a nonmunicipal entity meets the standards and
requirements under local, state or federal regulations and the
applicant is waiving their request for municipal services.
(b) Should waived municipal services be requested or required
during the event, the applicant shall be responsible for
municipal fees incurred.
(2) Municipal support.
(a) To be considered for a waiver of municipal fees, the application
must include a proposed list of municipal support that the
§ 166-7 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-7
165:271
§ 166-8. Fees exempt from receiving waiver.
applicant's organization has agreed to provide or supply to the
Township within 12 months following the event.
(b) The items on the applicant's list shall be numbered and
arranged in order of supply to the Township, with Item 1 on the
list being the first to be provided.
(c) The total value of listed goods and services shall equal, dollar
for dollar, the value of the statement of the financial
responsibility for municipal services, either requested or
required.
(d) Waivers granted accepting an applicant's proposed municipal
support in lieu of payment shall be awarded by resolution of
the Township Council and included with the application.
(e) While the applicant can propose the type of municipal support
to be provided by the organization, Township officials can
make a recommendation as to what type of support is best to
serve the community. The applicant may be required to amend,
add, delete, or supplement items on the list as a condition of
approval.
A. The application fee is a nonrefundable municipal fee that is exempt
from being waived, and must be included with application to reimburse
the Township for its reasonable and necessary costs in receiving,
processing and reviewing special event applications.
B. Administrative fees due by the applicant prior to hosting a special event
are exempt from being waived. These fees are based on the type of
event being hosted and permits needed, including but not limited to the
following: health inspection fees, Fire Official fees (fireworks), alcohol
sales areas (beer gardens), and park facility agreements.
C. Also exempt from being waived are planned or unplanned related costs
associated with a special event, including but not limited to:
(1) Nonmunicipal vendor fees;
(2) Off-duty police services;
(3) Emergency medical services - ambulance and first aid;
(4) Municipal, state or federal fines assessed;
(5) Insurance premiums and bonding costs;
(6) Nonrefundable deposits, interest or late fees; and
(7) Private property usage agreement fees.
§ 166-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-8
165:272
ARTICLE IV
Fees: Application; Permitting; Municipal Services; Off-Duty Police
Services
§ 166-9. Application fee schedule.
The following application fees are nonrefundable:
§ 166-10. Permit(s)/license fees.
The applicant shall be required to pay for the cost(s) of local, state and/
or federal permit(s) and/or license fees that are required to hold the
entertainment activity.
§ 166-11. Municipal services fee schedule.
A. Fifty dollars for nonprofits with their place of business in North
Brunswick.
B. Two hundred fifty dollars for nonprofits with their place of business
outside North Brunswick.
C. Two hundred fifty dollars for all other organizations or groups.
A. Compensation for municipal services shall be at the following rates per
worker. This includes time spent for event preparation, setup, operation
and dismantling:
$39 per hour for FY2019 (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
$58 per hour for FY2019 (after hours, holidays and weekends)
$40 per hour for FY2020 (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
$60 per hour for FY2020 (after hours, holidays and weekends)
$41 per hour for FY2021 (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
$61.50 per hour for FY2021 (after hours, holidays and weekends)
$42 per hour for FY2022 (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
$63 per hour for FY2022 (after hours, holidays and weekends)
B. To the extent available, municipal vehicles and equipment used shall be
provided at no additional cost. Additional fees incurred from use of a
third-party vendor and/or disposal fees will be the responsibility of the
event applicant. Any charges for said fees shall be invoiced at the same
rate as that paid by the Township.
C. To the extent available, the supply of municipal tables, chairs, speakers,
refuse and recycling containers, and nonperishable supplies shall be
§ 166-9 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-11
165:273
§ 166-12. Off-duty police services.
Any applicant required to retain the services of police officers shall be
required to enter into a contract with the Township of North Brunswick
Police Department for off-duty services pursuant to Chapter 69 of the
Municipal Code. The applicant shall be required to pay for any costs
associated with the agreement terms. Off-duty contracts shall include, but
not be limited to, the nature of duties to be performed, the location of said
duties, the date and hours of service, the rate of payment for services to the
officers, administrative fees to the Township and fees, if any, for the use of
Township-owned equipment. The contract may also provide for deposits in
advance for services to be performed. The Director of Police is empowered
to execute a contract for extra-duty police-related activities on behalf of
the Township of North Brunswick in accordance with Chapter 69 of the
Municipal Code.
provided at no additional cost. The event applicant shall be financially
responsible for municipal property damaged during the event. Fees for
damaged items shall be assessed and invoiced at the same rate as that
paid by the Township.
D. All personnel provided by the Township shall remain the employees of
the Township and shall not be under the supervision or control of the
event applicant.
§ 166-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-12
165:274
ARTICLE V
Conflicts; Compliance
§ 166-13. Conflicts with other laws.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than is set forth in any other ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick
or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick or
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in
any such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 166-14. Compliance with Township ordinances.
A. All applicants shall be subject to municipal ordinances, collectively
known as the Municipal Code, and shall secure necessary approvals and
permits from the Township when necessary.
B. Any person or entity who fails to comply with the terms of this chapter,
including the failure to obtain a permit for a special event, shall be
liable for a fine in an amount up to $2,000.
C. The Township additionally shall have the authority to terminate the
special event and/or issue an appropriate notice of violation for the
failure to comply with the terms of this chapter.
D. The following chapters of the Municipal Code set forth requirements
and fees, as applicable to a special event.
Chapter 69 Police Department, Art. VI,
Employment Outside Entities
Chapter 103 Alarm Systems
Chapter 106 Alcoholic Beverages
Chapter 109 Amusement Devices
Chapter 131 Bingo and Raffles
Chapter 147 Uniform Construction Codes
Chapter 158 Dumpster Regulations
Chapter 164 Emergency Medical Services
Chapter 168 Exhibitions, Shows, Theatrical
Places
Chapter 173 Fire Lanes and Fire Zones
Chapter 176 Fire Prevention
Chapter 184 Solid Waste
Chapter 188 Hawking and Peddling
Chapter 205 Land Use
§ 166-13 EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC § 166-14
165:275
Chapter 216 Littering
Chapter 234 Parks and Playgrounds
Chapter 238 Peace and Good Order, Art. II,
Noise
Chapter 258 Recycling
Chapter 285 Smoking
Chapter 342 Vending Machines, Coin-Operated
Chapter 356 Wreckers (Towing)
Chapter 399 Board of Health: Nuisances,
Public Health
Chapter 411 Board of Health: Refuse
Chapter 416 Board of Health: Retail Food
Establishments
§ 166-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 166-14
165:276
Chapter 168
EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES
§ 168-1. License required.
No person or persons having the ownership, management or control of
any theater, open-air, drive-in or otherwise, shall produce any performance,
show, motion picture or exhibition therein, or suffer or permit any
performance, show, motion picture or exhibition to be given therein, without
a license first had and obtained as hereinafter provided.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
THEATER — Any place devoted to public amusement wherein dramatic,
operatic, vaudeville or burlesque performance, motion picture exhibitions
or other like forms of amusement are provided for public entertainment for
which an admission fee is charged.
§ 168-3. Application for license.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing to
the Clerk of the township and shall give such information as he may deem
requisite to determine the suitability of the premises and the fitness of the
applicant to conduct the same.
§ 168-4. Issuance of license; power to revoke or suspend.
All such licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk under his hand and
seal after approval of the issuance of the license by the Mayor and Council
and upon payment of the fee fixed therefor, and not otherwise, and all
such licenses shall respectively state the purpose for which the same shall
have been issued, the number of the license, the location of the premises
and the name of the persons licensed. The Commissioner of Police may, in
his discretion, after public hearing, suspend, revoke or annul such license
whenever in his opinion the public welfare requires that such action be
taken.
§ 168-5. Censorship; hearings.
A. Whenever, in the judgment of the Commissioner of Police, any
entertainment, exhibition, play, act, motion picture or performance
offends against public decency or morals, or any such entertainment,
exhibition, play, motion picture, act or performance advertised to be
given is objectionable from a moral standpoint or likely to create public
disorder, he shall notify the manager of the theater wherein such
entertainment, exhibition, play, act, motion picture or performance is
advertised to be produced that the entertainment, exhibition, play, act,
§ 166-14 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 168-5
168:277
§ 168-6. Fees; duration of licenses.
motion picture or performance shall not, pending a public hearing, be
given, and he may cause the same, in each case pending public hearing,
to be censored before being produced in public, and may order any
and all objectionable language and features eliminated before being
produced in public, or he may suppress such entertainment, exhibition,
play, act, motion picture or performance altogether if in his opinion
the public good requires such action. No person shall produce any
entertainment, exhibition, play, act, motion picture or performance, or
permit the same to be produced, in disregard of any notice given or
order made by said Commissioner under the authority conferred upon
him by this section.
B. Any licensee whose performance has been subjected to an order of the
Commissioner of Police as provided in this section may request public
hearing respecting the same, which hearing shall thereupon be
designated within a period of three days from the receipt of such
request, filed with the Commissioner of Police or the Clerk of the
township, unless such licensee shall request further time for the
preparation for such hearing, in which case it shall be held within a
period of 10 days. After such hearing, the Commissioner of Police may
continue, modify or revoke any order respecting objectionable
performance theretofore made, which order, before becoming effective,
shall be approved by a majority of the members of the Township
Council.
A. The license fee for open-air theaters shall be:
(1) Three hundred seats or less, $100 per year.
(2) From 301 to 1,000 seats, $200 per year.
(3) From 1,001 to 2,000 seats, $300 per year.
(4) In excess of 2,000 seats, $400 per year.
B. The license fee for open-air theaters commonly known as drive-in
theaters shall be:
(1) For theaters having an automobile capacity of 300 to 650, $300 per
year.
(2) For theaters having an automobile capacity in excess of 650, $500
per year.
C. Such licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are
issued, but licenses may be issued for any part of a year upon
application therefor, the rate for such proportionate part of the year to
be fixed by the Clerk of the township based upon the yearly fees fixed
therefor.
§ 168-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 168-7
168:278
§ 168-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 173
FIRE LANES AND FIRE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 176.
§ 173-1. Designation of fire lanes and fire zones.
§ 173-2. Notice to affected property owners.
§ 173-3. Intervention by Township for failure to comply.
In the event that a property owner fails to comply with the requirements
of § 173-2, the Bureau of Fire Safety may arrange to have signs installed
and pavement painted at the expense of the property owner, said amount
to be assessed against the property affected and collected through the Tax
Collector's office.
A. Certain areas shall be designated as fire lanes to provide clear access to
buildings for fire-fighting equipment in the event of an emergency. Fire
hydrants and water connection devices located on local, county, state
and private roads shall be designated as fire zones.
B. Fire lanes and fire zones may be located on public or private property.
C. Fire lanes and fire zones shall be established by the Township Fire
Official, and drawings of properties delineating fire lanes and fire zones
shall be kept on file in the office of the Bureau of Fire Safety.
A. Notice that a property requires the posting of signs or painting of fire
lanes and fire zones shall be sent to the property owner by the Bureau
of Fire Safety either by personal delivery or certified mail.
B. Within 30 days of receipt of notice, said property owner shall install
required signs and paint required stripes.
§ 168-7 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 173-4
168:279
§ 173-4. Parking, stopping or standing of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, in any designated fire lane or fire zone or obstruct any
designated fire lane or fire zone. No person shall park, stop or leave
standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, within 15 feet of any
fire hydrant or other Fire Department water connection device.
§ 173-5. Restrictions for loading zones.
In loading zones designated herein, attended vehicles may stop solely for
the purpose of loading or unloading and only for the period of time
necessary to accomplish such loading or unloading.
§ 173-6. Installation of signs; painting of lines.
§ 173-7. Enforcement agencies.
The Bureau of Fire Safety, the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the North
Brunswick Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction in policing
and issuing parking summons.
§ 173-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Areas designated as fire lanes and fire zones shall be identified by signs
placed along their entire length at intervals of no less than 100 feet
apart. The words "Fire Lane (or Fire Zone) No Parking or Standing"
shall appear on the sign, with lettering three inches or more in height.
Diagonal yellow lines shall be painted on the pavement along the length
of the fire lanes and fire zones where possible. Fire lanes shall have a
minimum width of 18 feet. [Amended 2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
B. Fire zones associated with fire hydrants and water connection devices
shall be identified with yellow paint extending 15 feet in both directions
on the curb and/or pavement where possible.
A. Property owners failing to install signs or paint pavement within 30
days of receipt of notice shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Fire Safety Code.
B. Violators who park illegally in a fire lane or fire zone shall be subject to
a fine of $75. Said fine shall be imposed on complaint and conviction in
the Municipal Court of the Township of North Brunswick.
C. All fines and penalties shall be paid to the Township of North Brunswick
treasury.
§ 173-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 173-8
168:280
Chapter 176
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
§ 173-8 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 173-8
168:281

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)61
§ 176-1. through § 176-11. (Reserved)
61.Editor's Note: Former Article I, General Provisions, consisting of §§ 176-1 through 176-11,
was repealed 1-17-1995.
§ 176-1 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 176-1
168:283

ARTICLE II
Administration of Uniform Fire Safety Act
[Amended 4-6-1992]
§ 176-12. Legislative findings.
The Mayor and Council find and determine as follows:
§ 176-13. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,63 the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township.
§ 176-14. Enforcing agency. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Safety/Fire Marshal's
office located within the municipal offices of the Township of North
Brunswick and shall be comprised of the Fire Official or Fire Marshal, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5, fire inspector(s) or Deputy Fire Marshal, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.3(b), and clerical help as necessary to carry out
the responsibilities of the agency.
§ 176-15. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act64
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township other than
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire
Code.
§ 176-16. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 176-14 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
A. The Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)62 was enacted for the
purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of minimum fire
safety standards throughout the State of New Jersey.
B. The Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to provide for
local enforcement and to establish local enforcement agencies for that
purpose.
C. It in is the best interest of the Township to have the Uniform Fire Safety
Act enforced locally.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 176-12 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 176-17
168:285
§ 176-17. Organization. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1;
2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
The local enforcing agency established by § 176-14 shall be comprised of
employees of the Township of North Brunswick under the direct supervision
and control of the Fire Marshal. His/her office shall be part of the municipal
offices within the Department of Community Development and shall be
under the supervision and control of the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee. The local enforcing agency established
by § 176-14 shall be comprised of employees of the Township of North
Brunswick under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Marshal.
§ 176-18. Appointments; terms of office; removal. [Amended
1-17-1995]
§ 176-19. Fire Official; investigations. [Amended 4-20-1992;
1-17-1995; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
Investigations required to be performed by the Bureau of Fire Safety shall
conform with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:71-33(a)25.
§ 176-20. Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-20-1992]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,65 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
of appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Middlesex County.
§ 176-21. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended
4-20-1992; 1-17-1995; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1; 6-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-19; 2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Uniform Fire
Safety Act66 and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs,
the following additional inspections and fees shall be required:
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of the
Fire Official who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
B. Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Fire Marshal/Fire Official and Inspector/Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and
other employees of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by
the Township Administrator for inefficiency or misconduct. Each
inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a designated
hearing officer. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 176-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 176-21
168:286
A. Single-family, two-family and multifamily homes:
(1) The Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire Marshal shall inspect for the
presence and good working order of smoke detectors, carbon
monoxide detectors, and fire extinguishers in all single-family, twofamily
and multifamily residences prior to resale or other change of
occupancy, and if the property is in compliance, shall issue an
appropriate certificate.
(2) The application fee for a certificate of compliance shall be based
upon the amount of time remaining before the change of occupancy
is expected, as follows:
(a) Requests received more than 10 business days prior to change
of occupant require a fee of $45.
(b) Requests received four to 10 business days prior to the change
of occupant requires a fee of $75.
(c) Requests received fewer than four business days prior to the
change of occupant requires a fee of $125.
(d) Requests for a certificate of compliance for two family and
multifamily homes will require an additional fee of $45.
(e) Any residence that requires a reinspection will require an
additional fee of $15.
B. Non-life-hazard uses. The Fire Marshal's office shall carry out periodic
inspections of non-life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs on a schedule of
once every three years. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
(1) The application fee shall be based on area square footage as
follows:
Area
(square feet) Fee
0 to 2,000 $55
2,001 to 5,000 $75
5,001 to 10,000 $100
10,001 to 25,000 $135
25,001 to 50,000 $165
50,001 to 100,000 $265
(2) For each additional 1,000 square feet, the fee shall be $2, or $0.002
per square foot.
(3) These fees shall be paid by the occupant using the facility.
§ 176-21 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 176-22
168:287
§ 176-22. Revenue generated. [Amended 4-20-1992; 1-17-1995;
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
Revenue generated by the Bureau of Fire Safety shall be deposited in the
North Brunswick Treasury, with the exception of penalties and dedicated
compensatory penalties. Pursuant to P.L. 1991 c. 489,67 funds received from
penalties imposed under the State Uniform Fire Code [N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12
10.(f) 2, Penalties, and N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12A 3(b), Dedicated Compensatory
Penalties.] shall be "dedicated by rider" specifically for supporting the
local enforcing agency and for firefighter training and/or new firefighting
equipment.
§ 176-23. Title. [Amended 4-20-1992]
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Fire Safety
Ordinance."
§ 176-24. Budget. [Added 1-17-1995]
The Fire Official shall prepare an annual operating budget and submit same
to the North Brunswick Finance Officer.
§ 176-25. Inspection and fees; issuance of zoning permit for use;
penalties. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
The Fire Official or Fire Inspector shall conduct an inspection prior to
the issuance of a zoning permit for use issued by the Zoning Officer each
time there is a change in tenant in a nonresidential building. The fee
for this change of use inspection shall be $0.08 per square foot of gross
floor are, subject to a maximum charge of $15,000. The square footage
of the overall area, as interpreted for fee purpose, shall be computed
as the product of the greatest width dimension and the greatest length
dimension (maximum width times maximum length) of each floor. If there
is a basement, mezzanine or similar floor, it shall be counted as one floor
in addition to the other floors. All revenue generated through the change
in use inspection prior to the issuance of the zoning permit for use shall be
applied to offset the salary expenses of the Bureau of Fire Safety.
A. Tenants who occupy building space and who fail to obtain a zoning
permit for use shall be subject to a penalty fine not to exceed $1,000
and an additional individual daily penalty not to exceed $500 per day, as
determined by the Zoning Officer. If the tenant fails to pay the penalty
fine levied by the Township against the tenant, then the Township
reserves the right to seek enforcement and collection of violation of this
section against the property owner.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-210.
§ 176-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 176-25
168:288
Chapter 180
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 158.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 165.
Land use — See Ch. 205.
Sewers — See Ch. 276.
§ 176-25 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 176-25
168:289

ARTICLE I
Authorization; Findings; Purpose
§ 180-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Township of North
Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 180-2. Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of Township of North Brunswick are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in
other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§ 180-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 180-1 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-4
168:291
§ 180-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 180-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-4
168:292
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 180-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual-
or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral-loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
§ 180-5 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-5
168:293
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special-purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 180-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-5
168:294
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured
home" also includes park trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
§ 180-5 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-5
168:295
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 180-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-5
168:296
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 180-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of North Brunswick, Middlesex County, New
Jersey.
§ 180-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 180-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of North
Brunswick from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
§ 180-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of North Brunswick,
Community No. 340271, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Middlesex County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated July 6,
2010.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Middlesex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Nos. 34023C0108F,
34023C0109F, 34023C0117F, 34023C0126F, 34023C0127F,
34023C0128F, 34023C0129F, 34023C0131F, 34023C0133F,
34023C0136F, 34023C0137F; the effective date of which is July 6,
2010.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 710
Hermann Road, North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902.
§ 180-6 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-10
168:297
§ 180-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 180-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Township of North Brunswick, any officer or employee thereof or the
Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 180-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-11
168:298
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 180-12. Development permit required; application; fee.
§ 180-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 180-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 180-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Department of Community Development and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 180-17B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. The application for a development permit shall require a nonrefundable
fee of $100.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 180-18A are met.
§ 180-12 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-14
168:299
§ 180-15. Variance procedure.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 180-7,
the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer § 180-17.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 180-12C.
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 180-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Mayor and Council shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
§ 180-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-15
168:300
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Middlesex County
Superior Court by way of an action in lieu of prerogative writs
pursuant to Rule 4:69-1 et seq. of the Rules Governing the Courts of
the State of New Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 180-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 180-15 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-15
168:301
(6) The Planning Board, Township Engineer and Township Clerk shall
maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance
Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
items in § 180-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 180-15A(4) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 180-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-15
168:302
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 180-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 180-16 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-16
168:303
§ 180-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 180-7 or § 180-14B, the following standards
are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation;
(2) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM, require that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
§ 180-16 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-17
168:304
§ 180-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 180-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, either:
(1) Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and within any AO
Zone on the municipality's DFIRM, require that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified); and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in § 180-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 180-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
(3) No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
have been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
§ 180-17 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, THEATRICAL PLACES § 180-18
168:305
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths of a foot
at any point.
D. The placement of any mobile homes shall be prohibited in a floodway.
§ 180-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 180-18
168:306
Chapter 182
FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics, Code of — See Ch. 29.
§ 182-1. Short title.
An ordinance banning the use of government buildings and government
equipment for political fund-raising.
§ 182-2. Purpose.
Whereas, political contributions have a profound impact on government
decision making; and whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not presently
ban solicitation or acceptance of contributions by public office holders
and employees while on public property or by use of public facilities; and
whereas, a conflict may arise between the business of political fund-raising
and the business of government in town hall and other government-owned
premises, and this may cause a distraction from the people's business,
and whereas, the most appropriate method to prevent this conflict and to
ensure the integrity of government decisions is the prohibition of political
fund-raising on or by use of public property; therefore, it is accordingly
found and determined that the paramount public interest in a clean and
accountable government requires the prohibition of political fund-raising on
public property or use of public facilities.
§ 182-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or political
organization at an election.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by a candidate, elected official or political organization and all
pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any such
transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE and APPOINTEE — Any person holding
elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the municipal
government or in any agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether
the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or uncompensated, and
any employee of municipal government or in any agency, commission, board
or office thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time.
§ 180-18 FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL § 182-3
182:307
MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department, board,
commission or agency thereof.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to or does aid or promote at the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office.
PROPERTY of the MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles, phones, fax
machines, computers or other office equipment or supplies and other real
or personal property owned, leased or controlled by the municipality, except
for public roads and open park land.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 182-4. General regulations.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions on
public property. No municipal official, employee or appointee may
solicit, commit to pay or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any
contribution for any candidate, elected official or political organization
while in or on the property of the municipality or utilizing the property
of the municipality.
B. Prohibited forms of fund-raising. Prohibited forms of fund-raising shall
include but are not limited to:
(1) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal telephone,
fax machine or computers.
(2) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property or the municipality.
(3) Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly
owned computers or privately owned personal computers while on
the property of the municipality.
(4) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(5) Sending correspondence which solicits contributions by use of
municipal facility, staff or municipal resources.
(6) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
(7) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to accept
or solicit contributions.
C. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of any employee,
appointed or elected official who observes any prohibited forms of fundraising
to report such conduct to the Municipal Ethics Board, if one
§ 182-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 182-4
182:308
§ 182-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 184
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 135.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 191.
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Recycling — See Ch. 258.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 262.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 274.
Brush, grass and weeds (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 375.
Refuse — See Ch. 411.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
421.
§ 184-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "North Brunswick Solid
Waste Collection Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to law in order to provide regulations for
the efficient collection of solid waste by the Township.
§ 184-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATED COLLECTION — A process by which the Township shall
collect garbage and refuse from designated areas by means of automated
vehicles and carts designated by the Township.
AUTOMATED COLLECTION CARTS — The specifically designed refuse
storage container which will be serviced by the automated collection
system.
exists, or in the alternative, to the Municipal Prosecutor and the
Municipal Clerk who shall report same to the governing body.
D. Whistle-blower provision. It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected
official or appointee to be dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or
otherwise intimidated for complying with the reporting requirements
mandated by this chapter.
§ 182-4 FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL § 184-3
182:309
BRUSH — Branches, twigs and cuttings from shrub and tree pruning
operations that have a diameter of less than five inches and Christmas trees.
BULK MATERIALS — Any nonrecyclable materials that are too large to fit
into the automated collection cart.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, CLASS #1 — Lumber, wallboard or other
materials or debris generated by a project that does not require a Township
permit.[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, CLASS #2 — Lumber, wallboard, or other
materials or debris generated by a project requiring a permit from the
Township.[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
CONTRACTED TREE AND BRUSH REMOVAL — Work that is scheduled
through agreement with a private service or commercial company.
CURBSIDE — A location in the public right-of-way in proximity to the
curb or in a similar area where a curb does not exist or in an alternate
location as determined by the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
GARBAGE/SOLID WASTE — Food waste, refuse, debris, wood scrap, foodcontaminated
containers, tissue paper, disposable diapers, etc., generated
from a residential, institutional edifice.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — The cuttings, trimmings and clippings of low-growing
green vegetative plants common to residential lawn areas.
LEAVES — Seasonal vegetative residue generated by deciduous trees
mainly during the autumn months and early spring in normal growth cycles.
WHITE GOODS — Items of all or mostly metal consistency, including but not
limited to household appliances, exercise machines, bicycles, swing sets,
refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, air conditioners, etc.
YARD WASTE — Any vegetative materials which are not commonly
recyclable in existing Township programs, including but not limited to seed
pods, flowering garden plants, vegetable plants, fruit tree discards, bark,
weeds, twigs, hedge clippings too small for bundling, any briar or thornbearing
branch or limb cuttings.
§ 184-4. Applicability; means of collection.
A. The Township of North Brunswick shall provide for the collection of
solid waste from the following properties:
(1) All residential structures with four or fewer units; at the option of
the Township, all qualified private communities as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2, commonly known as the "Condominium Service
Act"; and all other residential structures that are having their solid
waste picked up by the Township as of the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 184-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 184-4
182:310
§ 184-5. Collection procedures and policies.
(2) All nonresidential uses that are having their solid waste collected at
the curbside by the Township as of the effective date of this
chapter.
(3) Houses of worship, buildings on publicly owned land, the rescue
squad, fire departments, and fraternal organizations.
B. An automated collection system shall be used where designated by the
Township. In those parts of the Township where the automated
collection system is not functional, the Director of Public Works, or his
or her designee, shall determine whether the alternate means of
collection shall be by bulk container or standard watertight containers.
[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
A. Automated collection carts. [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
(1) Garbage shall be placed in the automated collection carts provided
by the Township for that purpose. Each residential use within the
Township that is having its solid waste collected at the curbside by
the Township as of the effective date of this chapter, and every
future residential use where the automated collection system is
determined feasible by the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee, shall receive one ninety-five-gallon cart for each dwelling
unit in the building. This automated collection cart shall be and
remain the property of North Brunswick Township and shall stay
with the dwelling unit it was assigned to, regardless of resale,
rental or other conditions. [Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No.
20-10]
(2) Each owner/renter may purchase from the Township one additional
automated collection cart for each dwelling unit. Such automated
collection cart shall be and remain the property of the individual
making the purchase.
(3) Each automated collection cart shall be placed for collection at the
curbside in a location designated by the Township for collection,
which shall be a minimum of three feet away from any obstruction
to the automated collection vehicle.
B. Nonautomated collection containers. In those parts of North Brunswick
where the Director of Public Works or his or her designee determines
that the automated collection system is not functional, garbage shall be
placed in watertight plastic or metal containers with a volume not to
exceed the total volume of two ninety-five-gallon automated collection
carts. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such properties.
Said receptacles shall be free from protruding nails, wires or sharp and
dangerous substances of any kind, and no single receptacle, together
§ 184-4 FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL § 184-5
182:311
with its contents, shall be of a greater weight than 40 pounds.
[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
C. Bulk containers. The Director of Public Works or his or her designee
may also designate areas for collection by bulk containers. [Amended
4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
D. Location of containers and materials. All materials and containers,
other than bulk containers and the automated collection carts provided
by the Township, shall be at the curbside. At no time shall materials be
placed at the curbside in a manner that presents a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare, or that hinders normal vehicle or pedestrian
traffic.
E. Yard waste. Yard waste, excluding brush and leaves, may be placed in
the automated collection carts hereinbefore set forth so it may be
readily emptied into municipal collection vehicles. At no time may grass
clippings, leaves, brush or yard raking be placed loose or in piles at the
curb, on sidewalks, gutters or streets where the same may be dispersed
by wind, stormwater runoff, forces of nature, passersby or traffic,
except as specified herein.
F. Leaves. Leaves shall be placed in biodegradable paper bags. Collection
will be between the months of October and December as routinely
scheduled by the Township. Each biodegradable bag shall not weigh
more than 40 pounds. [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03;
4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
G. Grass clippings.
(1) Residents are encouraged to recycle grass clippings year round by
use of a mulching mower.
(2) Alternatively, grass clippings may be included along with household
solid waste on regular automated refuse collection days. For
control and elimination of odorous residues, grass clippings must
be contained in plastic trash or lawn bags before placing in the
solid waste automated cart.
(3) Grass will not be collected as a bulk pickup.
H. Brush. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials
commonly referred to as "brush" shall be put at the curb in lengths not
to exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet
thick and/or 40 pounds in weight. Contracted brush removal debris
shall be bundled as required by this chapter or otherwise disposed of by
the contractor. Collection of brush shall be by appointment only.
I. Tree and large branch removal. Contracted tree removal debris shall be
bundled as required by this chapter or otherwise disposed of by the
contractor. However, trunks and large branches exceeding five inches
in diameter shall require special consideration for disposal, by
§ 184-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 184-5
182:312
appointment only. Trunks and large branches exceeding five inches in
diameter that are a result of contracted work shall be disposed of by
the contractor.
J. Bulk materials, scheduled bulk pickup. Bulk materials that are not
recyclable as white goods, such as carpeting, sheet flooring, small
furniture and other bulky household items that are too large to be
disposed of in the automated collection cart, shall be collected at the
curb as follows:
(1) Bulk collection is by prescheduled appointment only. Each resident
will be limited to five bulk collections per year. [Amended
4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
(2) Collection volume per appointment is limited to two cubic yards, or
three feet by three feet by six feet. (Two cubic yards roughly equals
capacity of four ninety-five-gallon automated refuse carts.)
(3) Large items of furniture, such as couches, easy chairs, etc., shall be
limited to three items per collection.
(4) Mattresses and box springs that are placed curbside for bulk
collection shall be wrapped in plastic or placed in disposable plastic
bags. Plastic wrapping or plastic bags must be sufficient to cover
all exposed areas of the mattress and box spring. The plastic
wrapping and/or disposable plastic bags are required to avoid, to
the greatest extent possible, Township employees from coming into
contact with bedbugs or bedbug-infested materials. [Added
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-26]
(5) Furniture, mattresses or box springs or other items placed curbside
for bulk collection that are infested with bedbugs may be refused
pickup for bulk collection in the absolute discretion of the Director
of the Department of Public Works or his designee. [Added
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-26]
K. Carpeting. Carpeting, sheet flooring and other like materials shall be
put at the curb on bulk collection days that have been previously
scheduled by appointment. Material shall be cut into lengths not to
exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet
thick and/or 40 pounds in weight. Collection is by prearranged
appointment only.
L. Furniture. Furniture shall be placed at the curb on bulk collection days
that have been previously scheduled by appointment. Hide-a-beds with
metal frames shall be disassembled to separate the metals from the
frame elements. A prescheduled bulk collection appointment shall be
arranged for the nonmetallic frame materials, and a separate
prescheduled white goods collection appointment shall be arranged for
the metals.
§ 184-5 FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL § 184-5
182:313
M. Wooden fencing. Wooden fencing, including stockade, picket and
others, shall be cut into pieces not to exceed four feet by two feet and
placed at the curb for disposal on bulk collection days that have been
previously scheduled by appointment.
N. Construction materials, Class #1. Permitted collection volume for Class
#1 materials shall be limited to two cubic yards per appointment.
Lumber, wallboard or other building material or debris from a project
that does not require a Township permit shall be stacked and securely
tied in bundles of not more than four feet in length and/or 40 pounds
per bundle. Protruding nails, screws and other sharp fasteners shall be
removed from construction materials prior to placing them out for
collection, which shall be previously scheduled by appointment only.
Window casings shall have the glass panes removed and the glass
separately packaged to render it free of hazard. All Class #1
construction materials must originate from the property upon which the
refuse is placed for collection. None of the above-mentioned refuse
shall be brought from off site for collection. [Amended 4-6-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-10]
O. Construction materials, Class #2. The disposal of lumber, wallboard or
other building material or debris that comes from a project requiring a
permit from the Township shall not be subject to municipal collection.
[Amended 4-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10]
P. The Township does not collect any type of shingles. [Added 4-6-2020
by Ord. No. 20-1068]
Q. Hours, frequency and days of collection. The day or days of collection
shall be established by the Township and appropriate notification shall
be provided. [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03; 4-6-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-10]
(1) All items to be collected and/or containers to be emptied shall be
placed at the curb no later than 6:00 a.m. of the collection day.
(2) Automated collection. Automated collection shall take place
weekly. When holidays fall on the automated collection date,
collection will take place on an alternate day as specified by the
Department of Public Works.
(3) Bulk collection. Bulk collection shall take place by appointment
only.
R. Restriction on placement at the curb. No person shall place any
container or material at the street more than one day prior to the day
designated for collection, and all empty containers shall be removed
from the street by 8:00 a.m. on the morning following the day of
collection.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections P through U as
Subsections Q through V, respectively.
§ 184-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 184-5
182:314
§ 184-6. Unlawful deposits.
S. Existing collection of nonresidential properties. The Township shall
continue to collect a limited amount of solid waste from each
nonresidential property that is having its waste collected curbside by
the Township in noncontainerized receptacles as of the effective date of
this chapter. Said property owner shall receive one ninety-five-gallon
cart. This automated collection cart shall be and remain the property of
North Brunswick Township and stay with the owner it was assigned to
regardless of resale, rental or other conditions. Each such commercial
property owner may purchase from the Township one additional
automated collection cart for garbage collection. Such automated
collection cart shall be and remain the property of the individual
making the purchase. The Township shall not collect any containerized
receptacles from nonresidential properties as of the effective date of
this chapter, with the exception of the uses specified in § 184-4A(3)
herein.
T. Dangerous materials. No dangerous or environmentally injurious
material, highly volatile or explosive matter, either in liquid, gaseous or
solid form, shall be placed or set out for collection either by itself or in
connection with any other garbage, trash, waste, rubbish or other
refuse material. No person shall place in any receptacle any garbage,
refuse or material that would detrimentally affect the environment and/
or pose a risk of injury to those persons charged with the collection of
such material.
U. Disturbing receptacles. After materials have been placed at the
curbside for collection, no person shall scavenge or disturb the same or
upset any such receptacle in the street or cause the matter contained
therein to be scattered or deposited in the street prior to its being
collected by the persons authorized to do such work.
V. Overturned containers or scattered refuse.
(1) The person or persons by whom such solid waste has been placed
or caused to be placed in the street for collection shall be
responsible for the same until it is collected by persons authorized
to do such work, and in the event that any of the contents of said
receptacles are previously removed and deposited or scattered in
the street, the persons who placed said receptacles in the street for
collection, or caused the same to be so placed, shall as promptly as
possible cause such matter to be placed in said proper receptacle.
(2) If any container or garbage is upset or overturned by a Township
employee, that person shall immediately collect such garbage and
dispose of the same.
A. The depositing or placing of solid waste in the street or other public
place of the Township, in any manner whatsoever, except in the manner
provided by this chapter, is hereby forbidden.
§ 184-5 FUND-RAISING, POLITICAL § 184-6
182:315
§ 184-7. Restrictions on collection.
§ 184-8. Employee report of noncompliance. [Amended 4-6-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-10]
Any Township employee who observes noncompliance with any of the
regulations of § 184-5 herein shall immediately notify the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee. The Director of Public Works or his or her
designee shall provide notice to the occupant of the violation and direct that
said refuse not be collected until the violation is abated.
§ 184-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating the terms of this
chapter, whether as principal, agent or employee of another, shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 90
days, or both.
Chapter 188
HAWKING AND PEDDLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 116.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 143.
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Loitering — See Ch. 219.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 238.
B. The depositing or placing of refuse and debris from excavations,
grading, building operations, construction, demolition, repairs or
alterations of buildings, manufacturing operations or any other refuse
or debris in the street or upon any property owned, occupied or
controlled by the Township of North Brunswick, in any manner, except
as provided in § 184-5N and O is hereby forbidden unless otherwise
specifically authorized by the Township Council of the Township of
North Brunswick.
A. When any of the items referred to in § 184-5 hereof are placed at the
curbside, it shall be assumed that the same are so placed for municipal
garbage and refuse collection and disposal. However, the Township
shall not be obligated to collect any garbage or other materials left in a
manner not in full compliance with the regulations provided herein.
B. There shall be no collection of any solid waste items unless and until
such items are prepared for municipal collection and disposal as
directed in § 184-5 of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee. [Amended 4-6-2020
by Ord. No. 20-10]
§ 184-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 184-9
188:316
§ 188-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit unfair competition and dishonest
business practice by the regulation of the conduct of and by the imposition
of license fees for revenue upon all hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants
and itinerant vendors of merchandise and goods and chattels of any kind.
It is also the purpose of this chapter to establish background checks for
licensing of all hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants and itinerant
vendors and to establish and set forth Do Not Drop and Do Not Knock
Registries to regulate the distribution of any unsolicited materials and
solicitations in the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 188-2. License required; specifications.
A. Any individual who owns and/or operates a peddling business must first
obtain a license from the Township Clerk.
B. Employees of peddling businesses actively peddling within the
Township of North Brunswick must first obtain a permit from the
Township Clerk.
C. Licenses and permits must be displayed in full view during the course of
business.
D. Licenses/Permits must be renewed annually each calendar year.
E. Background checks will be conducted on a biennial basis for each
holder of a license or permit.
F. It is the responsibility of the license holder to ensure that each new
employee who engages in the activities regulated by this chapter
completes an application and receives a permit.
G. Holders of special licenses from the State of New Jersey pursuant to the
regulations of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, as supplemented and amended
(honorably discharged veterans and exempt members of volunteer fire
departments, volunteer fire engineer, hook and ladder, hose supply
company or salvage corps of any municipality or fire district in the State
of New Jersey who hold exemption certificates issued to them), must fill
out an application and pay for any background checks with the New
Jersey Division of State Police but shall be exempt from any of the
Township's administrative fees for background checks hereunder. Only
honorably discharged veterans who have resided in the State of New
Jersey for at least six months and in Middlesex County for at least three
months shall qualify for this exemption.
H. All licenses and permits shall expire on the last day of each calendar
year.
§ 184-9 HAWKING AND PEDDLING § 188-2
188:317
§ 188-3. Issuance of license; required information.
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized to issue any such license upon the
payment by the applicant of the proper fee therefor, as hereinafter provided.
Any person desiring a license or permit under this chapter shall file, on a
form to be supplied by the Township Clerk, an application with the Township
stating the following:
I. Upon termination of an employee, all permits of terminated employees
must be returned to the Township Clerk within 10 days of such
termination.
J. It shall be unlawful for any hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants and
itinerant vendors of merchandise to sell or dispose of any goods, wares
or merchandise, including bread, pies, cakes and any other bakery
products, milk, cream, cheese or any other dairy products, ice cream,
confections, merchandise and goods and chattels of any kind, within the
municipality of North Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, New
Jersey, without first obtaining a license and having paid the license fee
hereinafter prescribed.
A. License application:
(1) Name of applicant's business.
(2) Address of applicant's business.
(3) Telephone number of applicant's business.
(4) Name and social security number of applicant.
(5) Applicant's home address and telephone number.
(6) Date and place of applicant's birth.
(7) Place or places of residence of applicant for the preceding three
years.
(8) The kind and nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale.
(9) Whether or not the applicant will use or employ any vehicles in
connection with the operation of the business licensed under this
chapter and, if so, the number of vehicles, license plate number and
description of each vehicle.
(10) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance concerning peddlers
and/or hawkers and, if so, where and the nature of the offense or
convictions.
(11) All applications for licenses must be accompanied by an approved
fingerprint check from the North Brunswick Department of Public
Safety.
§ 188-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 188-3
188:318
§ 188-4. License fees; exceptions.
(12) All applications must be accompanied by a signed peddlers license
authorization form.
(13) Two passport-size photographs, one of which must be attached to
the license.
B. Permit application.
(1) Name of employer's business.
(2) Address of employer's business.
(3) Telephone number of employer's business.
(4) Name and social security number of applicant.
(5) Applicant's home address and telephone number.
(6) Date and place of the applicant's birth.
(7) Place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding three
years.
(8) The kind and nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale.
(9) Whether or not the applicant will use or employ any vehicles in
connection with the operation of the business licensed under this
chapter and, if so, the number of vehicles, license plate number and
description of each vehicle.
(10) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance concerning peddlers
and/or hawkers and, if so, where and the nature of the offense or
convictions.
(11) All applications for permits must be accompanied by an approved
fingerprint check from the North Brunswick Department of Public
Safety.
(12) All applications must be accompanied by a signed permit
application release authorization form.
(13) Two passport-size photographs, one of which must be attached to
the permit.
A. The license fee for peddlers who use or employ one or more wagons or
other vehicles shall be $200 annually; except that holders of special
licenses pursuant to § 188-2G shall be exempt.
B. The license fee for peddlers who do not use or employ wagons or other
vehicles, but carry their wares or goods about by foot, shall be $100
annually; except that holders of special licenses pursuant to § 188-2G
shall be exempt.
§ 188-3 HAWKING AND PEDDLING § 188-4
188:319
§ 188-5. Validity of license; nontransferability.
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed and shall apply only to the person or persons to whom
granted and shall not be transferable.
§ 188-6. Display of license; use of vehicle or carrier.
Any person to whom such license is granted as herein provided is hereby
required to exhibit such license whenever called upon so to do, and every
person using any sort of receptacle or carrier of any kind or vehicle,
whether propelled by man power, animal power or any form of mechanical
power, shall be required to obtain from the Township Clerk a metal license
plate bearing the words "Township of North Brunswick, License Plate No.
______" and shall be required to pay therefor, in addition to the fee
hereinabove mentioned for the issuing of the license and in addition to the
license fee hereinafter mentioned, the sum of $20.
§ 188-7. License exemptions.
The following persons are to be deemed outside the licensure requirements
of this chapter and are exempt from the licensing provisions and fee
requirements (except where noted) thereof:
C. For initial license/permit application:
(1) Money order for $30, payable to the New Jersey Division of State
Police - SBI.
(2) Fee of $45, payable to the Township of North Brunswick to cover
administrative fees for the background check, except that holders
of special licenses pursuant to § 188-2G shall be exempt.
D. For biennial (every two years) background check at renewal for those
who have had an initial background check completed:
(1) Money order for $18, payable to the New Jersey Division of State
Police - SBI.
(2) Fee of $25, payable to the Township of North Brunswick to cover
the administrative fee for the background check, except that
holders of special licenses pursuant to § 188-2G shall be exempt.
A. Any vendor of meat, milk, poultry or eggs.
B. Any person selling only at wholesale, from sample, to dealers in the
wares, merchandise or goods sold.
C. Any person selling newspapers or periodicals.
D. Any person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or
merchandise from a store or building in the Township.
§ 188-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 188-7
188:320
§ 188-8. Stationary peddling locations.
§ 188-9. Do Not Drop Registry; Do Not Knock Registry; distribution
of unsolicited or nonsubscribed materials prohibited.
E. Any farmer or gardener selling goods of his own growth.
F. Any federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to
federal, state or local law shall not be prohibited by this chapter.
A. No person authorized to conduct a business of being a peddler shall
disturb the public by crying out his wares nor by creating a nuisance,
nor shall any such person remain or allow any vehicle or conveyance to
remain within 100 feet of any one residence building for a period of
time exceeding 15 consecutive minutes for the purpose of conducting
such business.
B. As used in this section, "residence building" shall mean a detached
dwelling used as a place of residence by not more than two families.
A. Do Not Drop Registry. Pursuant to Chapter 143 of the Code of the
Township of North Brunswick, Canvassing and Soliciting, there has
been established a "Do Not Drop Registry" to be maintained in the
Office of the Township Clerk.69 The purpose of the Do Not Drop Registry
is to permit residents to bar the receipt of unsolicited or nonsubscribed
printed materials at their properties. Residents may register for such
list by personal delivery, regular mail or e-mail to the Township Clerk.
After registration on the Do Not Drop Registry, it shall be a violation of
the terms of this chapter to distribute such unsolicited or
nonsubscribed materials to any registered person and/or such person's
property. No circulars, publications, handbills, brochures, shoppers or
flyers, whether of a commercial, religious or charitable nature, shall be
distributed to any properties which have been listed with the Do Not
Drop Registry, to be maintained at the Township Clerk's office.
B. Distribution of unsolicited or nonsubscribed materials. It shall be
unlawful to place upon, deliver, deposit, throw upon, leave or abandon
within or upon any private property or public ways adjacent to private
property any circulars, publications, handbills, brochures, shoppers or
flyers, or other unsolicited commercial matter, printed or otherwise, of
every kind or nature whatsoever.
C. Do Not Knock Registry. Pursuant to Chapter 143 of the Code of the
Township of North Brunswick, Canvassing and Soliciting, there has
been established a "Do Not Knock Registry" to be maintained in the
Office of the Township Clerk. The purpose of the Do Not Knock Registry
is to permit residents to bar any commercial solicitation, peddling or
hawking taking place by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other
conveyance on a door-to-door basis. Residents may register for such list
69.Editor's Note: See § 143-8.2.
§ 188-7 HAWKING AND PEDDLING § 188-9
188:321
§ 188-10. Exceptions to delivery restrictions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the delivery or
personal solicitation of:
§ 188-11. Revocation of license.
The Business Administrator of the Township reserves the right to cause
the Township Clerk to revoke and/or rescind any license or permit granted
under this chapter if the person or organization with such license or permit,
as applicable, shall be found:
by personal delivery, regular mail or e-mail to the Township Clerk. After
registration on the Do Not Knock Registry, it shall be a violation of the
terms of this chapter to visit any residences for commercial solicitation,
peddling or hawking to any registered person and/or such person's
property. No commercial solicitation, peddling or hawking of any nature
or kind whatsoever shall be permitted on any properties which have
been listed with the Do Not Knock Registry, to be maintained at the
Township Clerk's office.
A. Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of the
United States Postal Service.
B. Parcels, packages and materials delivered by a commercially
recognized courier service or overnight express delivery agency, such
as, by way of example, Federal Express or United Parcel Service.
C. Newspapers and other publications and periodicals if subscribed to by
the owner or occupant of the recipient premises, provided same are
placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose, or, in the
absence of such receptacle, tightly wrapped to prevent blowing or
scattering upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
D. Delivery of laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food
products and commercial product sampling by agreement with or
invitation of the owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
E. Personal delivery or drop off of noncommercial handbills of a political,
charitable, or religious nature whose distribution is or may be
protected by constitutional rights of free speech, provided that same
are packaged and placed in such a manner as not to blow and scatter
upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
A. Using false or fraudulent statements in obtaining such license or
permit.
B. Using false or fraudulent statements or other misrepresentations in the
course of carrying on business or employment under such license or
permit, as applicable.
§ 188-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 188-11
188:322
§ 188-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 191
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 191-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby found that there exists a need in the Township of North
Brunswick for the establishment of standards defining the financial
responsibility for the cleanup of hazardous materials discharges, leaks,
spills and releases performed by Township of North Brunswick personnel
and with the use of equipment owned or leased by the Township of North
Brunswick. This finding is based upon the increased amount of hazardous
materials being transported in and through the Township of North
Brunswick and the considerable cost associated with the cleanup of
hazardous materials discharges, leaks, spills and releases.
§ 191-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the replacement and/or
reimbursement of specialized and sometimes disposable equipment
required by state and federal law to be available in the Township of North
Brunswick in order to cleanup a discharge, leak, spill or release of
hazardous materials. This chapter shall also entitle the Township of North
Brunswick to reimbursement for labor costs incurred in any such cleanup
process.
§ 191-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, be defined as follows:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to stop or contain any leak,
unwarranted discharge, release or spill involving any hazardous material
C. Conducting the business of canvassing, soliciting, peddling or hawking
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or nuisance or a menace to the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Township of North Brunswick.
D. To have any conviction of a crime or other offense which would be cause
for the denial of an initial license or permit application.
§ 188-11 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 191-3
191:323
which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that
particular leak, unwarranted discharge, release or spill. These include, but
are not limited to, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums and other
specialized protective equipment, including but not limited to acid suits,
gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, whether solid, liquid or gaseous,
enumerated in the United States Department of Transportation Listing of
Hazardous Materials, 49 CFR, Section 171; and any hazardous waste as
designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR,
Section 262.
LABOR COSTS — Those costs incurred by the Township of North Brunswick
for actual labor and/or personnel used in connection with the cleanup or
containment of any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous material.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold, contain,
carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 191-4. Reimbursement of cleanup costs.
Reimbursement to the Township of North Brunswick for the cost of any
expendable items, rental equipment, equipment damaged in connection
with the cleanup process and labor, services or personnel used in
connection with the cleanup process shall be made by any of the following
persons or entities:
§ 191-5. Time limit for reimbursement.
Any person or entity responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release of
a hazardous material pursuant to § 191-4 of this chapter shall reimburse
A. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any vehicle
responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous
material, whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or
intentional.
B. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any vessel
responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous
material, whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or
intentional.
C. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any property
from which any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous material
emanates, whether public or private, whether accidental or intentional.
D. Any person or entity responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release
of any hazardous material on public or private property, whether
accidental or intentional.
§ 191-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 191-5
191:324
the Township of North Brunswick for the full cost of any expendable items,
rental equipment, damaged equipment, labor, services or personnel used in
the cleanup process within 30 days after the receipt of an itemized bill from
the Emergency Management Coordinator or the Clerk of the Township of
North Brunswick.
§ 191-6. Failure to pay.
The Township of North Brunswick shall be entitled to institute suit against
any person or entity failing to make payment pursuant to § 191-5 of this
chapter for the full cost of any expendable items, rental equipment,
damaged equipment, labor, services or personnel used in the cleanup
process, together with interest, costs of suit and counsel fees.
§ 191-7. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent or conflict
with the enforcement of other statutes, ordinances or regulations
concerning the subject matter described herein.
§ 191-8. Third-party rights.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the rights
of third parties to seek reimbursement or recovery from any responsible
person or entity for costs or damages incurred as a result of any leak,
discharge, spill or release of a hazardous material.
Chapter 194
HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 194-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of PL 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of PL 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 194-2. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of North Brunswick which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage
rate of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room
in the Township of North Brunswick on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
§ 191-5 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 194-2
194:325
1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel
room in the Township of North Brunswick on or after July 1, 2004, of a room
or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section
3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 194-3. Tax in addition to other taxes and fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 194-4. Exemption.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer
is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the Sales
and Use Tax Act pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
§ 194-5. Statutory requirements.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
§ 194-6. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time,
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
Chapter 195
HOUSING, AFFORDABLE; AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42.
Land use — See Ch. 205.
Rent control — See Ch. 268.
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter.
§ 194-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 194-6
194:326
Part 1
[AAffdooprdteadbl2e- 3H-o1u9s8i6ng70]
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions
§ 195-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Affordable Housing
Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick."
§ 195-1.1. Applicability to specific projects. [Added 7-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-13]
§ 195-2. Purpose. [Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
The purpose of §§ 195-3 through 195-39 is to comply with the court order
of the Superior Court of New Jersey in Urban League of Greater New
Brunswick, et al. v. Mayor and Council of the Borough of Carteret, et al.,
while the purpose of §§ 195-40 through 195-60 is to comply with the Fair
Housing Act, UHAC, and the HEFSP adopted by the Planning Board on
June 23, 2016, by establishing mechanisms to assure that the housing units
designated for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households remain
affordable to and occupied by low- and moderate-income households.
§ 195-3. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this Part 1, shall have
the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN —
A. Sections 195-3 through 195-39 shall be applicable for regulating the
resales of the 200 affordable units in the Governor's Pointe 1 and
Governor's Pointe 2 condominium complexes.
B. Sections 195-40 through 195-60 shall be applicable to all other
affordable housing located in the Township, unless a project is
specifically exempted from the regulations due to the utilization of lowincome
housing tax credits.
An instrument to be recorded with the Office of the Recorder, Middlesex
County, New Jersey, constituting restrictive covenants running with the
A.
70.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Was Adopted By Court Order Of The Superior Court Of New
Jersey, 3-24-1986, In Which Section 1 Stated As Follows: "1. The Attached January 29,
1986, Revision Of The Affordable Housing Ordinance Of North Brunswick, Adoption Of
Which Was Favored By A Majority Of The Voting Members Of The North Brunswick
Township Council At Its February 3, 1986, Meeting, Is Hereby Placed Into Effect, Upon
Entry Of This Order, As The Affordable Housing Ordinance Of North Brunswick. The
Ordinance Shall Have The Same Effect As If It Had Been Formally Adopted By The
Township Council, And The Township Clerk Shall Forthwith Publish And Record This
Ordinance In The Same Manner As Ordinances Formally Adopted By The Council."
§ 195-1 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-3
194:327
AGENCY — The Affordable Housing Agency of the Township of North
Brunswick created pursuant to this Part 1 or any successor duly authorized
land with respect to the lower-income units described and identified in
such instrument. The instrument shall set forth the terms, restrictions
and provisions applicable to the lower-income units and shall be
consistent with the Affordable Housing Ordinance, including but not
limited to those provisions of the ordinance concerning use; occupancy;
sale; resale; rental; rerental; sales price and rental determination;
duration of restrictions; exempt transactions; hardship exemptions;
foreclosure; violation; legal description of the specific lower-income
units governed by the instrument; determination of eligible purchasers
and owners; responsibilities of owners; improvements; and creating the
liens and rights of the Agency upon such lower-income units, all as
such provisions of the ordinance exist at the time that the instrument is
executed by the Agency.
The instrument shall refer to this Affordable Housing Ordinance and
the rules and regulations of the Affordable Housing Agency. The terms,
restrictions and provisions of the instrument shall bind all purchasers
and owners of any lower-income unit, their heirs, assigns and all
persons claiming by, through or under their heirs, assigns and
administrators. If a single instrument is used to govern more than
one lower-income unit, then the instrument must contain the legal
description of each lower-income unit governed by the instrument, and
the deed of each and every individual lower-income unit so governed
must contain the recording information of the instrument applicable to
such lower-income unit.
B.
It is intended that the terms of the "affordable housing plan" be wholly
consistent with the Affordable Housing Ordinance and the rules and
regulations of the Agency, as such ordinance and rules and regulations
of the Agency existed on the date the "affordable housing plan" is
executed by the Agency; however, in the event of conflict or
inconsistency, the Affordable Housing Ordinance and rules and
regulations, as they existed on the date of the "plan," shall control.
C.
Changes, amendments or revisions to the Affordable Housing
Ordinance and rules and regulations subsequent to the date of an
"affordable housing plan" shall not affect, amend or alter the
"affordable housing plan," and such "affordable housing plan" shall
continue to be interpreted and applied in accordance with the
Affordable Housing Ordinance and rules and regulations as the same
existed on the date of the particular "affordable housing plan." Such
instrument shall be executed by the Agency prior to recording of the
"affordable housing plan," and the Agency shall certify that the
"affordable housing plan" is consistent with the then-current Affordable
Housing Ordinance and rules and regulations. The instrument shall also
be executed by the developer and/or the then-current title holder of
record of the property upon which the lower-income units are to be
constructed.
D.
§ 195-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-3
194:328
by the Township Council to carry out the powers and responsibilities of the
Agency.
ASSESSMENTS — Refers to taxes, levies, charges or assessments, both
public and private, including those imposed by the Association, as the
applicable case may be, upon the lower-income units which are part of the
Association.
FIRST PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGE — Refers to the most senior
mortgage lien to secure repayment of funds for the purchase of a lowerincome
unit.
FIRST PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGEE — Refers to the holder and/or
assigns of the first purchase money mortgage and which must also be an
institutional lender or investor, licensed or regulated by a state or federal
government or an agency thereof. Other lenders, investors or persons may
be holders of a first purchase money mortgage; however, for purposes of
this Part 1, such other lenders, investors or persons shall not be "first
purchase money mortgagees."
FORECLOSURE — Refers to a termination of all rights of the mortgagor
or the mortgagor's assigns or grantees in a lower-income unit covered by
a recorded mortgage through legal processes, or through a deed in lieu
of foreclosure which has been executed and delivered prior to a judiciallyregulated
sale.
GROSS AGGREGATE HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The total annual income
from all sources of all members of the household, with the exception of
income exclusions provided for in the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Agency. Household income shall specifically exempt interest income
earned on the first $25,000 of assets for senior citizen households (62 years
of age and over). Imputed interest income shall be added to annual income
only in the event that households are selling houses in order to move into
lower-income units.
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit, whether or not they are related by blood, marriage or
otherwise.
IMPROVEMENT — Refers to additions within a lower-income unit, including
materials, supplies, appliances or fixtures which become a permanent part
of or affixed to such lower-income unit.
INCOME CEILING — Eighty percent of the regional median income for
moderate-income households and 50% of the regional median income for
low-income households, with adjustments for household size.
LOWER-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household which is either a lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as the case may be.
LOWER-INCOME PURCHASER — A purchaser of a lower-income unit which
is either a low-income purchaser or a moderate-income purchaser, as the
case may be.
§ 195-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-3
194:329
LOWER-INCOME UNIT — A residential unit within a development which
has been designated as either a low-income unit or a moderate-income
unit, as the applicable case may be, pursuant to this Affordable Housing
Ordinance.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a gross aggregate
household income which does not exceed 50% of the regional median
income, with adjustments for household size.
LOW-INCOME PURCHASER — A low-income household purchasing either
a low-income unit or a moderate-income unit, as the case may be.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A unit which is affordable to a low-income
household.
MARKET UNIT — Any residential unit within a development which is not
designated a lower-income unit.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a gross aggregate
household income which is greater than 50% of the regional median income,
but which does not exceed 80% of said regional median income, with
adjustments for household size.
MODERATE-INCOME PURCHASER — A moderate-income household
purchasing a moderate-income unit.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A unit which is affordable to a low- or
moderate-income household.
OWNER — The then-current title holder of record of a lower income unit.
"Owner" shall refer to and mean the title holder of record as the same is
reflected in the most recently dated and recorded deed for the particular
lower-income unit. For purposes of the initial sales or rentals of any lowerincome
unit, "owner" shall include the developer/owner of such lowerincome
units. Ownership of a lower-income unit shall be deemed to be
acceptance and ratification of the provisions of this Affordable Housing
Ordinance and the affordable housing plan. Where appropriate, the term
"Owner" shall also mean and refer to a person who owns a lower-income
unit as a landlord or who occupies a lower-income unit as a tenant. "Owner"
shall not include any cosignor or coborrower on any first purchase money
mortgage unless such cosignor or coborrower is also a named title holder of
record of such lower-income unit.
QUALIFIED PURCHASER — Refers to a person whom, pursuant to this Part
1 and the affordable housing plan, submits an application for certification
as a qualified purchaser to the Agency; whose gross aggregate household
income at the time of proposed purchase of a lower-income unit is within
low- or moderate-income levels, as these income levels are designated
herein; and who obtains certification as a qualified purchaser of a lowerincome
unit from the Agency pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Agency. Once a qualified purchaser becomes an owner of a lower-income
unit in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1, any increase or
decrease in the gross aggregate household income of such owner shall not
affect ownership rights, privileges or obligations of such owner. The term
§ 195-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-3
194:330
"qualified purchaser" shall also include a person or family who occupies
the lower-income unit on a rental basis, subject to the qualifications and
conditions stated above and elsewhere herein. Any person who submits
false information in support of an application for certification and who
subsequently received such certification and either title to a lower-income
unit as owner or possession of a lower-income unit as tenant shall be
deemed to have committed a substantial breach of the provisions of this
Part 1 and the affordable housing plan, and any right of ownership of such
unit shall be subject to forfeiture pursuant to the provisions of § 195-17 of
this Part 1. A qualified purchaser shall not be permitted to own more than
one lower-income unit at the same time.
REGIONAL MEDIAN INCOME — The median household income for the
eleven-county present need region determined by the Court to include the
following counties: Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Morris,
Passaic, Somerset, Union, Sussex and Warren. For ease of calculation,
"regional median income" shall mean 94% of the median income for the
Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) in which Middlesex County is
located.
UTILITIES — Those utilities that are essential for safe and sanitary
occupancy of a rental unit, including water, sanitary sewage, gas, electricity
and heat. For the purposes of this Part 1, cable television and telephone are
specifically excluded.
§ 195-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-3
194:331

ARTICLE II
Affordable Housing Agency
§ 195-4. Creation.
There is hereby created an Affordable Housing Agency ("Agency") of the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 195-5. Membership; quorum; term.
§ 195-6. Vacancies; removal for cause.
The Council may remove any member of the Agency for cause. Written
charges served upon the member shall be followed by a hearing thereon,
at which time the member shall be entitled to be heard either in person or
by counsel. A vacancy in the Agency occurring otherwise than by expiration
of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 195-7. Powers and duties.
The Agency shall:
A. The Agency shall consist of five members and two alternate members,
all of whom shall be appointed by the Council. The membership of the
Agency may consist of one or more Township officials, no more than two
of whom may be Council members. All remaining members must be
Township residents. However, one appointment shall be reserved for a
tenant or owner/occupant of a low- or moderate-income unit who is not
a Township official.
B. Alternate members shall have all of the powers of regular members
when sitting in place of a regular member. Until such time as a low- or
moderate-income owner or renter appointment can be made, an
alternate member shall function as a regular member.
C. The Council shall designate annually one regular member to serve as
Chairperson.
D. Attendance by three regular members or alternates shall constitute a
quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by a
majority of members present.
E. The initial term of office of the Agency members shall be one, two or
three years, to be designated by the Council in making the
appointment. The terms of office shall thereafter be three years. The
appointments shall be made in such a manner so that the terms of
approximately 1/3 of the members shall expire each year. The term of
office for Council members shall be for a one-year appointment and
subject to reappointment for one-year terms.
§ 195-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-7
194:333
A. Within 30 days of the effective date of this Part 1, hold its first
organizational meeting.
B. Within 90 days of its organizational meeting, prepare and forward to
the Township Council such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
implement the policies and goals of this Article; specifically, to ensure
that housing units designated as low- or moderate-income units, once
constructed, shall remain affordable to and be occupied by low- or
moderate-income households. Such rules shall be subject to review and
approval of the Township Council. The Council shall review and approve
or disapprove or recommend changes within 60 days of the Agency's
proposal to the Council. The Agency must revise and resubmit proposed
rules and regulations to the Council within 20 days of the Council's
disapproval or recommended changes. The Council shall then review
and approve the revisions within 20 days of resubmittal by the Agency.
The final approved rules and regulations shall be approved by the
Council within a maximum total of 190 days from the organizational
meeting of the Agency.
C. Establish guidelines for regulation of capital improvements, within 150
days of its organizational meeting.
D. At a minimum, review its rules and regulations and implement
guidelines annually and report to the Township Council on its findings.
E. Determine the maximum sale, resale and rental charges for low- or
moderate-income units, and provide certification of the same to the
developer, Planning Board, Mayor and Council and the Construction
Official in charge of issuing building permits as required by this Part 1.
Said sales and rental prices shall be adjusted annually to reflect
recalculations of the regional median income.
F. 71To take enforcement action, as authorized by § 195-17 of this Part 1,
against any owner for violation of this Part 1 or the affordable housing
plan. [Added 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-35]
G. Prequalify prospective owners and renters based upon income and
household size, and issue a certificate as to income eligibility status.
H. Establish selection procedures and criteria for determining qualified
purchasers and households. Preference shall be given for up to 40% of
the lower-income units being offered for sale or rent in each phase of a
project to qualified households who live or work in the Township. In
order to be entitled to said preference, the application must be
submitted within 30 days of the unit initially being offered for sale or
rent. In the class "live or work," there shall be no preference given to
either "live" or "work."
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsections F through N were redesignated as Subsections G
through O due to the addition of this new Subsection F.
§ 195-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-7
194:334
I. Verify that an affordable housing plan has been recorded and the deeds
of individual lower-income units reference such affordable housing
plan.
J. Develop a formula for use in calculating the maximum resale price of
low- and moderate-income units which is consistent with the provisions
of § 195-11B of this Part 1.
K. Determine whether the cost or value of the installation of improvements
or amenities within or as part of a low- or moderate-income unit should
be included in the calculation of the resale price or rental charge for the
unit and establish procedures whereby a homeowner can obtain a
determination from the Agency in this regard prior to the time the
improvements are made. The Agency shall publish within 30 days of
adoption the guidelines and regulations setting forth the allowable
capital improvements that will be considered for inclusion in the resale
price of any lower-income unit. These regulations will indicate those
improvements whose value will be included; the maximum cost allowed
to be included within the resale price for each improvement, as well as
guidelines for the total maximum percentage by which the base price of
a lower-income unit may be increased by the cost of all capital
improvements and the rate at which such maximum percentage
increase may be attained, all for the purposes of determining the
maximum resale price of the lower-income units. No portion of the cost
or value of any improvement not specifically set forth in the guidelines
and regulations and which is not approved by the Agency prior to
installation shall be included within the base price for purposes of
resale price calculation. If the owner receiving approval from the
Agency for an improvement, a portion of the cost or value of which is to
be included within the base price of the lower-income unit, is in need of
a second mortgage in order to pay for such improvement, then the
Agency shall execute and deliver to the owner for recording by the
owner a document by which the Agency's rights, claims and liens under
this Affordable Housing Ordinance and the affordable housing plan are
also subordinated to such second mortgage. The Agency's rights, claims
and liens shall not be subordinated to any second mortgages unless the
Agency shall execute and deliver such instrument to an owner in
connection with an improvement approved by the Agency.
L. Review and approve or disapprove the affordable housing plan required
of all developers of low- and moderate-income housing.
M. Review and approve or disapprove the developer's proposed affirmative
marketing plan and require developers to submit proofs of publication
in accordance with approved affirmative marketing plans, and monitor
the marketing practices of developers of low- and moderate-income
units to ensure that they comply with the affirmative marketing
requirements of this Part 1.
N. Report quarterly to the Township Council on the status of low- and
moderate-income units, including but not limited to such things as the
§ 195-7 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-7
194:335
§ 195-8. Appropriation and accountability.
Agency's actions in connection with any statements of exemption and
foreclosures upon any lower-income units.
O. At all times, maintain a waiting list of qualified purchasers and provide
said list to any owner in the event of default proceedings.
A. Developers of lower-income units shall, at the time of submission of an
application to the Township Planning Board, reimburse the Township on
a pro-rata basis for the cost of all initial start-up costs. Start-up costs
are those costs necessary to enable the Agency to establish rules,
regulations and guidelines and shall include, but not be limited to,
attorney's fees, accountant's fees and fees for other required
professional services. The total obligation for start-up costs to all
developers shall be $15,000. The pro-rata calculation shall be
performed by the Agency utilizing the Township's total lower-income
obligation established by pursuant court order.
B. The Agency may employ or contract for professional services required
to carry out its duties and responsibilities, and all developers of lowerincome
units shall be required to pay application fees at the time of
submission for site plan approval. Said fee shall be equal to $10 per
lower-income unit included in the application for site plan approval.
C. The Agency shall report to the Township Council through the Township
Administrator.
§ 195-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-8
194:336
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 195-9. Sale/rent of units; low- or moderate-income households.
A. Wherever reference is made to low- or moderate-income housing in the
Township's Zoning Ordinance,72 the standards, definitions and
procedures set forth in this Part 1 shall apply.
B. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, no low-income unit shall
be offered for sale or rental except at prices that are affordable by lowincome
households and no moderate-income unit shall be offered for
sale or rental except at prices that are affordable by moderate-income
households and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, no lowincome
unit shall be sold, resold, rented or rerented except to a
household that has been qualified as a low-income household by the
Agency, and no moderate-income unit shall be sold, resold, rented or
rerented except to a household that has been qualified as a moderateincome
household by the Agency. The provisions of this subsection shall
apply equally to qualified lower-income owners or renters, in terms of
controls on sale, resale, rental or rerental of any lower-income unit.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this part to the contrary, a
certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the principal residence and not lease the unit; provided,
however, the Agency may permit the owner of the restricted unit, upon
a showing of hardship, to lease the unit to a certified household for a
period not to exceed one year. [Amended 12-20-2004 by Ord. No.
04-35]
C. Nothing contained in this Part 1, however, or in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Agency, shall restrict or preclude any
household which was classified as low- or moderate-income based upon
its gross aggregate household income at the time it purchased or leased
a low- or moderate-income unit from continuing to own or lease said
unit after its income exceeds the income ceilings established in this Part
1.
D. Prospective purchasers of lower-income units shall receive prior to or
simultaneously with the execution of the contract to purchase a lowerincome
unit a copy of the affordable housing plan and shall execute a
disclosure statement which briefly summarizes the salient features of
the use, occupancy and resale restrictions applicable to the lowerincome
unit. It shall be the developer's responsibility to provide such
for the initial sales and the subsequent owner's responsibility to provide
the same for resales. The developer shall record the affordable housing
plan prior to conveying any title to any individual lower-income unit or
executing a lease for any individual lower-income unit and the deeds or
leases or individual lower-income units must reference such recorded
affordable housing plan.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 195-9 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-9
194:337
§ 195-10. Income eligibility.
§ 195-11. Sales price and rental charges.
Prior to the sale, resale, rental or rerental of a low- or moderate-income
unit, the Agency shall determine the maximum sales price or rental charge
that may be charged for that size unit in each income category in
accordance with the following:
E. The Township of North Brunswick shall forever receive full credit
towards its then current total fair share obligation as may be
determined from time to time so long as the then-current total fair
share obligation includes previous fair share obligations for all lowerincome
units developed pursuant to this Affordable Housing Ordinance,
so long as such lower-income units are actually sold, resold, used,
occupied, rented, rerented and maintained in full and complete
compliance with the provisions of this Part 1, including but not limited
to those provisions covering hardship, foreclosure and exempt
transactions and the affordable housing plan.
F. The initial proportional relationship between condominium fees
assessed against market units and lower-income units shall not be
increased in future years and said restrictions shall be reflected in the
articles of incorporation and in the required disclosure statement.
Association fees assessed against said lower-income units shall be no
less than 1/3 of the fee which would have been assessed had all
condominiums (both lower-income and market units) been assessed
equally. Such initial calculations shall be provided by the developer.
A. A prospective purchaser or renter of a low- or moderate-income unit
must be qualified as a low- or moderate-income household by the
Agency prior to the purchase or rental of such unit. The Agency shall
periodically recalculate the regional median income and determine
adjustments for household size as updated data or estimates of regional
median income become available.
B. The income ceilings for low- and moderate-income households of four
members shall be 50% and 80%, respectively, of the regional median
income, with adjustments for household size in accordance with
guidelines of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
A. Estimated maximum initial sales prices for units.
(1) As part of the preliminary site plan application submittal to the
Planning Board by a developer for a development containing lowerincome
units, the developer shall also submit to the Agency
information demonstrating the mortgage financing generally
available to lower-income homebuyers and the developer's
calculations as to the estimated maximum sales prices in
accordance with Subsection B below.
§ 195-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-11
194:338
(2) The Agency shall review the developer's calculations and shall
determine the estimated maximum sales prices for applicable-sized
units in each income category in accordance with the financial
terms determined to be generally available and shall notify the
Planning Board and the developer of said estimated maximum sales
prices prior to final approval by the Planning Board. The delay of
the Agency shall not postpone or delay the Planning Board's
decision as to the proposed development.
B. Actual maximum initial sales prices for units.
(1) A base sales price shall be calculated such that the sum of the
monthly payments for principal, interest, taxes, fire, theft and
liability insurance and homeowner association fees, if any, shall not
exceed 28% of the low- or moderate-income ceilings determined in
accordance with § 195-10.
(2) In order to assure that low- and moderate-income units are
affordable by households whose income is less than the low- or
moderate-income ceilings, the maximum sales price that may be
offered for each such unit shall not exceed 90% of the base price for
that size unit in each income category.
(3) At least a minimum of 30 days prior to the developer's anticipated
need of building permits, with the exception of permits for model
units, the developer shall provide the Agency with information
demonstrating the financing that is generally available locally to
lower-income homebuyers and the developer's calculations as to
maximum initial sales prices. The interest rate used by the
developer in calculating the maximum sales price shall be the rate
that the Agency determines to be generally available locally for a
ninety-percent, thirty-year, fixed-rate mortgage.
(4) If the developer proposes to provide financing through an
adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) or establishes that ARM's are
generally available locally to lower-income purchasers, then the
interest rate to be used for calculating the maximum sales price
shall be the greater of either the current index of one-year Treasury
Bills plus two points or two points less than the best available fixed
rate mortgage.
(5) The Agency shall use this information to determine the maximum
initial sales prices for the different-sized units in each income
category, as described above. The Agency shall certify the actual
maximum initial sales prices to the Planning Board, the developer
and the Construction Official in charge of issuing building permits
within 30 days of submission of complete information by the
developer. No building permits, except for complete models,
including models of non-lower-income units, foundation permits for
units other than models, permits for underground utilities and site
development work shall be issued until the maximum initial sales
§ 195-11 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-11
194:339
prices have been certified by the Agency. These sales prices shall
remain in effect for a period of one year. However, the developer
may request a modification of the maximum sales prices at any time
by applying to the Affordable Housing Agency for recalculation
of these prices based on changes in any of the factors used to
calculate the prices.
C. Maximum resale prices. [Amended 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10]
(1) Prior to the resale of any low- or moderate-income unit, the Agency
shall determine the maximum sales price for the unit. The price of
low- and moderate-income units may be increased annually based
upon the percentage increase in the housing consumer price index
for the United States. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one
year. The Agency is hereby authorized to use the COAH/HAS Sale
Price Calculator, as authorized and established by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing,
in determining the maximum resale price for any given affordable
housing unit.
(2) Low- or moderate-income affordable housing units.
(a) The maximum resale price for low- or moderate-income
affordable housing units which have been designated as such
as of the effective date of this subsection shall be set pursuant
to the maximum resale prices established as of December 31,
2005, as follows:
Unit Size/Low-Moderate Maximum Resale Price
Two-bedroom low-income unit $110,238
Three-bedroom low-income unit $130,494
Two-bedroom moderate-income
unit
$130,746
Three-bedroom moderateincome
unit
$157,930
(b) These prices shall be used for purposes of determining the
resale price using the COAH/HAS Sale Price Calculator.
(3) Any low- or moderate-income affordable housing units constructed
and sold after the effective date of this subsection shall have resale
prices set and determined by using the COAH/HAS Sale Price
Calculator, based upon the actual sales prices and dates of sale.
D. Maximum rental charges for units.
(1) A base rent shall be calculated such that the sum of the monthly
rental payment, including utilities, does not exceed 30% of the lowor
moderate-income ceilings determined in accordance with
§ 195-10.
§ 195-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-11
194:340
(2) If the cost of all utilities is not included in the monthly rental
charge, the Agency shall calculate for each unit size an estimated
monthly charge for those utilities not included in the rent. These
charges shall be estimated utilizing estimating techniques
acceptable in the industry. This estimated charge shall be
subtracted from the maximum gross rent to determine the
maximum rental charge that may be charged for each low- and
moderate-income unit.
(3) In order to assure that low- and moderate-income units are
affordable by households whose income is less than the low- or
moderate-income ceilings, the maximum gross rent that may be
charged for any such unit shall not exceed 90% of the base rent for
that size unit in each income category. Notwithstanding these
requirements, landlords shall have the option to set rents equal to
30% of the tenant's gross household income, with the requirement
that the average of all rents charged for the same-size unit shall not
exceed 90% of the base rent charge for such size unit. The cost of
any additional administrative charges incurred by the Agency in
the monitoring of such rental distribution shall be the sole
responsibility of such landlord.
(4) The developer shall calculate the maximum rental charge for
applicable-sized units in each income category and shall submit
said calculations to the Agency for review. The Agency shall
determine, based upon its review, maximum rental charges. These
rental charges shall remain in effect for a period of at least one
year, except that the developer may request a modification of these
charges by applying to the Agency for recalculation of the prices
based on changes in any of the factors used to calculate the rental
charges.
(5) To the extent feasible, these criteria and procedures should ensure
that the new rental charges are consistent with the affordability
standards set forth in this Part 1.
(6) The Agency shall establish appropriate criteria and procedures for
allowing periodic rental charge increases.
E. Relationship between household size and unit size.
(1) For the purpose of determining maximum sales prices and rental
charges pursuant to this Part 1, the ceiling incomes of the following
household sizes shall be used to determine the maximum prices for
each of the following unit sizes:
Bedroom
Occupancy
(persons)
Efficiency 1
1 2
§ 195-11 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-11
194:341
§ 195-12. Restrictions.
§ 195-13. Exempt transactions; hardship exemptions; foreclosure.
Bedroom
Occupancy
(persons)
2 3
3 5
4 6
(2) Any room other than a bathroom, kitchen, dining area or living
room and which was initially designed for regular sleeping by
regular members of the household shall be considered a bedroom
for purposes of calculating the maximum initial sales prices. No
alterations or improvements by owners after initial occupancy shall
increase the number of bedrooms unless the total area of habitable
living space is increased by an amount at least equal to the new
area being claimed as a new bedroom.
A. Restrictions governing the lower-income units offered initially for sale
shall expire as to a particular lower-income unit 30 years from the date
of recording of the initial deed of the particular lower-income unit to a
qualified purchaser.
B. The restrictions governing the rental of lower-income units shall expire
as to a particular lower-income unit 30 years from the date of the initial
certificate of occupancy of such lower-income unit and a document shall
be recorded stating such date immediately after such initial certificate
of occupancy is issued by the Township.
C. If rental units are converted within 30 years of initial occupancy, the
same number of low- and moderate-income units, respectively, must be
maintained after conversion, subject to resale controls ensuring their
continued affordability and occupancy for the balance of the thirty-year
period.
A. Exempt transactions.
(1) The following transactions shall be deemed "non-sales" for
purposes of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan, and the
Agency shall issue a statement of exemption to the owner receiving
title by virtue of any of the following transactions:
(a) Transfer of ownership of a lower-income unit between husband
and wife.
(b) Transfer of ownership of a lower-income unit between former
spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce or
judicial decree of separation, but not including sales to third
parties.
§ 195-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-13
194:342
(c) Transfer of ownership of a lower-income unit between family
members as a result of inheritance.
(d) Transfer of ownership of a lower-income unit through an
executor's deed to any person.
(e) Transfer of ownership of a lower-income unit through an order
of the Superior Court or other court.
(2) Such transfer of ownership neither extinguishes the restrictions
and applicability of this Part 1 or the affordable housing plan to
such lower-income unit nor terminates any liens set forth under
this plan. Liens must be satisfied in full prior to the subsequent
resale of the lower-income unit and all such subsequent resales are
fully subject to the terms and provisions of this Part 1 and the
affordable housing plan.
B. Hardship exemptions. The developer and subsequent owners may apply
to the Agency for a hardship exemption.
(1) Provisions applicable to initial sales or rentals.
(a) The developer may only apply to the Agency for a hardship
exemption after the later of six months after the developer has
commenced marketing the lower-income unit in accordance
with the requirements of the affirmative marketing
requirements as set forth in § 195-14, and 90 days after the
developer has received the certificate of occupancy for such
lower-income unit.
(b) In order for the developer to be entitled to a hardship
exemption from the Agency, the developer must show the
Agency that:
[1] The time periods set forth in Subsection B(1)(a) above
have lapsed;
[2] The developer has been marketing such lower-income unit
in accordance with the affirmative marketing requirement
for such time period; and
[3] No qualified purchaser is obligated under a contract to
purchase or a lease to rent, as the case may be, for such
lower-income unit.
(2) Provisions applicable to other than initial sales or rentals.
(a) Owners or the developers may only apply to the Agency for a
hardship exemption after 120 days after such owner or
developer has notified the Agency that such lower-income unit
is available for resale or rerental to qualified lower-income
households.
§ 195-13 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-13
194:343
(b) In order for such owner or developer to be entitled to a
hardship exemption from the Agency, such owner or developer
must show the Agency that:
[1] The one hundred twenty-day time period has lapsed;
[2] The owner or developer has been affirmatively marketing
such unit in accordance with the affirmative marketing
requirement for such time period; and
[3] No qualified purchaser is obligated under a contract to
purchase or a lease to rent, as the case may be, for such
lower-income unit.
C. Procedural requirements for issuance of a statement of exemption for
both exempt transactions and hardship exemptions.
(1) The Agency must act upon an application for a statement of
exemption within 30 working days of receipt of such application.
(2) The Agency shall approve the application for a statement of
exemption if the Agency finds that the applicant has met its burden
of proof as described in Subsections B(1)(b) and B(2)(b) or
Subsection A above.
(3) If the Agency fails to approve, deny or conditionally approve an
application within such thirty-day period, such failure to act shall
be deemed to be an approval by the Agency of the application for a
statement of exemption.
(4) The Agency shall issue a written decision to the applicant
immediately after making its decision. If the application is
approved, the Agency shall immediately issue to the applicant a
statement of exemption in recordable form describing the specific
lower-income unit covered by the statement of exemption.
(5) The original of the statement of exemption shall be given to the
purchaser at the time of closing of title and shall be recorded
simultaneously with the deed, or to the tenant prior to taking
possession and occupancy, of the applicable lower-income unit.
D. Effect of statement of exemption for both hardship exemptions and
exempt transactions.
(1) A statement of exemption issued pursuant to Subsection B
(hardship) above shall authorize the owner or applicant to sell or
rent the particular lower-income unit to a household whose gross
aggregate household income is up to 50% higher than the original
relevant income ceilings applicable to such lower-income unit as
determined in accordance with § 195-10 of this Part 1.
(2) A statement of exemption issued in accordance with Subsection A
(exempt transactions) above shall permit the named grantee or
§ 195-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-13
194:344
lessee to receive title or possession of the particular lower-income
unit in the same manner as a qualified purchaser.
(3) The statement of exemption under Subsections A or B above shall
exempt only the specific sale or rental transaction for which it was
issued.
(4) The statement of exemption under Subsections A or B above shall
deem the grantee or lessee to be a qualified purchaser of such
lower-income unit for purposes of this Part 1 and the affordable
housing plan.
(5) The statement of exemption under Subsections A or B above shall
only relieve the specific transaction of the restriction of selling,
reselling or renting such lower-income unit to only qualified
purchasers. All other restrictions, requirements and provisions of
this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan shall remain in full force
and effect, including but not limited to the maximum sales prices
and rental charges which are established pursuant to § 195-11 of
this Part 1.
(6) The restrictions of resale or rental to only qualified purchasers
shall apply to subsequent resales or rentals of the particular lowerincome
unit unless a new statement of exemption is issued by the
Agency in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1.
(7) Nothing shall preclude the Agency from purchasing the specific
lower-income unit and holding, renting or conveying it to a
qualified purchaser, provided that such right is exercised prior to
the owner signing a valid contract to sell such lower-income unit
and such right is further exercised before the expiration of the
applicable fifteen-day period.
E. Foreclosure and first purchase money mortgages.
(1) Provisions for first purchase money mortgagees.
(a) The terms and restrictions of this Part 1 and the affordable
housing plan shall be subordinate only to the first purchase
money mortgage lien on any lower-income unit and in no way
shall impair the first purchase money mortgagee's ability to
exercise the contract remedies available to it in the event of
default as such remedies are set forth in the first purchase
money mortgage documents for the unit.
(b) So long as the first purchase money mortgage is not sold to the
Federal National Mortgage Association or in the secondary
mortgage market, the first purchase money mortgagee and/or
mortgage servicer shall serve written notice upon the Agency
within 10 days after the first purchase money mortgage is
three months in arrears, and within 10 calendar days of the
§ 195-13 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-13
194:345
filing of the complaint seeking foreclosure of the first purchase
money mortgage held on a lower-income unit.
(c) The obligation of first purchase money mortgagee and/or
servicer to notify the Agency shall cease automatically and
immediately upon the sale of the first purchase money
mortgage to the Federal National Mortgage Association or in
the secondary mortgage market unless the rules and
regulations or guidelines of the Federal National Mortgage
Association are amended so as to not prohibit or exclude
placing such obligation upon the holder of the mortgagee or its
service representative, in which case an instrument duly
evidencing the same must be recorded with the Office of the
Recorder, Middlesex County, New Jersey, and the Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick, before any such obligation shall
exist.
(d) Provided that the first purchase money mortgagee is obligated
to give the Agency the above-mentioned notices, the first
purchase money mortgagee shall also serve written notice of
any proposed foreclosure sale upon the Agency at least 30 days
prior to the first scheduled date of such sale.
(e) The first purchase money mortgage shall serve notice upon the
Agency within 30 days of the sale of the first purchase money
mortgage to the Federal National Mortgage Association or in
the secondary mortgage market.
(f) The Township of North Brunswick and/or the Agency or any
instrumentality designated by the Township shall have the
right to purchase any mortgage which is in default at any time
prior to the entry of a foreclosure judgment or within the
redemption period thereafter. Notification of a default and of
the institution of a foreclosure action and of a Sheriff's sale
shall be served in writing upon the Chairman of Agency as
aforesaid. The Township of North Brunswick shall at all times
be considered a party-in-interest and shall have the right to be
joined as a party defendant and/or shall have the right to
intervene in any foreclosure action seeking foreclosure of a
first mortgage and/or shall have the right to redeem and
acquire the owner's equity of redemption or to acquire the unit
from the owner upon such terms and conditions as may be
determined by the Agency.
(2) Effect of foreclosure. Any lower-income unit which is acquired by a
first purchase money mortgagee by deed in lieu of foreclosure or by
any purchaser at a mortgage foreclosure sale conducted by the
holder of the first purchase money mortgage, including the first
purchase money mortgagee but excepting the defaulting
mortgagor, shall be permanently released from the restrictions and
convenants of this plan, and all resale restrictions shall cease to be
§ 195-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-13
194:346
effective as to the first purchase money mortgagee and all
subsequent purchasers and mortgagees of that particular unit,
except for the defaulting mortgagor, who shall be forever subject
to the resale restrictions of this plan with respect to the unit owned
by him at the time of his default. The Agency shall execute a
document in recordable form evidencing that such lower-income
unit has been forever released from the restrictions of this Part
1 and the affordable housing plan. Execution of foreclosure sales
by any other class of creditor or mortgagees shall not result in a
release of the unit from the provisions and restrictions of this Part
1 or the affordable housing plan.
(3) Surplus funds. In the event of a foreclosure sale by the holder of the
first purchase money mortgage, the owner shall be personally
obligated to pay to the Agency any surplus funds. For purposes of
this subsection, "surplus funds" shall be the total amount paid to
the Sheriff in excess of the greater of the maximum resale price of
the unit pursuant to § 195-11C and the amount required to pay and
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage, including the costs of
foreclosure plus any second mortgages approved by the Agency in
accordance with § 195-7J of this Part 1. Surplus funds shall also
include all payments to any junior creditors out of such surplus
funds even if such were to the exclusion of the owner. The Agency
shall be given a first priority lien, second only to the first purchase
money mortgagee of a unit and any taxes or public assessments by
a duly authorized governmental body, equal to the full amount of
such surplus funds. This obligation of the owner to pay this full
amount of surplus funds to the Agency shall be deemed to be a
personal obligation of the owner of record at the time of the
foreclosure sale, and the Agency shall be empowered to enforce the
obligation of the owner in any appropriate court of law or equity as
though the same were a personal contractual obligation of the
owner. Neither the first purchase money mortgagee nor the
purchaser at the foreclosure sale shall be responsible or liable to
the Agency for any portion of this excess. The Agency may utilize
up to 30% of the surplus funds realized in any one calendar year,
but in no event to exceed $10,000 per calendar year, for the
purpose of funding operating expenses of the Agency. Other
surplus funds shall be used for increasing the opportunities for
affordable housing within the Township in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1.
(4) Owner's equity.
(a) Owner's equity shall be determined to be the difference
between the maximum resale price of the unit as calculated in
accordance with § 195-11C and the total of the first purchase
money mortgage, prior liens, costs of foreclosure,
assessments, property taxes and other liens which may have
§ 195-13 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-13
194:347
§ 195-14. Affirmative marketing requirements.
§ 195-15. Reporting requirements.
The Township of North Brunswick shall report quarterly in writing to the
Civic League of Greater New Brunswick or its designee, commencing with
December 31, 1985, providing the following information with regard to any
sites requiring set asides of low- and moderate-income housing:
been attached against the unit prior to foreclosure, provided
that such total is less than the maximum resale price.
(b) If there are sums to which the owner is properly entitled, such
sums shall be turned over to the owner or placed in an escrow
by the Agency for the owner for a maximum period of two
years. Any interest accrued or earned on such balance while
being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to the
Agency.
(c) This provision is subject, however, to applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey governing the distribution and payment of
proceeds of foreclosure sales.
A. All developers of low- and moderate-income units shall affirmatively
market said units to persons of low and moderate income, irrespective
of race, color, sex, religion or national origin.
B. Towards that end, the developer shall formulate and submit an
affirmative marketing plan acceptable to the Agency, which plan shall
be incorporated as a condition of approval of the development
application. At a minimum, the plan shall provide for advertisement in
newspapers with general circulation in the following urban areas:
Jersey City, Newark, Elizabeth, Paterson, New Brunswick and Perth
Amboy. The plan shall also require that the developer notify the
following agencies on a regular basis of the availability of any low- or
moderate-income units: the Civic League of Greater New Brunswick,
the Housing Coalition of Middlesex County, the Middlesex County
Office of Community Development and other fair housing centers,
housing referral organizations and government housing and community
development departments located in the following eleven counties:
Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic,
Somerset, Union, Sussex and Warren, as such are identified by the
Agency prior to approval of the developer's proposed affirmative
marketing plan.
C. All advertisements shall conform to applicable affirmative action, equal
opportunity and nondiscrimination laws of the state and federal
government.
A. Itemization of all proposed developments which are subject to the
provisions of this Part 1 and for which applications have been filed with
§ 195-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-15
194:348
§ 195-16. Responsibilities.
or approved by the Planning Board. Information shall be provided on
the location of the proposed site, the number of low- or moderateincome
units, the number of market units, calculation of maximum sales
prices per § 195-11, the distribution of lower-income units by bedroom
number, the phasing schedule for completion of lower-income units in
relation to completion of market units, the name of the developer and
dates that Planning Board actions were taken or are anticipated to be
taken.
B. A copy of the affirmative marketing plans provided for each
development, together with copies of advertisements and a list of
newspapers and community or governmental organizations or agencies
which received the advertisements.
A. Developer's responsibilities.
(1) The responsibilities of the developer shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
(a) Submission of information as to financing terms readily
available to low- and moderate-income households for use by
the Agency in computing maximum sales prices.
(b) Submission of an affordable housing plan and an affirmative
marketing plan to the Agency for approval, and submission of
proofs of publication to ensure compliance with said plan.
(c) The marketing of all low- and moderate-income units in
accordance with the requirements of this Part 1.
(d) Submission of quarterly reports to the Agency detailing the
number of low- and moderate-income households who have
signed leases or purchase agreements, as well as the number
who have taken occupancy of lower-income units, including
household size, number of bedrooms in the unit, sales price
and monthly carrying costs or, in the case of rental units, the
monthly rental charges and utilities included.
(2) The developer's responsibilities hereunder shall expire
automatically with respect to for-sale lower-income units upon the
date upon which the last lower-income unit within the particular
development is sold by the developer. With respect to rental lowerincome
units, the developer's responsibilities shall be assumed by
the landlord and shall be performed by the landlord so long as such
unit is a rental lower-income unit and subject to the restrictions of
this Part 1.
B. Responsibilities of owners. [Amended 1-15-1990; 12-20-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-35]
§ 195-15 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-16
194:349
(1) Prior to advertising or listing his or her low- or moderate-income
unit for resale or rental, if a rental is permitted by the Agency as
provided in § 195-9B, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Agency of the proposed advertisement or listing and a copy of such
proposed advertisement or listing which identifies the unit as
income restricted.
(2) Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this Part 1, the owner shall
only resell or rent, if a rental is permitted by the Agency as
provided in § 195-9B, his or her low or moderate-income unit to a
qualified purchaser or renter as determined by the Agency in
accordance with the income eligibility guidelines adopted by the
Agency.
(3) Prior to reselling or renting his or her low or moderate-income unit,
the owner shall provide the Agency with a true and correct copy of
the contract for sale or lease and obtain approval of the maximum
permitted resale price or rental for the resale or rental from the
Agency.
(4) Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this Part 1, the owner shall be
responsible for guaranteeing that the necessary documents are
executed and filed at the closing of rifle or rental, if a rental is
permitted by the Agency as provided in § 195-9B, of a low or
moderate-income unit to assure that the unit remains affordable to
and occupied by low or moderate-income households.
(5) In the event that any first mortgagee or other creditor of an owner
of a lower-income unit exercises its contractual or legal remedies
available in the event of default or nonpayment by the owner of a
lower-income unit, the owner shall notify the Agency in writing
within 10 days of such exercise by the first mortgagee or creditor
and no later than 10 days after service of any summons and
complaint.
(6) Any owner of a lower-income unit shall notify the Agency within 10
days in writing of any default in the performance by the owner of
any obligation under either the master deed of the condominium
association, including the failure to pay any lawful and proper
assessment by the condominium association, or any mortgage or
other lien against the lower-income unit, which default is not cured
within 60 days of the date upon which the default first occurs.
(7) The owner shall not permit any lien, other than the first purchase
money mortgage, Agency-approved second mortgages and liens of
the Agency, to attach and remain on the property for more than 60
days.
(8) The owner of a lower-income unit shall keep the unit in good repair
and shall not commit waste thereon.
§ 195-16 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-16
194:350
§ 195-17. Violations and penalties.
(9) The owner shall pay all taxes and public assessments and
assessments by the condominium association levied upon or
assessed against the unit or any part thereof as and when the same
become due and before penalties accrue.
(10) If a lower-income unit is part of a Condominium Association, the
owner, in addition to paying any assessments required to be paid by
the master deed of the condominium association, shall further fully
comply with all of the terms, covenants or conditions of said master
deed, as well as fully comply with all terms, conditions and
restrictions of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan.
(11) Certification of compliance.
(a) The owner of a lower-income unit shall be required to certify, in
writing, compliance with the provisions of the Affordable
Housing Ordinance, an approved applicable affordable housing
plan and the rules and regulations of the Township of North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency at least one time per
calendar year and at such other times as may be required by
the Agency.
(b) The certificate shall be completed by the owner on a form
provided by the Agency and shall be completed and returned
by the owner to the Agency no later than 10 days from the date
of mailing by the Agency.
(c) The Agency shall have the right to verify the accuracy of the
certification by such means as are lawfully available to it,
including but not limited to inspections by the Office of Code
Enforcement as well as the Department of Law and Safety.
A. Violations of this Part 1 or affordable housing plan; interest.
(1) The interest of any owner may, at the option of the Agency, be
subject to forfeiture in the event of substantial breach of any of the
terms, restrictions and provisions of this Part 1 or the affordable
housing plan which remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of a written notice of a violation upon the owner by the
Agency.
(2) However, the interest of any owner shall be subject to forfeiture in
the event of falsification of any application and/or certification as
may be required by this Part 1 and/or the rules and regulations of
the Township of North Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency and/
or by an applicable approved affordable housing plan, and
accordingly, the Agency shall have the right to institute appropriate
legal action in the Superior Court of New Jersey for the purpose of
obtaining a judgment which would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit in the nature of a
§ 195-16 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-17
194:351
mortgage foreclosure, together with damages, interest, attorney's
fees and costs. Any judgment shall be enforceable and have the
same effect as set forth in this section. [Added 1-15-1990]
(3) Further, the interest of any owner shall be subject to forfeiture and
legal proceedings as set forth above in the event the owner rents a
unit which is not authorized or permitted to be rented by this Part 1
and/or the rules and regulations of the Township of North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency and/or an approved
affordable housing plan. [Added 1-15-1990]
B. Code Enforcement Official's investigation; notice of violation.
[Amended 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-35]
(1) The Code Enforcement Official shall investigate all complaints of a
violation of this Part 1.
(2) The Code Enforcement Official shall, within 60 days of the receipt
of the complaint, or longer for good cause shown, timely report the
findings of his investigation to the Agency in a form that will permit
the Agency to comprehensively review the complaint and the
official's findings. Such a report, which shall be in writing and
submitted to the Secretary of the Agency, shall contain adequate
information upon which the Agency may rely to provide written
notice to an owner of a violation of this Part 1.
(3) The Agency, upon a review of the Code Enforcement Official's
report, shall determine whether to issue a notice of violation. Any
notice of violation shall specify the particular infraction and shall
advise the owner that his or her right to continued ownership may
be subject to forfeiture if such infraction is not cured within 60 days
of receipt of the notice.
C. Violation of this Part 1 or the affordable housing plan. After providing
written notice of a violation of this Part 1 and/or the affordable housing
plan to an owner of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the
owner of the penalties for such violations, the Agency may take the
following action against the owner for any violation that remains
uncured for a period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(1) The Agency may file an action in Municipal Court pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of this Part 1 and/
or the affordable housing plan. If the owner is found by the court to
have violated any provision of this Part 1 and/or the affordable
housing plan, he or she shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense.
§ 195-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-17
194:352
(b) In the case of an owner who has resold his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this Part 1 and/or the
affordable housing plan, payment into Township of North
Brunswick Housing Trust Fund of the difference between the
unauthorized resale price and the maximum resale price
allowed by this Part 1.
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this Part 1 and/or the
affordable housing plan, payment into the Township of North
Brunswick Housing Trust Fund of the difference between the
unauthorized rental charge and the maximum rental charge
allowed by this Part 1 for the entire term for which it is
determined that a violation existed.
(d) In the ease of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this Part 1 and/or the
affordable housing plan, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The Agency may file an action in the Superior Court seeking a
judgment which would result in the termination of the owner's
equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage
foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were
a judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage and
shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderate-income unit.
(a) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
Agency, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low and moderate-income unit of the violating owner
shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount
necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money
mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the enforcement
proceedings incurred by the Agency, including attorney's fees.
The violating owner shall have his right to possession
terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to the
Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the Agency for any and all
costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the Agency in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for and to the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and
all costs incurred by the Agency in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
§ 195-17 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-17
194:353
in escrow by the Agency for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier
time as the owner shall make a claim with the Agency for such.
Failure of the owner to claim such balance within the two-year
period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance
to the Agency. Any interest accrued or earned on such balance
while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the Agency, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the Agency.
(c) Foreclosure by the Agency due to violation of this Part 1 and/or
the affordable housing plan shall not extinguish the
restrictions of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan as
the same apply to the low and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to
the restrictions and provisions of this Part 1 and the affordable
housing plan. The owner determined to be in violation of the
provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession
were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled
to any right or redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the Agency may acquire title to the low and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner
with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale prior for which the low and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of this Part 1 and the
affordable housing plan. This excess shall be treated in the
same manner as the excess which would have been realized
from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the Agency shall obligate
the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified
purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the Agency,
with such offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale
price of the low and moderate unit as permitted by the terms
and provisions of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of this Part 1 and
the affordable housing plan until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
D. Such judgment shall be enforceable at the option of the Agency by
means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which the lower-income
unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sales price which is not less
§ 195-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-17
194:354
than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the enforcement
proceedings incurred by the Agency, including attorney's fees. The
violating owner shall have his right to possession terminated as well as
his title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
E. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the lowerincome
unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the
Agency for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection with
either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are
insufficient to reimburse the Agency in full as aforesaid, the violating
owner shall be personally responsible for and to the extent of such
deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by the Agency in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the Agency for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time as
the owner shall make a claim with the Agency for such. Failure of the
owner to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the Agency. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the Agency, whether such balance
shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the Agency.
F. Foreclosure by the Agency due to violation of this Part 1 and the
affordable housing plan shall not extinguish the restrictions of this Part
1 and the affordable housing plan as the same apply to the lowerincome
unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's
sale subject to the restrictions and provisions of this Part 1 and the
affordable housing plan. The owner determined to be in violation of the
provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were taken
by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
G. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale or if insufficient amounts are
bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the
Agency may acquire title to the lower- income unit by satisfying the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the
violating owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale
price for which the lower-income unit could have been sold under the
terms of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan. This excess shall
be treated in the same manner as the excess which would have been
realized from an actual sale as previously described.
H. Failure of the lower-income unit to be either sold at the Sheriff's sale or
acquired by the Agency shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to
purchase from any qualified purchaser, which may be referred to the
§ 195-17 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-17
194:355
owner by the Agency, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum sales price of the lower-income unit as permitted by the
terms and provisions of this Part 1 and the affordable housing plan.
I. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of this Part 1 and the
affordable housing plan until such time as title is conveyed from the
owner.
§ 195-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-17
194:356
Part 2
[AdoptedA1ffi2r-m1-a2t0iv0e3 MByarOkredt.i nNgo. 03-40]
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 195-18. Fair share obligation.
North Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, has a fair share obligation of
489 units, of which 395 provide new affordable housing opportunities. This
Part 2 will apply to the following developments:
§ 195-19. Affirmative marketing plan.
The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to
attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless
of sex, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will address the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan prohibits
discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services related to
housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial
status/size or national origin. North Brunswick Township is in the housing
region consisting of Middlesex, Somerset and Huntington Counties.
§ 195-20. Affirmative marketing program.
The affirmative marketing program is a continuing program and will meet
the following requirements:
A. North Brunswick Senior Housing; and
B. Governors Pointe 1 and 2.
A. All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the following
publications:
(1) Home News Tribune.
(2) The Sentinel.
(3) The Navigator.
B. The advertisement will include the following:
(1) Street address;
(2) Number of bedrooms per unit;
(3) Range of selling prices/rents;
(4) Size of units;
§ 195-18 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-20
194:357
§ 195-21. Random selection method.
The following is a description of the random selection method that will be
used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
(5) Household income limits; and
(6) Location of applications, including business hours and where/how
applications may be obtained.
C. If applicable, the following regional radio and/or cable television
station(s) will be used:
(1) WCTC.
D. The following is the location of applications, brochure(s), sign(s) and/or
poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program:
(1) Municipal building.
(2) Municipal library.
(3) Senior center.
E. The following is a list of community contact person(s) and/or
organization(s) in Middlesex County that will aid in the affirmative
marketing program with particular emphasis on contacts that will reach
out to groups that are least likely to apply for housing within the region:
(1) Civic League of Greater New Brunswick.
(2) New Brunswick Housing Coalition.
F. Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
G. Additionally, applications will be sent to the chief administrative
employees of each of the following agencies in the counties of
Middlesex, Somerset and Hunterdon:
(1) Office on Aging.
(2) Housing Agency or Authority.
(3) Library.
A. North Brunswick Senior Housing will be first come, first served.
B. In Governors Pointe, potential purchasers will be approved on a
monthly basis when applications are complete, but the decisions as to
who to sell to will be made by the seller based upon the best offer
received.
§ 195-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-22
194:358
§ 195-22. Administration.
North Brunswick Township is ultimately responsible for administering the
affirmative marketing program. North Brunswick Township has delegated
this responsibility to the North Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency.
§ 195-23. Affordable Housing Agency.
The North Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency will income qualify lowand
moderate-income households; continue to qualify households for
reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; assist with advertising and outreach to low- and
moderate-income households; and enforce the terms of the deed restriction
and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9. The Secretary to the Affordable
Housing Agency shall be the designated housing officer. The North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency will provide counseling services to
low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, responsibilities of homeownership, rental
lease requirements and landlord/tenant law.
§ 195-24. Preference to households within housing region.
Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing region may
be given preference for sales and rental units constructed within that
housing region. Applicants living outside the housing region will have an
equal opportunity for units after regional applicants have been initially
serviced. North Brunswick Township intends to comply with N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.7.
§ 195-25. Continuance of program; monitoring and reporting.
The marketing program will continue for as long as all low- and moderateincome
housing units are deed restricted and occupancy or reoccupancy
of units continues to be necessary. North Brunswick Affordable Housing
Agency will comply with monitoring and reporting requirements as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 5:93-12.1.
§ 195-22 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-25
194:359

Part 3
Residentia[Al dAonpdt eNdo1n2re-1si-d2e0n0t8iaBl yDOevredl.o Npom. e0n8t- 2R9equirements 73]
ARTICLE V
Implementation of Policies
§ 195-26. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known as "Residential and Nonresidential Development
Requirements."
§ 195-27. Purpose.
§ 195-28. Basic requirements.
§ 195-29. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this part, shall have the following meanings:
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This part establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 through 38. Fees collected
pursuant to this part shall be used for the sole purpose of providing lowand
moderate-income housing. This part shall be interpreted within the
framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.
A. This part shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Township of North Brunswick shall not spend development fees
until COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance
with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and 5:96-5.3.
73.Editor’s Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Part 3, Uniform Growth-Based
Affordable Housing Production, Adopted 3-6-2006 By Ord. No. 06-01.
§ 195-26 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-29
194:361
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5,
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 195-30. Residential development.
A. Residential development of affordable housing obligations on site.
Every residential development that consists of five or more dwelling
units shall be required to build the applicable number of affordable
housing units on site. Payments in lieu of construction shall be
prohibited. If there is a fractional affordable unit required, the
applicant shall be required to pay a residential development fee of 1.5%
of the equalized assessed valuation for each market-priced unit which
contributed to the fractional unit.
B. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the Township of North Brunswick's zoning district(s),
residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1 1/2%
of the equalized assessed value for residential development
provided no increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
§ 195-29 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-30
194:362
§ 195-31. Nonresidential development fees.
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(3) Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
C. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Residential structures that are demolished and replaced as a result
of a natural disaster, alterations or additions to single-family
homes, and improvements to single-family properties such as
finishing a basement, installing a deck or patio, installing a pool,
and similar improvements shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
§ 195-30 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-31
194:363
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or marketrate
development shall be subject to the two-and-a-half-percent
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The two-and-a-half-percent fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption Form." Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
C. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies,
and shall make the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in
that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of
the final certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
D. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination of
the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential development fees
under these circumstances may be enforceable by the Township of
North Brunswick as a lien against the real property of the owner.
§ 195-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-32
194:364
§ 195-32. Collection procedures.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of North Brunswick fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
§ 195-32 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-32
194:365
§ 195-33. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township of
North Brunswick. Appeals from a determination of the Board may
be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township of North Brunswick. Appeals from a determination
of the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of North
Brunswick's affordable housing program.
§ 195-32 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-33
194:366
§ 195-34. Use of funds.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Township of North Brunswick shall provide COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between
the municipality, the bank and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Township of North
Brunswick's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs,
conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable
units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land
for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and specified
in the approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of North
Brunswick for past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
§ 195-33 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-34
194:367
§ 195-35. Monitoring.
The Township of North Brunswick shall complete and return to COAH
all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any
other funds collected in connection with the Township of North Brunswick's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall
be completed on forms designed by COAH.
§ 195-36. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Township of North Brunswick to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with its substantive certification
unless the Township of North Brunswick has filed an adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee
ordinance. If the Township of North Brunswick fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited
income. The use of development fees in this manner may entitle the
Township of North Brunswick to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.7.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township of North Brunswick may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 195-34 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-36
194:368
into the New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant
to § 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Township of North
Brunswick shall not impose a residential development fee on a development
that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the
Township of North Brunswick retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. The Township of North Brunswick shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
§ 195-36 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-36
194:369

Part 4
Adm[Aindiosptrtaetdio1n2 -O1f5 A-2ff0o0r8daBbyleO Hrdo.u Nsion. g0 8P-r3o0g]ram
ARTICLE VI
Municipal Housing Liaison
§ 195-37. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township of North Brunswick's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 195-38. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Township of North Brunswick to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the Mayor
and Township Council with the responsibility for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 195-39. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and
duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Township
of North Brunswick.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Council and may be a full- or parttime
municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
North Brunswick, including the following responsibilities which may
not be contracted out, exclusive of item C(6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the Township of North Brunswick's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing
providers, administrative agents, and interested households;
§ 195-37 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-39
194:371
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
North Brunswick's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Township of North Brunswick as
described in Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of North Brunswick may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any
agency charged by the Township Council, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Township of North Brunswick, except for those responsibilities which
may not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the
Township of North Brunswick contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including
the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Township Council at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of North Brunswick
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
§ 195-39 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-39
194:372
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of North Brunswick
when referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
§ 195-39 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-39
194:373
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 195-39 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-39
194:374
ARTICLE VII
General Regulations
[Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
§ 195-40. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units for a specific project in accordance with this
article, N.J.A.C. 5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4 and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit
conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent-affordable housing
development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
fair share plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
§ 195-40 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-40
194:375
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to, transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons," as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 195-40 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-40
194:376
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
HOUSING ELEMENT AND FAIR SHARE PLAN (HEFSP) — The master plan
element adopted by the Planning Board on June 23, 2016, and endorsed by
the Township Council on July 25, 2016, in accordance with the settlement
agreement for a declaratory judgment; Docket No. MID-L-3565-15.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for Region III,
as adopted annually by COAH or a successor entity approved by the court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
NORTH BRUNSWICK AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLAN (NBAMP) — The
affirmative marketing plan adopted by resolution of the Township Council
on July 25, 2016, to assure that all affordable units are affirmatively
marketed to low- and moderate-income households; said NBAMP providing
minimum guidelines that must be incorporated into project-specific
§ 195-40 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-40
194:377
affirmative marketing plans (PSAMP) developed and approved for each
specific affordable housing project in the Township.
NORTH BRUNSWICK AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY — The agency
created pursuant to the 1986 consent order to carry out the powers and
responsibilities of the Agency relative to the sale and resale of affordable
housing units located in the Governor Pointe condominium complexes.
PROJECT-SPECIFIC AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLAN (PSAMP) — An
affirmative marketing plan developed by the administrative agent for a
specific affordable housing project; said PSAMP incorporating at a
minimum all requirements of the North Brunswick Affirmative Marketing
Plan (NBAMP).
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income for
the applicable housing region.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 195-40 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-41
194:378
§ 195-41. Applicability.
§ 195-42. Exceptions to requirements.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of North Brunswick
pursuant to the Township's most recently adopted HEFSP, with the
exception of specific projects that are exempted from requirements
identified herein in § 195-42.
B. In addition, any property in the Township of North Brunswick that is
currently zoned for nonresidential uses and that is subsequently
rezoned for residential purposes or receives a zoning change or a use
variance to permit residential development, or receives a zoning
change or a density variance to permit higher density residential
development, and provided such residential development provides a
sufficient compensatory benefit in terms of the density of development
permitted, shall provide an affordable housing set-aside of 15% if the
affordable units will be for rent and 20% if the affordable units will be
for sale. The determination of a "sufficient compensatory benefit" shall
be made by the reviewing authority based upon prevailing legislation
and/or case law.
C. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units, subject to the exceptions outlined in § 195-42.
A. The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), originally adopted
October 1, 2001, and amended December 20, 2004, were designed to
implement the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.) to assure that low- and moderate-income units created under the
Act are occupied by low- and moderate-income households for an
appropriate period of time. While UHAC applies to the vast majority of
restricted units, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 states that UHAC does not apply to
units qualifying for federal low-income housing tax credits.
B. The exception noted above results in both the North Brunswick Senior
Apartments building and the North Brunswick Crescent project being
exempt from UHAC requirements, as federal low-income housing tax
credits are utilized in the financing of these projects. As a result, these
two projects are exempt from the UHAC regulations, and are only
required to meet regulations in the NBAMP that are identical to UHAC
regulations if the NBAMP specifically states that a particular regulation
applies to these two developments.
C. There is one additional project in the Township that will be governed by
different affirmative marketing regulations than those proposed herein.
There are 200 affordable units located in the Governor's Pointe I and
Governor's Pointe II condominium complexes. The North Brunswick
§ 195-41 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-42
194:379
§ 195-43. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 195-44. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
With the exception of the specific developments identified in the Township's
settlement agreement and HEFSP adopted on June 23, 2016, inclusionary
developments shall comply with the following schedule for production of
affordable units:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25% 0%
25% + 1% 10%
Council created the North Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency to
enforce the affordability controls for these units in 1987. The
affordability controls on these units expire in either 2018 or 2019,
depending upon the date of initial occupancy. Since 1988, the North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency has been regulating the sale
and resale of these units, and the income eligibility determinations of
applicants. With only two years or less remaining in the control period
of these units, these units will continue to be regulated by the North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Agency in accordance with Chapter 195,
§§ 195-1 through 195-39. Affordable units incorporated in the June
23, 2016, Housing Element and Fair Share Plan shall be regulated in
accordance with Chapter 195, §§ 195-40 through 195-60.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
§ 195-42 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-44
194:380
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
§ 195-45. New construction.
A. For all future affordable housing units that are not specifically identified
in the Township's Settlement Agreement and Township's second round
HEFSP, approved by COAH on October 1, 2003, or the third round
HEFSP, approved by the Planning Board on June 23, 2016, the following
low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing units
shall apply:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 10% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
median income). The very-low-income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
§ 195-44 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-45
194:381
B. Accessibility requirements. The first floor of all restricted townhouse
dwelling units and all restricted units in all other multistory buildings
shall be subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
(1) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(1)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(1)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that North Brunswick has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of North Brunswick's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(1)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of North Brunswick for the
sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by a
person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy
the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
§ 195-45 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-45
194:382
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of North Brunswick for the conversion of
adaptable to accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units. With the exception of the
specific developments identified in the Township's Settlement
Agreement and HEFSP adopted on June 23, 2016, at least 10% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income.
§ 195-45 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-45
194:383
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
§ 195-45 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-45
194:384
§ 195-46. Utilities.
§ 195-47. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 195-48. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for Region 3. In no event shall the maximum
resale price established by the administrative agent be lower than
the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by DCA for its Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until North Brunswick
§ 195-45 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-48
194:385
§ 195-49. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
takes action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such
action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions
in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent and by the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
§ 195-48 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-49
194:386
§ 195-50. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 195-51. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 195-52.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may,
upon approval by the Municipal Housing Liaison, and subject to the
court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy lowincome
units in housing markets if the Municipal Housing Liaison
determines that there is an insufficient number of eligible low-income
purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of the units. All such lowincome
units to be sold to moderate-income households shall retain the
required pricing and pricing restrictions for low-income units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
§ 195-49 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-51
194:387
§ 195-52. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 195-53. Control periods for restricted rental units.
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until North Brunswick takes
action to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action,
a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
§ 195-51 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-53
194:388
§ 195-54. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 195-55. Tenant income eligibility.
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Middlesex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided
to the Municipal Housing Liaison within 30 days of the receipt of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the form of the lease utilized
by the administrative agent for each type of restricted rental unit shall
be provided to the Municipal Housing Liaison prior to leasing the units.
In addition, the administrative agent shall provide to the Municipal
Housing Liaison prior to the beginning of marketing of any affordable
rental units, a detailed breakdown of the proposed rents for each
bedroom mix and income group indicating the formula and showing the
calculations utilized to determine the rents for each unit.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
§ 195-53 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-55
194:389
§ 195-56. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A(1) through (3) and B(1)
through (5) above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting. The administrative agent shall provide the
Municipal Housing Liaison with a spreadsheet listing all approved
applicants who meet one of the circumstances identified above on a
quarterly basis. This spreadsheet shall identify the percentage of
monthly income represented by the rent, and the specific circumstance
in Subsection B(1) through (5) that has been met.
A. The Township of North Brunswick shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
administering the affordable housing plan, including affordability
controls, the North Brunswick Affirmative Marketing Plan (NBAMP),
monitoring and reporting, and, where applicable, supervising any
developer serving as administrative agent upon approval by resolution
of the Township Council, or any contracted administrative agent. North
Brunswick shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of Municipal
Housing Liaison. North Brunswick shall adopt a resolution appointing a
§ 195-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-56
194:390
§ 195-57. Administrative agent.
Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by the Township Council and may be a full- or part-time
municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved
by the court and shall be duly qualified.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
North Brunswick, including the following responsibilities which may
not be contracted out to an administrative agent:
(1) Serving as North Brunwick's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in North Brunswick's
HEFSP;
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed; and
(6) Oversee review and approval of project-specific Affirmative
Marketing Plans (PSAMP), make recommendations to the Township
Council relative to whether a developer should be appointed as
administrative agent and whether the management plan should be
accepted as adequate.
C. Subject to the approval of the court, the Township of North Brunswick
shall designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer newly
constructed or renovated affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An
operating manual for each new affordable housing development
incorporated into the HEFSP shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to the Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall determine if the operating manual is adequate. Said
operating manual is subject to approval of the court. The operating
manual shall be available for public inspection in the Community
Development Office, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and
in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall supervise both developers serving as administrative
agents and any contracted administrative agent(s).
A. The NBAMP provides minimum requirements that must be followed for
the marketing of affordable units in the Township. It also provides
options for the designation of administrative agents for each affordable
§ 195-56 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-57
194:391
housing development. The Township shall provide the developer of
each affordable housing development the option to serve as the
administrative agent for the development if said developer can
document to the satisfaction of the Township that the company and
individuals from the company who will be involved in the marketing of
the project and the review of applications for approval have adequate
training to act in this capacity. The developer shall submit to the
Municipal Housing Liaison the qualifications of the company in order to
document that the company meets the requirements of UHAC [N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.14(e)]. The developer shall also submit an operating manual
that describes the management procedures and responsibilities for
processing applications in accordance with UHAC [N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.14(b)]. The Municipal Housing Liaison will make a
recommendation to the Township Council as to whether the developer
has the requisite experience and personnel have the required training
to act as administrative agent. The Township Council shall either adopt
a resolution designating the developer as the administrative agent,
or rejecting the developer's request to act as administrative agent. If
approved to act as administrative agent, the developer shall submit to
the Municipal Housing Liaison each year the name of the individual
who will be the contact person/responsible party for the North
Brunswick project. If a developer is designated as administrative agent
by the Township Council, the Township Council may revoke this
approval at any time if the Council determines that the administrative
agent fails to perform the functions of administrative agent in an
acceptable manner.
B. If the developer's application to act as administrative agent is rejected
by the Township Council, the Township Council shall contract with a
trained individual or company to provide the services of administrative
agent, and the developer shall be responsible for all costs of said
contract.
C. If the Township of North Brunswick does not approve a developer to
serve as administrative agent for an affordable housing project, then
the Township shall hire an independent entity to serve under contract
to and report to the Township. The fees of a contracted administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative
agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative
agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections
5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the North
Brunswick Affirmative Marketing Plan (NBAMP) and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
§ 195-57 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-57
194:392
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing a random selection process as outlined in the
PSAMP when referring households for certification to
affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Middlesex County Register of Deeds or
Middlesex County Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resales and rerentals:
§ 195-57 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-57
194:393
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this article;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement responsibilities of the administrative agent.
(a) For a project with owner-occupied affordable units, securing
annually from the Tax Assessor a list of all affordable housing
units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners, and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, a notice as to the
maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number
of the Municipal Housing Liaison where complaints of excess
rent or other charges can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in;
§ 195-57 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-57
194:394
§ 195-58. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(e) Working with the Municipal Housing Liaison to divert unlawful
rent payments to the Township's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
administrative agent, to be approved by the Township Council
and the court, setting forth procedures for administering the
affordability controls.
(7) Additional responsibilities.
(a) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
(b) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
any monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the
court, COAH or any other state agency.
(c) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
A. The Township of North Brunswick shall adopt by resolution an
affirmative marketing plan, entitled North Brunswick Affirmative
Marketing Plan (NBAMP) subject to approval of the court that is
compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and
supplemented.
B. The NBAMP is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers
and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race,
creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital or familial status, gender,
affectional or sexual orientation, disability, age or number of children to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or
owner of affordable housing. The NBAMP is intended to target those
potentially eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable
units in that region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing
activities toward Housing Region 3 and is required to be followed
throughout the period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 3, comprised of
Middlesex, Somerset, and Hunterdon Counties.
D. The Township desires to provide a preference for affordable housing to
low- to moderate-income veterans who served in time of war or other
emergency, as defined in Section 1 of P.L. 1963, c.171 (N.J.S.A.
§ 195-57 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-58
194:395
§ 195-59. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
54:4-8.10). This preference shall apply to 10% of the affordable housing
units in each development. This preference shall be established in
the applicant selection process for available affordable units so that
applicants who are veterans who served in times of war or other
emergency, as referenced in this section, and who apply within 90
days of the initial marketing period shall receive preference for the
rental of 10% of the units. After the first 90 days of the initial onehundred-
twenty-day marketing period, if any of those units subject
to the preference remain available, then applicants from the general
public shall be considered for occupancy. Following the initial onehundred-
twenty-day marketing period, previously qualified applicants
and future qualified applicants who are veterans who served in times of
war or other emergency, as referenced in this section, shall be placed
on a special waiting list as well as the general waiting list. The veterans
on the special waiting list shall be given preference for affordable units,
as the units become available, whenever the percentage of preferenceoccupied
units falls below 10%.
E. The Township has the ultimate responsibility for adopting an
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of North Brunswick for each specific project shall implement
the PSAMP developed and approved for his or her development to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
F. In implementing the PSAMP, the administrative agent shall provide a
list of counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
G. The NBAMP and each approved PSAMP shall describe the media to be
used in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In
implementing the PSAMP, the administrative agent shall consider the
use of language translations where appropriate.
H. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
I. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the county library for each county within the housing region; the
North Brunswick administration building and the North Brunswick
library, and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
§ 195-58 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-59
194:396
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance. Any and all costs incurred by
the Township to enforce the NBAMP shall be borne by the
administrative agent for the specific affordable housing project
associated with the violation.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of North Brunswick
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
§ 195-59 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-59
194:397
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
§ 195-59 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-59
194:398
§ 195-60. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant
to this article shall be filed in writing with the Municipal Housing Liaison.
Appeals from all decisions of the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be filed
in writing with the Superior Court of New Jersey, Middlesex County, Law
Division.
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 195-59 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 195-60
194:399
Chapter 196
HOTELS AND MULTIFAMILY HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 158.
Dwellings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 161.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 176.
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
Hotel and motel room occupancy tax — See
Ch. 194.
Housing standards and occupancy
limits — See Ch. 197.
Parking — See Ch. 227.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
§ 195-60 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 195-60
194:400
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 196-1. General application and interpretation.
§ 196-2. Cyclical inspections of multiple dwellings.
A. Purpose. The North Brunswick Housing Code is adopted to establish
reasonable minimum standards and to authorize and mandate
inspections of units and to provide for the cyclical inspections of hotels
and multiple dwellings; to define responsibilities of owners, owners'
agents, and occupants; and to fix penalties for violation of this chapter.
B. Application. This chapter shall apply to the repair, maintenance,
occupancy and use of all hotels and multiple-dwelling units in North
Brunswick Township. It shall not supersede other codes and regulations
of the Township.
C. Interpretation.
(1) This chapter shall be liberally interpreted to secure the beneficial
purposes thereof.
(2) Any conflict or inconsistency between the requirements of these
regulations and applicable local, state and federal laws and
regulations shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive
requirements.
(3) Whenever any standard or code is referred to in this chapter, the
most recent edition of such shall be deemed to be incorporated
herein by reference, notwithstanding the fact that such edition may
have been published subsequent to enactment of this chapter in
which the reference to such standard or code is contained.
(4) The local enforcing agency, as the term is defined in N.J.A.C.
5:70-1.5, is authorized to enforce provisions of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., and the most current
edition of the International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70, applicable to
hotels and multiple dwellings. Inspectors, as defined by this
chapter and certified as fire inspectors and licensed as housing
inspectors, shall act as agents of the local enforcing agency
inspecting non-life-hazard uses in hotels and multiple dwellings.
D. Force and effect of regulations. This chapter shall have the force and
effect of law until revised, repealed or amended by the Mayor and
Township Council and shall be administered and enforced by the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development.
E. Matters covered. The provisions of this chapter shall cover all matters
affecting or relating to multiple-family housing and shall extend to their
appurtenant constructions, together with all surface and subsurface
construction.
§ 196-1 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-2
194:401
§ 196-3. Maintenance requirements.
A. The Inspector is authorized and directed to inspect all hotels and/or
multiple dwellings or dwelling units offered for rent or resale to
determine the condition of dwellings or dwelling units and to safeguard
the health and safety of the occupants and the general public. The
Inspector is authorized to enter, examine and survey the premises on
reasonable notice at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
inspections. The owner, occupant or person in charge thereof shall give
these officers free access to such dwellings on reasonable notice at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey.
B. Every occupant of a multiple-dwelling unit shall give the owner or his
agent access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, on reasonable
notice at all reasonable times, for the purpose of making repairs or
alterations necessary to comply with this chapter or with any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or the statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions contained herein, in nonrental multipledwelling
properties where 100% of the units are privately owned,
including, but not limited to condominiums, co-ops and townhouses,
individual unit inspections are not required and the cyclical inspection
shall be limited to a full inspection of all exterior spaces and common
areas. The inspection fee for such properties exterior shall be $1,500,
inclusive of all inspections and reinspections. [Added 8-6-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
A. Multiple dwellings.
(1) All buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained as required by
this chapter and by the International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70.
(2) A nonprofit corporation owning or controlling buildings of three
stories or less in a retirement community, which are excluded from
the definition of "multiple dwelling" pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 154,
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, shall maintain all such buildings in compliance
with the International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70.
(3) All buildings in compliance with the International Fire Code shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter insofar as issues
of firesafety are concerned.
B. Multiple-dwelling cyclical inspections.
(1) The North Brunswick Department of Community Development
shall be designated as the agency to conduct all cyclical inspections
on hotels and multiple dwellings.
(2) All multiple dwellings and hotels shall pay an inspection fee of $15
per each inspection, payable to the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 196-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-3
194:402
In the event that it is necessary to reinspect any multiple-dwelling
unit, a reinspection fee of $10 per unit per inspection shall be
imposed. Any future revisions to such inspection or reinspection
fee shall be established by the Department of Community
Development, such future fees to be effective, until same are
approved by the Township Council, which approval may be
provided by resolution.
(3) North Brunswick Inspectors, in the discharge of their duties, shall
have authority to enter upon and examine and inspect at all
reasonable times any building, enclosure, or premises, or any part
thereof or service equipment attached thereto or contained
therein, for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Inspectors and employees of the North
Brunswick Township Department of Community Development, in
the discharge of their duties, shall identify themselves by exhibiting
their Township photo identification.
(4) The North Brunswick Department of Community Development
shall cause inspections to be made periodically of registered
buildings. Each multiple dwelling and hotel shall be inspected once
every five years. The statutorily mandated state hotel and multipledwelling
inspections that are required once every five years will
continue to be required but will be performed by the State of New
Jersey Bureau of Housing Inspection. The Township inspections
and the state hotel and multiple dwelling inspections will result in
the property being inspected on a thirty-month inspection cycle.
For example, the inspection schedule of a ten-year period would be
30 months, Township inspection; 60 months, state inspection; 90
months, Township inspection; and 120 months, state inspection.
(5) All inspections and reinspection reports shall be in writing and
signed by the Inspector making the inspection, and the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development shall keep
record of all inspections on file.
(6) Inspections of private living quarters shall require consent of the
occupant of the premises, except as hereunder described:
(a) In case of emergencies where facts known to a housing office
personnel indicate that conditions exist on any premises,
subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Community
Development, which are either an immediate threat to the
safety or health of persons using or in near proximity to the
premises or of such a nature that the delay necessary to secure
a warrant would render the inspection of no value in
confirming the existence of the suspected violation, an
inspection may be demanded and, if possible without the use of
force, made to determine whether or not a violation of the law
or regulations in fact exists.
§ 196-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-3
194:403
(b) Where access to any premises where an inspection is desired
to implement the policy of the North Brunswick Department of
Community Development and such access has been refused,
then such refusal shall be reported to the Department of
Community Development and an administrative search
warrant shall be obtained upon one or more of the following
grounds:
[1] An inspection is required as part of the procedures
authorized by law and implemented by regulations.
[2] There is evidence of or indication of a violation of the law
or this chapter requiring an examination to determine
whether the violation in fact exists.
(7) It shall be the duty of every owner or managing agent of a hotel or
multiple dwelling, upon receipt of notice from the North Brunswick
Department of Community Development that his property is
scheduled for a five-year cyclical inspection, to notify each
occupant, except hotel guests, and to request that each occupant
either admit the Inspector to his dwelling unit or authorize the
owner or managing agent to do so. Any occupant who has been so
notified, has allowed the owner or managing agent to retain a key
to his dwelling unit and has not expressed any objection, in writing,
to the Inspector's entering his dwelling unit either to the
Department of Community Development or the Inspector or to the
owner or managing agent shall be deemed to have consented to the
inspection of his dwelling unit. Any occupant consenting to an
inspection who is unable to be present or to have a representative
present shall, upon notice from either the owner or the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development, give a key to
his unit to the owner or managing agent. Such key shall be
returned to the occupant within 24 hours after the inspection. It
shall be the further duty of the owner and/or any managing agent
to provide such assistance as may be reasonable and necessary to
enable the Inspector to gain access to all areas of the property and,
upon request, to accompany the Inspector during his inspection.
(8) When an Inspector observes what may be a structural deficiency,
this condition shall be referred to the North Brunswick Building
Department. This report shall be in writing and signed by the
Inspector.
(9) If, during any inspection, the Inspector shall find a condition which
is, or appears to be, in violation of the International Fire Code, the
Inspector shall give a report of that condition to the Office of the
Fire Marshal. This report shall be in writing and signed by the
Inspector.
C. Certification of registration/inspection.
(1) Multiple dwellings.
§ 196-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-3
194:404
(a) The owner of each hotel or multiple dwelling shall file with the
North Brunswick Department of Community Development,
upon forms provided by the Department, a certificate of
registration. A fee of $250, payable each time there is a change
in ownership, shall accompany each certificate of registration,
which shall state:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of said owner;
[2] Such description of each hotel or multiple dwelling, by
street number or otherwise, as will enable the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development to
easily locate the same;
[3] The name, address and telephone number of the agent
appointed by said owner pursuant to § 196-3C(1)(d)
hereinbelow for the purpose of receiving service of
process and other orders or notices;
[4] The name, address and telephone number of the person,
association or corporation, if any, which manages or
operates such hotel or multiple dwelling for or on behalf of
said owner;
[5] The name and address of any mortgage holder of record;
[6] Whether or not the property is being registered for the
first time and, if not, the date of transfer to the present
owner;
[7] Whether the owner is a corporation, partnership,
individual(s), or some other entity;
[8] Whether the building is a hotel or multiple dwelling;
[9] The construction class;
[10] The number of dwelling units in the building;
[11] The number of stories;
[12] The year, or approximate year, of construction;
[13] The name and address of any person other than the record
owner of the property who controls the property pursuant
to a net lease or otherwise;
[14] If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address
of the registered agent and of each corporate officer;
[15] If the record owner is a partnership, the name and address
of each partner who is not exclusively a limited partner;
§ 196-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-3
194:405
[16] If the record owner is a limited partnership, the name and
address of each managing partner who is not exclusively a
managing partner;
[17] If the record owner is a limited liability company, the name
and address of each managing member who is not
exclusively a managing member;
[18] The name and address of a person who resides or has an
office in Middlesex County who is authorized to accept
notices from tenants and to issue receipts therefor and to
accept service of process on behalf of the record owner;
[19] The name and address, including the dwelling unit,
apartment or room number, of any person employed by the
owner or managing agent to provide regular maintenance
service;
[20] The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or managing agent who may
be contacted at any time and who has authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building and any
repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith; and
[21] The name and address of the fuel oil supplier, if any, and
the grade of fuel oil used.
(b) Upon the receipt of said certificate and fee, the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development shall issue
to the owner of such hotel or multiple dwelling a validated copy
of the certificate of registration, which shall be kept posted by
the owner of such hotel or dwelling in a conspicuous location
therein.
(c) The certificate of registration shall be in such form as may be
prescribed by the North Brunswick Department of Community
Development.
(d) The owner of each hotel or multiple dwelling shall appoint an
agent for the purpose of receiving service of process and such
orders or notices as may be issued by the North Brunswick
Department of Community Development pursuant to this
chapter. Each agent so appointed shall be of Middlesex County
or shall have an office in Middlesex County. If the agent is a
corporation, it shall be licensed to do business in the state.
(e) In the case of any transfer of the ownership, any hotel or
multiple dwelling, whether by sale, assignment, gift, intestate
succession, testate devolution, reorganization, receivership,
foreclosure or execution process, it shall be the duty of the new
owner thereof to file with the North Brunswick Department of
Community Development, within 20 days of said transfer, an
§ 196-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-3
194:406
application for a certificate of registration pursuant to
§ 196-3C(1)(a) above and to appoint an agent for the service of
process pursuant to § 196-3C(1)(d) above. The transferee shall,
within 30 days of such transfer, return to the North Brunswick
Department of Community Development his validated copy of
the certificate of registration, indicating thereon the name and
address of the new owner.
(f) In the event that the number of dwelling units in a registered
hotel or multiple dwelling, or any other information required to
be set forth in a certificate of registration, is changed, the
owner of the said hotel or multiple dwelling shall file an
amended certificate of registration within 30 days of such
changes. No fee shall be charged for the filing of such amended
certificate.
(g) Within 30 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
any newly constructed hotel or multiple dwelling, subject to
this chapter, the owner thereof shall file with the North
Brunswick Department of Community Development, upon
forms provided by the Department of Community
Development, a certificate of registration pursuant to this
chapter.
(h) A separate application for a certificate of registration shall be
filed for each building in a project.
(i) Every application for a certificate of registration shall be
signed by at least one individual owner. In the case of a
partnership, corporation or other entity, the application shall
be signed by a duly authorized representative of the owner,
and the signer's relationship to the owner shall be printed or
typed beneath the signature in a legible manner.
(j) No certificate of inspection shall be issued for any hotel or
multiple dwelling subject to this chapter by a local enforcing
agency, until the North Brunswick Department of Community
Development shall have received from the local enforcing
agency a certification that the building(s) does not have any
outstanding violations of the International Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70.
D. Violation and/or complaint reporting.
(1) Any tenant or owner may report a violation and/or complaint of a
violation of this chapter to the Inspector. The Inspector shall
inspect the violation within 10 business days of the report. If the
violation constitutes an emergency, the Inspector shall inspect the
violation within 24 hours of the report. Such report may constitute
a complaint.
§ 196-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-3
194:407
(2) Whenever the Inspector determines that this chapter has been
violated, a complaint notice shall be served upon the owner and
tenant, where relevant, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall
be in writing, contain the section(s) and/or paragraph(s) of the code
violated and specify the date by which the violation must be
corrected or abated.
(3) The Inspector shall serve a notice of common area violation(s),
which may be a hazard to the safety or health of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, upon the
owner or agent of such premises. Such notice shall be in writing,
contain the section(s) and/or paragraph(s) of the ordinance violated
and specify the date by which the violation must be corrected or
abated.
(4) The time limit to abate the violation shall be at the discretion of the
Inspector but shall not exceed six months.
(5) Service of notices shall be made by one or more of the following
methods.
(a) Personal service. Notice shall be served personally on the
owner or tenant of the dwelling or common area where the
violation occurred.
(b) Service by mail. The Inspector may effect service by sending
the notice by certified mail and regular mail to the owner's last
known address.
(c) Service by posting notice. The Inspector may effect service by
posting a copy of the notice on both the building and unit or the
building and common area where the violations occur.
(d) Service by other methods. Notice may be served by any other
method authorized under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
E. Hotels required to post fire or smoke emergency information. The
owner or manager of a hotel shall post, in a prominent place in each
dwelling unit, a notice per N.J.A.C. 5:70-3 (Section 404.174) that states:
(1) The location of the nearest fire exits and fire alarms;
(2) The procedures to be followed when smoke or fire alarms sound;
(3) The procedures to be followed in the event of fire or smoke.
F. Codes cited. Where other codes or standards are referenced in this
chapter, unless otherwise noted, the most recent adopted code or
standard shall be used.
74.Editor's Note: This reference is to Section 404.1 of the International Fire Code, 2006
edition.
§ 196-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-3
194:408
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 196-4. Terms defined; word usage.
A. The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADJOINING GRADE ELEVATION — The average elevation of the final
grade adjoining all exterior walls of a building, calculated from grade
elevations taken at intervals of 10 feet around the perimeter of the
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Department of Community
Development of the Township of North Brunswick, which is authorized
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
AGENT — A person who is legally empowered to act for the owner of
property by the expressed or implied authority of the owner.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, means a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the egress facilities of
any such building or structure; any enlargement thereof, whether by
extension on any side or by any increase in height; or the moving of
such building or structure from one location or position to another.
ANSI — The American National Standards Inc.
APPLIANCE — A device which utilizes fuel or other energy to produce
heat, power refrigeration, air conditioning or perform a specific
mechanical function, including but not limited to washers, dryers,
dishwashers, refrigerators etc.
APPROVED — Approved by the Department of Community
Development of North Brunswick Township or its duly authorized
representative.
ARCHITECT — A person registered to practice the profession of
architecture under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
ASHRAE — The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the
roof rafters.
BASEMENT — The portion of a building which is partly below and
partly above grade and has at least 1/2 its ceiling height above grade.
BASIN — A plumbing fixture located in a bathroom or in close proximity
thereto and used exclusively for sanitation operations.
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which also may contain water closets, lavatories
or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BOCA — Building Officials and Code Administrators International.
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:409
BUILDING — A structure built, erected and framed of component
structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and
support of individuals, animals or property of any kind which is
enclosed within exterior walls on all sides.
BUYER — A person or persons who buy property or a part thereof,
including a single-family home, a town home or a condominium unit.
CEILING HEIGHT — Vertical distance between the finished floor and
the finished ceiling.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade and has more than 1/2 its ceiling height below grade.
CENTRAL HEATING — The provision of heat throughout a building by
means of one or more heating units or furnaces centrally located in a
building, rather than by means of individual heating units or furnaces
located in some or all of the units of dwelling space in said building.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The certificate provided for in this
chapter.
CHIMNEY — A vertical enclosure containing one or more flues used
to remove hot gases from burning fuel, refuse or from industrial
processes.
COMMON AREAS — All areas accessible to and which may be utilized
by either occupants of a building or the general public, or both,
including but not limited to vestibules, hallways, stairways, landings,
and common space and occupiable room or space, as hereinafter
defined, which is not part of any dwelling unit. This definition shall also
mean and include any area accessible to the owner or manager or any
person employed in the maintenance of the building which is not part
of any dwelling unit.
COMMUNITY ROOM — An enclosed area accessible to occupants of the
complex or to the general public, including but not limited to common
spaces and habitable rooms used for assembly, recreation or similar
purposes.
CONCURRENT LOADS — Two or more elements of dead or live load
that, for purposes of design, are considered to act simultaneously.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a
master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units,
together with an undivided interest in common elements appurtenant
to each such unit.
CONSTRUCTION — Any or all work or operations necessary or
incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, installing, or
equipping of buildings, or any alterations and operations incidental
thereto. The term "construction" shall include land clearing, grading,
excavating and filling. It shall also mean the finished product of any
such work or operations.
§ 196-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-4
194:410
CONSTRUCTION CLASS (GROUP) — The category in which a building
or space is classified based on the fire resistance ratings of its
construction elements as set forth in the current edition of the BOCA
National Building Code.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association which entitles
the holder of a share or membership interest thereof to possess and
occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other structure
owned or leased by said corporation or association, or to lease or
purchase a dwelling constructed or to be constructed by said
corporation or association.
CORRIDOR — An enclosed passage providing a means of access from
rooms or spaces to an exit.
COURT — An open, uncovered, and unoccupied space on the same lot
with a building.
CRAWL SPACE — An unoccupiable area in a building not more than 48
inches in height.
DEAD END — A portion of a corridor in which the travel to an exit is in
one direction only.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or razing of all or part of a building,
including operations incidental thereto.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the
Township of North Brunswick.
DESIGN WINTER CONDITIONS — The design temperature at the
nearest locality reported in the latest edition of the Handbook of the
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE).
DETERIORATION — Decay, damage, loss of material or ability to
function as intended caused by exposure to the elements.
DOUBLE-KEYED DEADBOLT LOCK — Any locking device which
requires a key to open from either side.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All the piping within public or private premises
which conveys sewage, rainwater, or other liquid wastes to a legal point
of disposal, but shall not include the mains of public sewer system or
private or public sewage treatment or disposal plant.
DUCT (VENTILATION) — A pipe, tube, shaft, conduit, or an enclosed
space within a wall or structure, used for conveying air.
DWELLING — Any building or structure or part thereof used for human
habitation or designed to be so used, containing one or more dwelling
units, including any appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or rooms, or suite or apartment, that are
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes
by one or more persons.
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:411
EGRESS or MEANS OF EGRESS — A continuous and unobstructed path
of travel from any point in a building or structure to a public way and
consists of three separate and distinct parts: the exit access; the exit;
and the exit discharge. A means of egress comprises the vertical and
horizontal means of travel and shall include intervening room spaces,
doors, hallways, corridors, passageways, balconies, ramps, stairs,
enclosures, lobbies, escalators, horizontal exits, courts, aisles and
yards.
ELECTRICALLY SUPERVISED — As applied to a control circuit, means
that in the event of interruption of the current supply or in the event of
a break in the circuit, a specific signal will be given.
ELEVATOR — A hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a car
or platform that moves in guides in a substantially vertical direction and
that serves two or more floors of a building.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 who is
gainfully employed and who is self-supporting or who is married to a
spouse who is gainfully employed and who supports the said minor, or
who is a student living away from home and in regular attendance in an
institution of higher learning.
EMERGENCY — A situation in which there is reasonable cause to
believe that an immediate danger to life, limb or property exists, or any
situation deemed to be an emergency by the Inspector.
ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice the profession of
engineering under the law of the State of New Jersey.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXTERMINATION — The process of controlling and eliminating insects,
rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their
food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigation, trapping, or by any other
recognized and lawful pest elimination method.
FIRE RESISTANCE RATING — The time in hours or fractions thereof
that materials or their assemblies will withstand fire exposure as
determined by a fire test made in conformity with recognized
standards.
FIRE SEPARATION WALL — A fire-resistance-rated assembly of
materials having protected openings which is designed to restrict the
spread of fire.
FIRE WALL — A fire-resistance-rated wall, having no unprotected
openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously
from the foundation to or through the roof.
FLOOR AREA — The projected horizontal area enclosed inside of walls,
partitions, or other enclosed construction.
§ 196-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-4
194:412
FLUE — An enclosed passageway in a chimney to carry products of
combustion to the outer air.
FOOTING AREA — A foundation element consisting of an enlargement
of a foundation pier or foundation wall, wherein the soil materials along
the sides of and underlying the element may be visually inspected prior
to and during its construction.
FOUNDATION (BUILDING) — A construction that transfers building
loads to the support soil.
FOUNDATION WALL — A wall extending below grade.
FRESH AIR — Outdoor air.
GARBAGE — Rubbish and refuse as defined in this chapter.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GRADE PASSAGEWAY — A horizontal extension of a vertical exit or a
passage leading from a yard or court to an open exterior space.
GUEST — Any person who occupies a unit of dwelling space either as
a temporary occupant or transient in an establishment holding itself
out as serving transients or on a temporary or permanent basis in an
establishment providing housekeeping or dining services on a regular
basis to occupants.
HABITABLE ROOM — A residential room or space, having an area
exceeding 59 square feet in which the ordinary functions of domestic
life are carried on and which includes bedrooms, living rooms, studies,
recreation rooms, kitchens, dining rooms, and other similar spaces, but
does not include closets, halls, stairs, laundry rooms, or bathrooms.
HAZARD — A condition which because of faulty construction or
maintenance of the premises creates significant and recognizable
danger or risk to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises.
HEIGHT (BUILDINGS) — The vertical distance from the curb level to
the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs or to a point
at the average height of the gable in the case of roofs having a pitch of
more than one foot in 4 1/2 feet, except that where the curb level has
not been legally established, or where every part of the building is set
back more than 25 feet from a street line, the height shall be measured
from the adjoining grade elevation.
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related
structure, accessory building and land appurtenant thereto, and any
part thereof, which contains 10 or more dwelling units or has sleeping
facilities for 25 or more persons and is kept, used, maintained,
advertised as, or held out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling
accommodations are available to guests. "Hotel" also means any facility
that is commonly regarded as a hotel, motor hotel, motel or established
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:413
guesthouse in the community in which it is located. "Hotel" does not
include those facilities that are excluded by this chapter.
IBC — International Building Code.
INFESTATION — The presence within a hotel or multiple dwelling of
any insects, rodents or other pests. Infestation shall include breeding
areas on the exterior of the premises so located that products thereof
may spread to the interior of any building subject to these regulations.
INSPECTOR — All employees designated to serve as officers authorized
to exercise powers prescribed by this chapter.
JANITORIAL SERVICES — The cleaning and maintaining of common
areas, including the making of minor repairs, attendance to the
furnishing of heat and hot water where the owner is responsible for
operation and maintenance thereof, the removal of garbage, refuse and
rubbish from the premises, and the removal of snow, ice, dirt, and
other matter creating obstructions or hazards from pedestrian paths,
sidewalks and gutters.
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the
preparation of food.
LEADER — A vertical drainage pipe for conveying stormwater from roof
or gutter drains to a building house storm drain, building house drain
(combined) or other means of disposal. The leader shall include the
horizontal pipe to a single roof drain or gutter drain.
LIVE LOAD — All occupants, materials, equipment, constructions or
other elements of weight supported in, on or by a building that will
or are likely to be moved or relocated during the expected life of the
building.
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY — The local fire marshal authorized
by municipal ordinance to enforce the Uniform Fire Code for North
Brunswick Township.
MAINTENANCE PERSON — A person employed to provide janitorial
services, make minor repairs, clean common areas, prepare units for
reoccupancy and provide twenty-four-hour emergency service.
MANAGING AGENT/INDIVIDUAL REPRESENTATIVE — The person
who may be contacted at any time and who has authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or
expenditure in connection therewith.
MECHANICAL VENTILATION — The process of introducing outdoor air
into or removing vitiated air from a building or room by mechanical
means. A mechanical ventilating system may include air heating, air
cooling or air-conditioning components.
MINOR — Any person who is under the age of 18.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure and any land
appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof, in which three or more
§ 196-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-4
194:414
dwelling units are occupied or intended to be occupied by three or
more persons living independently of each other. "Multiple dwelling"
also means any group of 10 or more buildings on a single parcel of land
or on contiguous parcels under common ownership, in each of which
two dwelling units are occupied or intended to be occupied by two
persons or households living independently of each other, and any land
appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof. "Multiple dwelling" does
not include those buildings and structures that are excluded by statute.
MUTUAL HOUSING CORPORATION — A not-for-profit corporation
incorporated under the laws of the State of New Jersey on a mutual
or cooperative basis within the scope of the Lanham War Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 1501 et seq., which acquired a National Defense Housing
Project pursuant to said act.
NATURAL VENTILATION — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
NEW JERSEY UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., and subcodes adopted
pursuant thereto.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose or activity for which a building or space is
used or is designed or intended to be used.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including guests, in actual
physical possession or occupancy of a unit of dwelling space on a
regular basis. For purposes of assigning specific duties or
responsibilities, the term "occupant," unless the text indicates
otherwise, shall mean the tenant, lessee, head of the family or
household, or other adult person or emancipated minor assuming basic
responsibility for the continued renting or occupancy of the dwelling
space.
OCCUPIABLE ROOM — A room or space, other than a habitable room,
designed for human occupancy or use, in which persons may remain for
a period of time for rest, amusement, dining, shopping, storing goods
or other similar purposes or in which persons may be engaged at work.
ORDER — A directive issued by an authorized agency mandating action
or forbearance.
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity who
has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care
or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner, executor,
administrator, administrative trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any person representing the "owner" shall be his agent and
bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:415
were the owner. Usage of the term "owner" herein shall include and
encompass the owner's agent and employee.
PARTITION — A vertical unit or assembly of materials that separates
one space from another within any story of a building.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, or other entity.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping,
fixtures, appliances, equipment and appurtenances in connection with
any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the
venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within
or adjacent to any building; also, the practice and materials used in the
installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid
waste, or sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises and
their connection with any point or public disposal or other acceptable
terminal.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Installed receptacles, devices, or appliances
that are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or
liquid-borne waste.
POTABLE WATER — Water free from impurities present in amounts
sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its
bacteriological and chemical quality shall conform to the requirements
of the Department of Health.
PREMISES — Land, improvements thereon, or any part thereof.
PROJECT/RENTAL COMPLEX — A group of buildings subject to this
chapter that are represented to be under common or substantially
common ownership; that are on a single lot or contiguous lots; and
are named, designated or advertised as a common entity. Lots shall
be considered to be contiguous even if they are separated by a public
right-of-way.
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT — Any equipment, device, system or
apparatus required or permitted to be constructed or installed for the
protection of occupants, intended occupants or the general public.
RECYCLABLE ITEMS — Those items listed in the ordinances of the
Township of North Brunswick. 75
REFUSE — All putrescible solid waste (except body waste), including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial
wastes.
REGULATIONS — The rules contained in this chapter.
REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of its maintenance, but not including additional work
that would affect safety, or affect required exit facilities, or a vital
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 258, Recycling.
§ 196-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-4
194:416
element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring, ventilation, or
heating installation, or any work that would be in violation of a
provision of this chapter or any other law governing building
construction.
REQUIRED — Required by the provisions of these regulations.
ROOF — The topmost slab or deck of a building, either flat or sloping
with its supporting members, not including vertical support.
ROOMING UNIT — A unit of dwelling space located within a multiple
dwelling or a hotel, forming a single habitable unit used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
SAFETY — The quality or condition of being safe and freedom from
danger, injury or damage; security.
SANITARY SYSTEM — Either the public system for disposal of sewage
from the premises or, in the absence of such system, any private system
available to the premises for the disposal of sewage.
SELF-CLOSING — As applied to an opening protective, means a door,
window, damper, or other device and its assembly that is normally kept
in a closed position and that is equipped with an approved device to
insure immediate closing after having been opened for use.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and may include liquids containing chemicals in
solution.
SHAFT — A vertical, inclined or offset passage, duct or hoistway,
penetrating through two or more floors of a building or through a floor
and roof, for the transmission of light, air, materials or persons, or the
passage of pipes or other mechanical facilities.
SINK — A plumbing fixture located in a kitchen area and used
exclusively for food preparation operations.
STORY — That portion of a building that is between a floor level and the
next higher level or roof above.
STREET — A thoroughfare dedicated or devoted to public use by legal
mapping or other lawful means.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including, among others: buildings, stands, tents,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio
towers, tanks, trestles, open sheds, coal pockets, shelters, fences and
display signs.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or his agent.
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:417
TRANSIENT — As applied to occupancy, means occupancy for not more
than 90 days by a person having a principal residence elsewhere.
TYPES OF DWELLINGS —
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 who is
not an "emancipated minor" as defined herein.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE — See "dwelling unit" in this chapter.
USABLE FLOOR AREA — That part of the floor area within a unit
of dwelling space that can be considered usable for general living
purposes, excluding areas devoted to built-in equipment, such as
wardrobes, cabinets, closets, kitchen units, and equipment or fixtures
which are not readily available for use as floor area.
USE (USED) — The purpose for which a building, structure, or space
is occupied or utilized, unless otherwise indicated by the text. "Use"
("used") shall be construed as if followed by the words "or is intended,
arranged, or designed to be used."
UTILITIES — Includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas, water and
sewerage services.
VENTILATION — The supply and removal of air to and from any space
by natural or mechanical means. Cross-reference: See also "mechanical
ventilation" and "natural ventilation" in this chapter.
WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPING — The pipes in a building or premises
that convey water from the water service pipe to the plumbing fixtures
and other water outlets.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — The pipe from the water (street) main or
other source of water supply to the building served.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The water service pipe, the water
distribution piping, and all of the necessary connecting pipes, fittings,
control valves, and appurtenances used for conveying water in the
plumbing system.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms to live in for which
one pays rent. An apartment may be located in a building where
all units are apartments or one or more dwelling units located
in a condominium building or a separate unit of a single-family
dwelling.
(1)
CONDOMINIUM — A single dwelling unit located in an apartmenttype
building.
(2)
TOWNHOME — A single dwelling unit attached to similar dwelling
units.
(3)
§ 196-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-4
194:418
WORKMANSHIP — All work shall be conducted, installed and
completed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the
results intended by this code.
B. "Shall," as used in this chapter, is always to be construed as mandatory.
§ 196-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-4
194:419

ARTICLE III
Standards and Regulations
§ 196-5. Standards; duties of owners and occupants.
A. Concurrent responsibilities.
(1) Owners, including agents of owners and managing agents and
superintendents shall have the general duties outlined herein for
the maintenance of the premises, and no such person shall be
relieved from any such responsibility hereunder by reason of the
fact that an occupant or the person shall have similar
responsibilities or shall have failed to report any violation, nor shall
any such person be relieved of any responsibility by the terms or
provisions of any lease, contract or agreement.
(2) Occupants, and to the extent provided herein, members of their
families, or other persons living on the premises shall have the
general duties outlined herein for occupants for the maintenance of
the premises, and no such person shall be relieved from any such
responsibilities by reason of the fact that any owner or operator
shall have similar responsibilities, nor shall any person be relieved
of any responsibility by the terms or provisions of any contract,
lease or agreement.
(3) In any premises subject to either the Horizontal Property Act
(N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.) or the Condominium Act (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1
et seq.), the council of co-owners or condominium association, as
the case may be, shall have the duties of an owner as set forth in
these regulations. However, any such council or association shall
only be required to abate those violations which pertain either to
the common areas or common elements or which it has the right,
pursuant to contract or otherwise, to require the owner of the
individual dwelling unit to abate. Owners of individual dwelling
units shall be responsible for the abatement of violations pertaining
only to each such unit; provided, however, that the responsibilities
of the dwelling unit owner and of the council or association may be
concurrent.
B. Discontinuation of services.
(1) No person shall intentionally cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required to be supplied under this chapter to be
removed, shut off or discontinued, or knowingly allow such
condition to continue, when the condition affects any occupied unit
of dwelling space.
(2) This section shall not be applicable to such temporary interruption
as may be necessary when actual repairs or alterations are in
process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
§ 196-5 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-5
194:421
§ 196-6. Duties of occupants.
service is caused by any public utility or public agency or is
approved by North Brunswick Township Housing.
(3) In the event of any discontinuation of services, repairs shall be
performed expeditiously to minimize inconvenience to occupants
and, to the greatest extent possible, temporary or alternate service
shall be provided until permanent service can be restored.
(4) Tenants shall be given twenty-four-hour notification when regular
or scheduled repairs and/or maintenance requires the
discontinuation of services facilities or utility for more than two
hours in one day.
(5) All utility services must be operational at the time of inspections.
A. Responsibility of occupant.
(1) An occupant shall, in addition to complying with all provisions of
this chapter applicable to him, be responsible for violations of this
chapter to the extent that he has the power to prevent the
occurrence of a violation or assist in abating the violation. An
occupant has the power to prevent the occurrence of a violation if:
(a) It is caused by his own willful act, or the willful act of a member
of his family or household, or of his guest; or
(b) It is the result of his neglect or abuse, or the neglect or abuse
of a member of his family or household, or his guest.
(2) The occupant, any member of his family or household, or his guest
shall, with respect to the public parts of the premises, be liable if a
violation is caused by his own willful act, neglect or abuse.
(3) Every occupant of each unit of dwelling space shall give the owner
thereof or his agent or employees access to any part of the unit of
dwelling space upon reasonable notification, which under ordinary
circumstances shall be 24 hours for multiple dwellings, except
immediately for hotels, for the purpose of making such inspection
and such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the law and this chapter. In case of safety or
structural emergencies, immediate access shall be given.
(4) All items stored by occupants in any area provided for common
storage by occupants of more than one unit of dwelling space shall
bear the name and dwelling unit number of the occupant storing
the said item or items. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant
to label each item and maintain it labeled. Materials stored in such
areas shall be secured against becoming sources of infestation and
shall not be placed so as to create a hazard. No flammable or other
§ 196-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-6
194:422
hazardous liquids or gas shall be stored within any storage area or
within the dwelling unit.
B. Reporting of violations; prohibited acts.
(1) Violations to be reported. Upon discovery by an occupant of any
conditions on the premises, failure of service, or defect in any
equipment which constitutes a violation hereof, the occupant shall
report the same promptly to the owner or to the managing agent
having charge of the premises.
(2) Prohibited acts. No occupant or other person shall:
(a) Create or maintain any condition constituting a violation of the
International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70;
(b) Take down, obscure, alter, destroy, or in any way deface any
notice, certificate or sign required by this chapter to be
displayed; or
(c) Destroy or damage protective equipment.
C. Unsafe and unsanitary conditions.
(1) Occupants shall place all garbage within the receptacles provided
for garbage disposal. Where janitorial service is not required, they
shall place all containers with sufficient frequency to avoid an
unsanitary accumulation in the exterior area or areas set aside for
the same. Garbage, rubbish and other refuse shall not be thrown
out of windows or down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse
be set out on stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways.
(2) Occupants of each unit of dwelling space shall be responsible to the
extent of their own use and activities for keeping the interior
thereof safe and sanitary. Occupants shall prevent any
accumulation of garbage or waste matter which may become a
source of infestation or accumulation of combustible material
(example: newspaper and books) which may constitute a fire
hazard.
(3) Every occupant shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in
a clean and sanitary condition, shall not deposit any material in any
fixture or sewer system which would cause stoppage of or damage
to properly maintained fixtures or sewer systems and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of such fixtures.
(4) Occupants shall not damage, remove or destroy screens needed for
the building.
(5) Every occupant of any unit of dwelling space shall be responsible
for removing conditions resulting from the occupant's own
§ 196-6 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-6
194:423
§ 196-7. General maintenance.
activities or which may result in infestation conditions which are
subject to and under his exclusive control.
(6) No occupant shall cause excessive grease, soot or other foreign
matter to accumulate on side walls, ceilings or other exposed room
surface by improper use of heating or cooking equipment. Cooking
equipment shall be kept clean, free of garbage, food particles and
grease.
D. Malicious damage. Every occupant shall be liable for willfully or
maliciously causing damage to any part of the premises which results in
a violation of this chapter. Any adult occupants shall be responsible and
liable for any violation of this chapter caused by minors under their care
or custody occupying the same unit of dwelling space if the violations
were created or permitted to continue with the knowledge or
acquiescence or consent of said adult member.
E. Heating by occupant. Where any occupant undertakes, by condition of
his lease, to supply his own heat through a furnace or boiler which also
heats any unit of dwelling space occupied by other persons, the said
occupant shall be responsible in the same manner as the owner for
supplying heat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
F. Occupancy violations of housing ordinance. No occupant shall occupy
or permit the occupancy of any unit of dwelling space in violation of the
occupancy standards established under N.J.A.C. 5:10-22 or any
applicable section of North Brunswick Township ordinances. No
occupant shall cook in any unit or dwelling space except where all the
required cooking facilities are installed as required under N.J.A.C.
5:10-20. No occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a unit of
dwelling space that does not have provision for bathroom and toilet
room facilities as required by N.J.A.C. 5:10-21.
G. Storage. No occupant shall utilize any area outside of his dwelling
space for storage purposes except in an area designated for such use in
accordance with this chapter.
A. Elimination of hazards. The owner of any dwelling unit shall be
responsible at all times for keeping all parts of the premises occupied
by himself or other persons, to the extent of his responsibilities
described herein, clean and free of infestation and hazards to the health
or safety of occupants and other persons in or near the premises.
B. Nuisances. The owner of any hotel or multiple dwelling shall be
responsible for avoiding, eliminating or abating any noises, lights,
odors, radiations or vibrations arising out of the use or occupancy of the
premises which shall constitute a nuisance that is harmful or potentially
harmful to the health and well-being of persons of ordinary sensitivity
occupying or using the premises.
§ 196-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-7
194:424
C. Maintenance of dwelling units. Every unit of dwelling space in a hotel
or multiple dwelling shall be so maintained as to be fit for human use
and habitation and to prevent progressive deterioration of the unit to
the detriment of the health, safety and well-being of its occupants.
D. Maintenance of exterior.
(1) The exterior of all premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions, and any hazards to the
safety or health of occupants, pedestrians and other persons
utilizing the premises, and any of the foregoing conditions shall be
promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be
the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of such
conditions, which include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(b) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which
by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof.
Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such
conditions. Tree stumps, which may be tripping hazards, shall
be removed.
(c) Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and
snow which, by reason of location above ground level,
constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
(d) Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, litter, icy
conditions, unclean snow and excretion of pets and other
animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking
areas and other parts of the premises. Holes and excavations
shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other
conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or
unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their
discovery.
(e) Accumulations of water, vegetation or other matter which
might serve as a source of food or as a harboring or breeding
place for infestation.
(f) Walks, courts and other paved areas shall be kept clean and
free of litter, dirt, mud or other conditions hazardous to
pedestrians.
(2) All parts of the premises shall be so graded and, where necessary,
provided with runoff drains and/or other means to carry off and
dispose of surface waters in such a manner as to eliminate any
recurrent or excessive accumulations of stormwater on the
premises, without causing the accumulation of water on adjoining
properties:
§ 196-7 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-7
194:425
§ 196-8. Structural maintenance.
(a) Parts of the premises regularly used by occupants shall drain
within one hour of the termination of any storm creating
surface waters.
(b) Other parts of the premises not covered under § 196-7D(1) of
this section shall drain within six hours of the cessation of any
such storm.
(3) All outside contractors or concessions providing services on the
premises of apartment complexes, condominiums, or townhome
projects shall maintain all their equipment in a safe manner
(example: cable wiring and boxes).
(4) Outdoor swimming pools, decorative pools, reflecting pools and
artificial fish ponds which contain 24 inches or more of water or
having a surface area of 250 square feet or more shall be protected
by a barrier conforming to the requirements of the International
Building Code.
(5) Electrical hazards near swimming pools. No overhead electrical
conductors shall be within 15 feet of any swimming pool. All metal
fences, enclosures or railings that might become electrically
charged as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or
from any other cause near or adjacent to a swimming pool shall be
grounded in accordance with the provisions of the National
Electrical Code.
A. Bearing of loads. Building and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to
be capable of sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which
they may be subject to so that loads are transmitted to the soil without
undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement of the
building or any structural part thereof.
B. Foundations. Foundations of all structures shall be kept, maintained
and repaired to eliminate all exposed holes, cracks and other defects so
that the foundation shall be at all times capable of resisting the
penetration of liquids into the building and be weathertight and serve to
protect the building against infestation. They shall also be maintained
to prevent or correct erosion around footings.
C. Exterior surfaces.
(1) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, fence or
other improvement on the premises shall be kept in good repair,
and all exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration shall be
protected against weathering or deterioration by a protective
coating appropriate for the particular material involved as needed.
(2) All exterior windows and window frames shall be painted with at
least one coat of suitable exterior paint or other preservative as
§ 196-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-8
194:426
§ 196-9. Maintenance of interior.
needed except where constructed of an approved atmospheric
corrosion-resistant metal or other equivalent material.
(3) The exterior surfaces shall be maintained to eliminate conditions
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, such as
broken glass, fogged windows, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick or excessive peeling of paint.
(4) The exterior of the building shall be free of loose material that may
create a hazard by falling on persons utilizing the premises.
D. Leakage, drafts and infestation. All exterior walls, roofs, windows,
window frames, doors, door frames, skylights, foundations and other
parts of the structure shall be maintained as to keep water from
entering the structure, to prevent excessive drafts or heat loss during
cold or inclement weather and to provide a barrier against infestation.
Damaged or badly worn material shall be repaired or replaced, and
places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion shall be
treated or restored to prevent weathering or seepage.
E. Leaders and drainpipes. Leaders and drainpipes shall be securely
fastened to the building and maintained in good condition, free of leaks,
kept clean and free of obstructions and shall direct stormwaters into
draining systems and away from the foundation walls of the structure.
Splash block shall be provided where needed to direct water away from
a building.
F. Railings. Stairways shall have continuous guards and handrails
conforming to the International Building Code.
A. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces.
(1) Basements, cellars and crawl spaces are to be free of moisture
resulting from liquid penetration from the exterior and shall be
provided with ventilation as required herein to prevent
accumulations of moisture and dampness.
(2) Floors of basements and cellars shall have a permanent surface
that is water resistant and capable of being kept broom-clean so as
not to create a safety hazard. Subcellars and crawl spaces which
are neither usable nor occupiable need not be permanently
surfaced.
B. Interior surfaces.
(1) All floors, walls, ceilings and other surfaces shall be kept in good
repair, that is, free from cracks, breaks, split or splintering boards
or woodwork, loose plaster, flaking or peeling paint or other
materials. Loose or defective sections shall be removed and
§ 196-8 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-9
194:427
replaced so that the joint between the repair and the sound
material is made flush and smooth.
(2) Floors, walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces shall be kept
clean, free from visible foreign matter, sanitary and wellmaintained
at all times. If necessary to accomplish the foregoing,
these surfaces shall be kept painted, whitewashed, papered,
covered or treated with sealing materials or other protective
coatings as needed.
(3) Interior walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces in units of
dwelling space shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking, loose or
peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of being maintained
free of visible foreign matter and of vermin, and in a sanitary
condition. If and when necessary to accomplish the foregoing or
any part thereof, such interior surfaces shall be spackled, painted,
papered or otherwise provided with a protective coating
appropriate for the surface material, and this shall be done at least
once every three years unless it is clearly unnecessary. Painting or
other provision of a protective coating shall be the responsibility of
the occupant and not of the owner when required more frequently
than once every three years as a result of the acts or omissions of
the occupant, a member of his family or household or his guest.
(4) Owners shall maintain records indicating the date on which any
dwelling unit or part thereof was painted or otherwise provided
with a protective coating for six years. Said records shall also
indicate the names and address of the person who did the work, the
nature of the work done and the cost. Said records shall be made
available upon request to the North Brunswick Township
Department of Community Development or to any Inspector
performing an inspection of the premises on behalf of the
Township.
(5) Carpeting, where provided by the owner, shall be cleaned, sanitized
and in good condition at the time of reoccupancy by a new tenant.
(6) Carpeting which creates a hazardous condition shall be repaired or
replaced.
(7) Except where housekeeping services are provided, normal
housekeeping as required for the maintenance of cleanliness and
sanitation within individual units of dwelling space of multiple
dwellings shall be the responsibility of the occupants and shall not,
unless a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of persons other
than the occupant of the dwelling unit is thereby created, be the
responsibility of the owner.
C. Stairways and common areas.
(1) Stairways shall be maintained to support a live load of 100 pounds
per square foot, and walking surfaces shall be maintained free of
§ 196-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-9
194:428
§ 196-10. Waste disposal.
hazards, such as loose steps, loose or uneven treads, torn
carpeting, raised strips and nonuniform risers.
(2) Hallways, fire escapes, stairs, landings and passages and other
common areas shall be kept open for unrestricted passage.
(3) There shall be guards and handrailings to provide support and
protect persons from falling off the stairways or landings. Such
stairway guards and handrails shall have continuous guards and
handrails on both sides. Intermediate handrails are required so
that all portions of the required width of the stairs are within 30
inches of a handrail.
(a) Stairways with fewer than three risers are not required to have
handrails where serving a single dwelling unit or where such
stairways are not in an exit access corridor or aisle, exit or exit
discharge.
(b) Aisle stairs provided with a center handrail or serving seating
one side shall be equipped with a minimum of one handrail.
(c) Stairways within a dwelling unit shall be equipped with a
minimum of one handrail.
(d) Spiral stairways shall be equipped with a minimum of one
handrail.
(4) Egress: habitable rooms and sleeping areas. Every dwelling shall
have a safe and unobstructed means of egress. Such egress shall
not be through any other dwelling or part thereof and shall lead to
a safe and open space at ground level accessible to the street.
D. Doors. All doors shall be so maintained that they can be readily opened
and closed.
A. Receptacles.
(1) There shall be provided, for each multiple dwelling, noncorrosive,
impervious and noncombustible receptacles sufficient in size and
number to contain waste accumulation, pending collection, twice
weekly. The receptacles shall be so constructed as to hold their
contents without leakage and shall be provided with tight-fitting
covers and handles.
(2) Receptacles for the collection of garbage shall be located so as not
to constitute a hazard and located so as to be accessible to the
collecting agency.
(3) Garbage collection receptacles shall be kept covered, shall be
maintained in good repair and shall be kept in the area designed for
storage of such receptacles.
§ 196-9 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-10
194:429
§ 196-11. Screens and infestation.
B. Materials requiring separate disposal.
(1) Disposal of materials not fitting into or appropriate for receptacles
such as newspapers, wrapping paper and other inorganic wastes
which are likely to be blown or scattered about the adjacent
property or streets shall be secured to prevent littering.
(2) Other objects and material which, because of bulk or size, do not fit
into receptacles shall be placed out for collection only at such
places as are designated for that purpose and at such times as shall
assure the prompt removal by the collection service available to the
building and/or site.
(3) Items requiring recycling: see definitions.76
A. Screens. Screens suited to protect the interior of the building against
mosquitoes, flies and other undesirable insects shall be provided and
kept in good repair for each exterior door, except as otherwise provided
in Exception 2 of § 196-11A(2) below, and each operable window in
habitable and occupiable rooms and common areas. Screens shall be
installed and maintained by the owner on all such doors and windows at
least from May 1 to October 1 each year. All screens required pursuant
hereto shall be affixed either to the window frame or to the upper sash
and the window frame. Fixed windows need not be provided with
screens.
(1) Exception 1: in transient nonresidential hotels.
(2) Exception 2: exterior doors which do not provide any portion of the
minimum ventilation area of at least 4% of the floor area of the
room or space ventilated.
(3) Exception 3: Screens are not required on windows or exterior doors
in areas and spaces where a central mechanical ventilation system
is provided which conforms to applicable construction codes of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.77
B. Elimination of infestation. Every owner shall be responsible for the
eradication of any insects, rats or other pests when the infestation
exists in two or more units of dwelling space or in common areas. All
buildings subject to this chapter shall be made ratproof and shall be
maintained in a condition free from infestation. Such ratproofing and
pest extermination shall include but is not limited to the following:
76.Editor's Note: See the definition of "recyclable items" in § 196-4A. See also Ch. 258,
Recycling.
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 196-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-11
194:430
§ 196-12. Managerial and maintenance personnel for hotels and
multiple dwellings.
(1) Prevention of entrance by blocking off or stopping up at passages
by which rats may secure entry from the exterior with rat
impervious material;
(2) Prevention of interior infestation by elimination of sources of food
and access thereto;
(3) Prevention of interior infestation by elimination of sources of food
and access thereto; and
(4) All hotels and multiple dwellings shall be subject to periodic
procedures for the prevention and elimination of infestation by
persons qualified to conduct such procedures no less frequently
than once annually and more frequently where there is recurring
evidence of infestation.
A. Duties of owner.
(1) The owner shall have the positive responsibility of providing, either
by his own direct efforts or by hiring others qualified to so serve, a
person or persons qualified by training or experience to discharge
the duties and responsibilities outlined for owners under these
regulations.
(2) In multiple dwelling of nine or more dwelling units, the owner shall
either perform the janitorial and/or maintenance services himself,
if he is a resident owner, or provide a janitor and/or maintenance
person, or provide janitorial and/or maintenance services to be
performed, on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis in a manner approved
by this chapter.
(3) Where necessary to assure compliance with this chapter and other
provisions of law affecting multiple dwellings and hotels, there
shall be a full-time person or employee responsible for providing
janitorial and/or maintenance services as defined herein. The
owner shall provide additional personnel as may be required to
assure proper maintenance and compliance with this chapter.
B. Duties of manager and superintendent.
(1) Without relieving the owner of any responsibility placed by these
regulations on the owner, any person undertaking for and on behalf
of the owner any responsibilities for the operation and maintenance
of the premises shall thereby assume, concurrently with the owner,
responsibilities for the premises and be subject to penalty for
failure to comply with any regulation or order relating to any item
or matter within the responsibilities so assumed.
§ 196-11 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-12
194:431
§ 196-13. Elevators.
(2) Where the owner has vested any other person with active
management or control of the property and the owner, either by his
physical absence or unavailability to the premises, has left such
person in charge thereof or, by reason of any other arrangement
with such person, the owner does not actively engage in the day-today
conduct or operation of the premises, then such person
assuming management shall be responsible as the agent of the
owner for compliance thereto.
(3) Where there is present on the premises or available to the premises
a person whose duties and authority do not comprise overall
control of the management of the premises, but such person is
designated by the owner as the person responsible for the day-today
physical upkeep and maintenance for the premises, then such
person shall be liable concurrently and jointly with the owner and
any managing agent for such matters as shall constitute routine
maintenance and upkeep of the premises, for any other matters
pertaining to the maintenance of the premises entrusted to such
person by the owner or management, and for apprising the owner
or managing agent promptly of any other and further matters such
as major repairs, structural improvements and capital investments
which are beyond such person's authority and competence to
undertake and which, if not done, constitute violations of this
chapter or hazards to the health, safety or well-being of occupants.
C. Janitorial/maintenance services required. The person in regular
attendance on the premises and responsible for providing janitorial or
maintenance duties as required by this chapter shall provide the
following services:
(1) Setting out and returning waste disposal receptacles and avoiding
leaving receptacles on days when there is no pickup;
(2) Providing regular daily care for all common areas, including
removal of garbage, litter or other accumulations;
(3) Attending to sidewalk, pedestrian walkways, parking areas and
driveways and, in case of snow or ice, to permit safe passage in and
out of the premises for vehicles and pedestrians;
(4) Operating of the equipment designed to provide heat as required
under these regulations;
(5) Such other and further routine operational and maintenance
service as is required for the owner to comply with this chapter;
and
(6) Provide regular maintenance services for interior repairs which are
the responsibility of the owner as outlined in this chapter.
§ 196-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-13
194:432
§ 196-14. Electrical service and lighting.
A. Suspension of service. Elevator service shall not be suspended except
where unavoidable or where necessary to provide servicing or repairs
and then only for the minimum period of time necessary to effectuate
such servicing or repairs. Where the owner has knowledge in advance
of such suspension, he shall post a notice of the same advising all
occupants of the time and duration of any such suspension and the
reason thereof.
B. Mirrors. In all hotels and multiple dwellings in which there are one or
more self-service elevators, there shall be affixed and maintained in
each elevator a mirror that will enable persons, prior to entering into
such elevator, to view the inside thereof to determine whether any
person is in such elevator.
A. Electrical service.
(1) Service location/meter panels. In all multiple dwellings, each
individual meter shall be identified to indicate the unit the meter
serves. Markings shall be at least one-inch high and easily visible.
Markings shall be maintained so as to be legible at all times and of
sufficient durability to withstand the environment.
(2) There shall be maintained in good operational condition in every
dwelling and hotel electrical service which shall comply with the
electrical requirements in effect at the time the dwelling or
dwelling unit received the certificate of occupancy from the North
Brunswick Township Building Department.
(3) The following electrical installations shall be provided and
hereafter properly maintained in all dwelling units:
(a) All entrances and exits shall be illuminated by exterior lights
sufficient to provide safe passage for persons of normal vision.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be controlled by interior wall
switches, located for convenient and readily accessible use,
except if such lights are controlled by an automatic timer or
photoelectric control device.
(b) Every kitchen shall be provided with a minimum of two duplex
receptacle outlets; when replacing receptacles within six feet
of a sink, a ground fault circuit interrupt protection receptacle
shall be provided.
(c) Each basement shall be wired for a minimum of one lighting
fixture for use as general illumination. All enclosed areas to
which occupants of the apartment or hotel have access shall be
provided with at least one lighting fixture. Stairwell and
laundry area lighting fixtures shall not be counted as part of
the required basement lighting fixtures.
§ 196-13 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-14
194:433
(d) Laundry areas shall be provided with illumination. The laundry
circuit shall be an individual circuit. A wall-mounted grounding
type duplex receptacle outlet shall be provided, located near
the laundry equipment.
(e) Heating equipment requiring electrical energy for operation or
control shall be provided with an individual circuit.
(f) Service and circuiting shall be adequate for the electric load
being served. If the electrical load in a building is excessive,
the load shall be required or service shall be increased so as to
be adequate.
(g) Existing wiring and equipment shall be kept in good repair.
(h) Bathroom: When replacing existing electrical within six feet of
a sink, a ground fault circuit interrupt protection receptacle
shall be provided.
(i) Electric garage door openers shall plug directly into an
electrical box. No extension cords shall be permitted.
(4) Over-current protection devices shall be provided. Under no
circumstances shall the capacity of over-current protection devices
exceed the rated capacity of all connected wiring as determined by
the National Electrical Code.
(5) No extension cords shall be utilized except in conformity with the
following standards:
(a) No cords shall be used which are not listed by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc.
(b) Maximum length shall not exceed eight feet, and minimum
wire size shall not be less than No. 18 (AWG).
(c) No extension cord shall be used that is rated for a lower
current-carrying capacity than is required by the appliance(s)
to which it is connected.
(d) No extension cord shall pass under any rug or carpet or across
any path of travel or be used in any other location where it
would create a hazardous condition.
(e) No frayed, worn or otherwise damaged extension cord shall be
used.
(6) There shall be available in each habitable room sufficient electrical
outlets to enable occupants to utilize the room for the function for
which it is designed without use of loose cords or extension lines as
prohibited in § 196-14A(5) above.
B. Exterior lighting.
§ 196-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-14
194:434
(1) Illumination of common areas in apartment and condominium
complexes shall be situated so as not to shine into adjacent
dwelling units.
(2) Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions of
the premises in apartment, condominium and townhouse
complexes subject to regular and recurrent use by occupants at
night shall be illuminated continually from 1/2 hour before sunset
to the 1/2 hour after sunrise, unless the lighting is connected to a
dusk-to-dawn photoelectric device to enable safe passage of
persons of normal vision.
(3) Exterior lighting maintenance shall comply with Chapter 243,
Property Maintenance, Article I, Commercial and Multifamily
Dwellings.
C. Artificial lighting: multiple-dwelling complexes.
(1) All interior common areas on the premises utilized by occupants or
that are likely to be used by persons frequenting the premises shall
be equipped with lighting so that during periods of darkness, all
such parts and areas shall be sufficiently illuminated to enable
persons of normal vision to traverse such areas safely and to
perform therein the functions for which the parts or areas are
designed.
(2) Light switches in exitways, including corridors, hallways, landings,
stairways and vestibules, shall be of a type that may not be
operated by occupants or persons frequenting the premises.
(3) Lighting fixtures, wall plates and other electrical facilities in
bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be of the type or located and
maintained so that there will be no danger of short-circuiting from
the splashing of water from any facility therein. No such fixtures
shall be located so as to be reached from a bathtub or shower
enclosure.
(4) Every habitable or occupiable room shall have light available at all
times, with an illumination of at least six footcandles. Such light
shall be measured 30 inches from the floor at the center of the
room.
(5) Every bathroom and toilet room shall have light available at all
times, with an illumination of at least three footcandles. Such light
shall be measured 30 inches from the floor at the center of the
room.
(6) The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, it shall not be the
responsibility of a multiple-dwelling owner to provide lamps or
lighting fixtures in dwelling units other than kitchen and bathroom
ceiling or wall fixtures or to supply replacement bulbs.
§ 196-14 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-15
194:435
§ 196-15. Heating.
A. Standard of performance. Every unit of dwelling space shall contain
facilities to provide heat sufficient to maintain a minimum inside
temperature of 68° F. in all habitable rooms, measured at least one foot
away from any surface at the coldest portion of the space, subject to
regular use by occupants of any such room when the outside
temperature is at design winter conditions.
B. Corrective measures. Where the North Brunswick Township
Department of Community Development, in consultation with the North
Brunswick Building Department, determines that the facilities are of
inadequate size or capacity to accomplish the foregoing, the owner may
be ordered to either increase the capacity of the heating system,
provide additional insulation or take such other or further steps as will
enable the heating system of the unit to satisfy this requirement;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as
authorizing loss of habitable space to an extent that would create a
violation of this chapter.
C. Standards of maintenance.
(1) The heating equipment, facilities and system and all parts thereof
shall be kept in good operating condition, free of defects, corrosion
and deterioration at all times.
(2) Heating equipment shall be installed and maintained in such a
manner as to avoid leakage of or concentration of liquids, gases
and solid matters which may constitute hazards or violations of this
chapter.
(3) Heating equipment shall not be operated in such a manner as to
impair its ability to perform as required hereunder or create a
hazard anywhere in the system due to excessive temperature.
(4) The heating system, including such parts as heating risers, ducts
and hot-water lines, shall be covered with an insulating material or
guard to protect occupants and other persons on the premises from
receiving burns due to chance contact.
(5) Any pressure-relief valve on any type of heating unit shall be
connected to a pipe that discharges either vertically toward the
floor to a minimum distance of six inches from that floor surface
and to a maximum of 20 inches to that floor surface or in a manner
conforming to the plumbing subcode of the Uniform Construction
Code.78
(6) Furnace rooms which contain gas or oil-fired furnaces and/or hotwater
heaters shall not be used for storage of any kind. Boiler,
78.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 196-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-15
194:436
furnace, and storage rooms shall be protected with one-hour fire
separation or automatic suppression system.
(7) At the time of sale of any residential unit, the North Brunswick
Department of Community Development may require the seller to
provide documentation as to the maintenance of oil-fired and gas
heating units.
D. Minimum temperature; rental units.
(1) From September 15 of each year to the next succeeding May 15,
every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall
be maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., at least 65° F. between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The heating system shall be capable of
maintaining the minimum required temperature in the habitable
rooms without the necessity of heating adjoining rooms more than
five degrees higher than said minimum required temperature. The
design of the heating system shall conform to the ASHRAE Guide
and Data Book.
(2) In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be
responsible for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior
temperature arising out of action by the occupant in leaving
windows or doors open to the exterior of the building.
(3) The owner shall be obligated to supply required fuel or energy and
maintain the heating system in good operating condition so that it
can supply heat as required herein, notwithstanding any
contractual provision seeking to delegate or shift responsibility to
the occupant or third person, except that the owner shall not be
required to supply fuel or energy for heating purposes to any unit
where the occupant thereof agrees, in writing, to supply heat to his
own unit of dwelling space and the said unit is served by its own
exclusive heating equipment for which the source of heat can be
separately computed and billed.
E. Space heaters.
(1) Space heaters shall be so installed, located and maintained so as to
exhaust the products of combustion to the outside air, to prevent a
fire hazard by being sufficiently removed or insulated from
surrounding material, to be permanently affixed so that the heater
cannot be moved by occupants, and not to constitute a hazard to
persons using the premises in close proximity to the heater by
reason of chance contact or by reason of lack of fresh air supply.
(2) Space heaters shall be installed in such a manner that all habitable
rooms will be heated to the required temperature.
(3) Electric and gas space heaters shall be permitted, provided that
they meet standards established by the Underwriters Laboratories
§ 196-15 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-15
194:437
§ 196-16. Water supply.
and shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
instruction.
F. Inspection.
(1) The heating system, as herein defined, shall be inspected annually,
such:
(a) To insure that the system is being maintained in accordance
with the standards applicable to the system as of the time of
installation.
(b) To locate and remove hazards or conditions that may, if not
corrected, are foreseen to develop into hazards or become
violations of these regulations.
(c) To confirm the ability of the system to fulfill the heating
requirements provided hereunder.
(2) Fireplaces, fireplace inserts, and woodburning stoves, where they
exist, shall be installed according to manufacturer's instructions,
well maintained and properly vented, or the unit shall be sealed
and secured to prevent usage. Chimneys shall be checked by a
chimney sweep certified by National Chimney Sweep Guild at least
once every three years. If inspection indicates cleaning is required,
the unit shall be cleaned. Records shall be maintained for six years
on each fireplace unit. These records shall contain the name and
address of the chimney sweep conducting the inspection and his
findings.
A. Sufficiency of source and system. Every multiple dwelling and hotel
shall be connected to a source of and system for delivery of potable
water sufficient to meet the requirements for hot and cold water at all
connected fixtures.
B. Connection of fixtures. Every kitchen sink, bathroom or toilet room,
sink, basin, tub or shower shall be connected to both hot and cold water
lines and be provided with both hot and cold water.
C. Hot water.
(1) Each building or dwelling unit shall be served by a hot-water heater
and hot-water distribution system capable of operating even when
the heating system itself is not in operation and of providing all
units of dwelling space and facilities therein requiring hot water
with water at the outlets at a minimum temperature of 120° F. and
a maximum temperature of 160° F. at all times in accordance with
anticipated need resulting from the number of fixtures and use of
the building.
(2) The use of sidearm water heaters shall be prohibited.
§ 196-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-16
194:438
§ 196-17. Natural light, ventilation and replacement glazing.
D. Flow of water. All plumbing fixtures and equipment for the supply and
drainage of running water shall be maintained so that the rate of flow
shall be of sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them
to function properly. The pipes conveying the water shall be of sufficient
size to provide the water required without undue pressure reduction
and without undue noise under all normal conditions of use.
A. Natural light.
(1) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight or
transparent or translucent panel facing the exterior of the premises
directly or through an open porch into the room, equal in area to at
least 8% of the floor area of such room.
(2) Wherever walls or other portions of a structure or other opaque
barriers face a window surface and are less than three feet distant
from such window surface and where the projected plane of any
such wall, surface or barrier shall obscure more than 1/2 of the
window surface, then such shall not be included in the calculation
as contributing to meet the minimum requirements hereof.
B. Natural ventilation.
(1) Every habitable room, bathroom, toilet room or enclosed
kitchenette shall have a means of natural ventilation unless there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
exchange of air. Natural ventilation as required hereunder shall be
directly to the exterior through an opening of at least three square
feet or through a porch having access and exposure to fresh air
from the exterior. The total of openable window or skylight area in
each such room shall be equal to at least 50% of the minimum
window or skylight area required for natural light under N.J.A.C.
5:10-16.1.
(2) Every such window or skylight shall be equipped with the
necessary hardware or other means so that it can be readily opened
and closed by occupants from the interior of the dwelling space.
C. Mechanical ventilation. Where the required natural ventilation is not
provided, there shall be ventilation by mechanical means, conforming
to the following requirements:
(1) Kitchens and kitchenettes shall be ventilated by mechanical means
so as to exhaust at least two cubic feet of air per minute per square
foot of floor area directly to the outdoors or by means of a properly
installed and maintained electrically powered, nonducted range
hood equipped with an activated charcoal filter for the elimination
of cooking odors.
(2) For commercial kitchens, see N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.7(g).
§ 196-16 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-17
194:439
§ 196-18. Storage and closet facilities.
(3) Bathrooms and toilet rooms containing only one water closet or
urinal shall be mechanically vented by an exhaust system that
exhausts at least 50 cubic feet of air per minute. Means shall be
provided for air ingress by louvers in the door, by undercutting the
door or by transfer ducts, grilles, or other openings.
(4) Bathrooms and toilet rooms containing more than one water closet
or urinal shall be mechanically vented by an independent exhaust
system that exhausts at least 40 cubic feet of air per minute per
water closet or urinal.
(5) All clothes dyers vented to the exterior must be cleaned and well
maintained.
D. Replacement glazing. All replacement glazing shall conform to the
applicable construction codes of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code79 for glazing requirements for specific hazardous locations.
A. Storage of occupant's property.
(1) Any storage area available to or used by occupants in common
areas shall have each space within the area separately designated
for each unit of dwelling space, and a list identifying each such
space shall be retained by the person in charge of the premises, or
if the space is used in common by occupants of more than one unit
of dwelling space, then all items so stored shall bear the
identification of the occupant storing the item or items.
(2) The owner shall not permit unmarked items to be stored in a
common storage area and shall have a procedure for notifying each
tenant, in writing, before removal and disposal of the same.
(3) Materials stored in such areas shall be secured against becoming
sources of infestation and shall be protected against fire hazards
caused by ignition from electrical or heating devices or equipment
of similar possible sources of fire.
B. No-smoking signs. Common areas available for or utilized for storage
purposes and public garages shall contain one sign at least one square
foot in area, clearly legible and prominently displayed at or near the
entrance to the space, prohibiting smoking in the area.
C. Limitations on storage space.
(1) Storage in common areas shall not cover more than 80% of the
overall floor area and not more than 60% of the cubic content of the
storage area and shall be arranged so that there will be maintained
at all times aisles at least three feet in width.
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 196-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-18
194:440
§ 196-19. Mailboxes and identification signs.
§ 196-20. Building security.
(2) Storage shall not be permitted in attic spaces in garden apartments
unless such spaces are designed for such purposes according to the
International Building Code.
D. Refrigerators and similar equipment. The owner shall first remove the
doors of any refrigerators or other such equipment with exterior closing
devices likely to be hazardous to children, if stored on the premises.
A. Mailboxes and directories.
(1) The owner shall provide and maintain mail receptacles for all
occupants, conforming to all federal postal laws and regulations.
(2) In multiple dwellings, there shall be identification by name and unit
of dwelling space for each designated occupant, maintained by the
person in charge of the premises or posted at or near the main
entrance of the premises or in the lobby, lounge or mailroom area.
Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring a directory for
transient guests, provided that there is a responsible person on the
premises designated by the owner, known to postal authorities,
who shall on behalf of the owner receive and distribute or make
available for pickup mail for transient guests.
B. Identification signs.
(1) Every unit of dwelling space in hotels and multiple dwellings shall
have some permanent and legible identification by letter, number
or other symbol at or near the front entrance thereof.
(2) Floor signs designating the number of the floor shall be posted
prominently and maintained permanent and legible identification
by letter, number or other symbol at or near the front entrance
thereof.
(3) The street number of the premises shall be posted prominently at
the front entrance of the premises and be visible day and night
from the public right-of-way adjoining the main front entrances of
the premises.
(4) Buildings having three or more units shall have identification
posted prominently at the front entrance of the premises and be
visible day and night from the public right-of-way adjoining the
main front entrance of the premises. Signs shall be of reflective
material and bear both the street number and unit numbers
(Example: Bldg. 36 36-01 through 36-24).
A. Hotels. The following provisions apply to hotels.
§ 196-18 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-20
194:441
(1) Entrance doors to dwelling units shall be equipped with a mediumduty
dead-latching lockset (Series 160, FF-H-106a, minimum, with
a minimum 1 1/16 inch by 1/2 inch with 1/2 inch minimum throw
latch bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger) or with a dead bolt
separate from the latch set.
(2) Such entrance doors shall also be equipped with either a viewing
device installed on the designated main entrance door to the
dwelling unit located so as to enable a person on the inside of the
entrance door to view a person immediately outside or with a chain
door guard so installed as to permit partial opening of the door.
(3) All openable windows, sliding doors, basement windows and
windows opening onto exterior stairways, fire escapes, porches,
terraces, balconies or other areas affording easy access to the
premises shall be equipped with a locking device of some kind.
(4) Grilles lockable from the inside only may be placed on the inside or
outside of windows only if the windows do not serve to provide
access to exits.
B. Multiple dwellings. The following provisions apply to multiple
dwellings:
(1) Every building entrance door or other exterior door permitting
access to two or more units of dwelling space shall be equipped
with a heavy-duty dead-latching lockset (Series 161, FF-H-106a,
minimum, with a minimum 7/8 inch by 5/8 inch with 1/2 inch
minimum throw latch bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger).
Outside cylinders of main entrance door locks shall be operated by
the tenant's key, which shall not be keyed to also open the tenant's
dwelling unit entrance door.
(2) All exit and exitway doors shall be freely openable from the inside
at all times. Double-keyed dead bolts shall not be installed on main
entrance doors.
(3) All exterior entrance doors to common basement, cellar or storage
areas shall be self-closing and lockable.
(4) All entrance doors to dwelling units shall be equipped with a
medium-duty latching lockset (Series 160, FF-H106a, minimum,
with a minimum 1 1/16 inch by 1/2 inch with 1/2 inch minimum
throw latch bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger) or with a
dead bolt lock separate from the latch set.
(5) All entrance doors to each dwelling unit shall be equipped with a
chain door guard so as to permit partial opening of the door and a
viewing device installed on the designated main entrance door to
the dwelling unit, located so to enable a person on the inside or the
entrance door to view a person immediately outside.
§ 196-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-20
194:442
§ 196-21. Cooking facilities.
(6) All openable windows, sliding doors, basement windows and
windows opening onto exterior stairways, fire escapes, porches,
terraces, balconies or other areas affording easy access to the
premises shall be equipped with a locking device of some kind.
(7) Grilles lockable from the inside only may be placed on the inside or
outside of windows only if the windows do not serve to provide
access to exits.
(8) Every exterior entrance door leading to interior common areas
which provide access to two or more interior dwelling units'
entrance doors shall be a self-closing and self-locking door, shall be
kept closed at all times except when in actual use and shall be
equipped with a viewing device if it would not otherwise be
possible to see a person seeking to enter without opening the door.
In addition, the main entrance door shall be equipped with an
electrically operated buzzer and latch-release system, individual
exterior door bells connected to each dwelling unit, or an approved
alternative security and entrance system. However, no building
shall be equipped with an electrically operated latch-release
system if such building is not also equipped with an
intercommunication system allowing effective communication
between a person in any dwelling unit and a person standing
outside of the main entrance door.
(9) When the main entrance to a building contains a vestibule with
doors at both ends, only the inside set of doors must conform to the
security requirements.
(10) Buildings with fewer than six dwelling units shall not be required to
have bells in every dwelling unit, provided that there is at least one
exterior door bell connected so as to ring at least one bell in the
common areas which will be audible in all dwelling units.
(11) Exposed hinges on building entrance doors and entrance doors to
dwelling units are either to be removed and replaced with hinges
which have nonremovable hinge pins or altered so that the door
would be protected against being lifted from its hinges by pulling
the hinge pin. (An acceptable alteration method to an existing door
would be to remove two screws, opposite each other, from both
leaves of the hinge, insert screw, steel pin or equivalent into jamb
leaf, protruding 1/2 inch, drill out the opposite screw hole in the
door. Do this in the top and bottom hinge of the door. When closed,
the hinge pins may be removed, but the door will remain firmly in
place.)
A. Required facilities. No cooking shall be permitted in any unit of
dwelling space unless there is a provision for the following minimum
cooking and sanitary facilities:
§ 196-20 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-21
194:443
§ 196-22. Sanitary facilities.
(1) A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and drain
board of appropriate materials, connected to and having available
at all times a supply of hot and cold water under sufficient pressure
as required under N.J.A.C. 5:10-15. The kitchen sink shall be
connected to a sanitary disposal or sewer system.
(2) Cooking and preparation of food shall be undertaken only in areas
designated therefor.
(3) Means of natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation sufficient to
remove promptly cooking odors to the exterior of the premises
without first circulating them within the interior habitable space of
the unit.
(4) Place for storage of food free from infestation.
(5) Facilities for refrigeration in good operating condition for
protection of food from spoilage permitting maintenance of
temperatures for storage above 32° F. and below 50° F. without
regard to outside temperature.
(6) A cooking facility which, if electrical, is connected with safety to an
electrical system of sufficient capacity or, if gas, connected by
permanent fixture and tubing to avoid leakage of gas. The use of
gasoline stoves or other similar fuel-burning appliances using
highly flammable liquids and the use of portable kerosene stoves or
other similar fuel-burning portable appliances for cooking is
prohibited.
(7) Cabinets or drawers or other storage areas for utensils, dishes and
other cooking and eating equipment. Cabinets and countertops
shall be in good condition and well maintained.
(8) Two floor or wall electrical outlets for electrical appliances.
A. Required facilities.
(1) Every unit of dwelling space shall contain the following minimum
sanitary facilities:
(a) A toilet equipped with a flushing mechanism.
(b) A bathtub or shower or other complete bathing facility.
(c) A washbasin in the toilet room or within close proximity
thereto.
(d) In dwelling units having more than one room available or used
for sleeping purposes, each such room shall have accessible to
it sanitary facilities directly from the room itself or through any
§ 196-21 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-22
194:444
§ 196-23. Occupancy standards.
common portion of the dwelling unit without requiring passage
through the bedroom.
(2) A complete second set of sanitary facilities shall be required for any
unit of dwelling space with permissible occupancy of 10 or more
persons.
(3) Each toilet and bathing facility shall be located in a separate room
or rooms with completely enclosed sides and top and shall be
provided with:
(a) One or more doors, each of which can be locked from the
interior.
(b) Floor, walls and ceiling surfaces made of or protected by
durable materials capable of being exposed regularly to
moisture without damage or deterioration.
(4) Every bathroom and toilet room shall be of sufficient dimension to
provide clearance of 1 1/2 feet in front of each fixture, including but
not limited to toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower.
(5) Every toilet, including the toilet seat, washbasin, shower, bath and
other plumbing or sanitary facility forming part of any toilet room
or bathroom, shall be maintained in good operating condition at all
times and shall be kept clean and free of material that might clog
the same or impair its operation and shall drain into a sanitary
sewer or other approved sanitary disposal system.
A. Basements and cellars. Basements and cellars may be used for dwelling
space, provided that:
(1) The entire area constituting the dwelling unit must comply with all
requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to habitable
rooms or areas and to all requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70
applicable to rooms and dwelling units in basements or stories
below grade; and
(2) The floors, ceiling and walls of each unit of dwelling space must be
free of moisture.
B. Unemancipated minors. No unemancipated minor shall occupy any unit
of dwelling space not having as part thereof for the exclusive use of its
occupants the sanitary facility required under N.J.A.C. 5:10-21.
C. Floor area.
(1) In all dwelling units other than rooming units, there shall be a
minimum usable floor area for the initial occupant of 175 square
feet and 125 square feet of additional space for each additional
occupant.
§ 196-22 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-23
194:445
(2) In every dwelling unit, every room occupied or intended to be
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a
minimum usable floor area of 70 square feet, and every room
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall have a usable floor area of at least 50
square feet for each such occupant; provided, however, that
children under the age of three shall not be considered to be
additional occupants.
D. Prohibited sleeping areas. Kitchens, bathrooms, halls and toilet rooms
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
E. Required ceiling height.
(1) Other than a kitchen, basement or attic, ceiling heights in habitable
rooms, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry
rooms on the first or second floor shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven feet. The required height shall be measured from
the finished floor to the lowest projection from the ceiling.
Exception: Beams and girders spaced not less than four feet on
center may project not more than six inches below the required
ceiling height.
(2) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces to be used for
sleeping purposes may project to within six feet, eight inches of the
finished floor, and beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions may
project to within six feet four inches of the finished floor.
(3) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces not to be used
for sleeping purposes may project to within six feet two inches of
the finished floor, and beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions
may project to within five feet 10 inches of the finished floor.
(4) Not more than 50% of the required floor area of a room or space is
permitted to have a sloped ceiling less than the height required
herein, with no portion of the required floor area less than five feet
in height. Portions of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring less
than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not
be considered as contributing to the minimum required habitable
area for that room.
(5) Read in context with the definition of "habitable room"80 and the
occupancy standards found in this chapter, this section requires an
attic apartment to contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
having a ceiling height of seven feet zero inches and that every
attic room have at least 59 square feet of floor area, having a
ceiling height of at least seven feet zero inches. While additional
floor area having less than seven feet zero inches ceiling height is
permitted, it cannot be counted for purposes of determining
habitability.
80.Editor's Note: See § 196-4A in this chapter for said definition.
§ 196-23 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-23
194:446
§ 196-24. Special provisions for hotels and multiple dwellings with
rooming units.
F. Emergency escapes and rescue openings shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(1) Basements with habitable space to be used for sleeping purposes
must contain emergency escape and rescue openings in the
room(s) used for sleeping purposes. All emergency escape and
rescue openings shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5.7
square feet. Exception: Grade floor openings shall have a minimum
net clear opening of five square feet. The minimum net clear
opening height shall be 24 inches. Emergency escape and rescue
openings shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater
than 44 inches measured from the floor. The minimum net clear
opening width shall be 20 inches. Emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without
the use of keys or tools.
(2) Window wells required for emergency escape and rescue shall have
horizontal dimensions that allow the door or window of the
emergency escape and rescue opening to be fully opened. The
horizontal dimensions of the window well shall provide a minimum
net clear area of nine square feet with a minimum horizontal
projection and width of 36 inches. Exception: Ladder(s) or steps
required shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of six inches
into the required dimensions of the window well.
(3) Window wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches below
the adjacent ground level shall be equipped with a permanently
affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in the fully open
position. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of at least 12
inches and shall project at least three inches from the wall and
shall be spaced not more than 18 inches on center vertically for the
full height of the window well.
A. Registry and rate posting. Every hotel shall have posted in a
conspicuous place a statement of the range of rates charged by the
hotel.
B. The owner or operator of every hotel or dwelling space for which
housekeeping services are provided shall:
(1) Supply a fresh change of bed linen and towels, all of which shall be
in good condition, at least once a week or when there is a change of
occupancy of the unit.
(2) Provide housekeeping and interior maintenance on a daily basis if a
hotel, but under any circumstances each such unit shall be
completely inspected and cleaned where the occupancy thereof is
changed.
§ 196-23 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-25
194:447
§ 196-25. Parking areas and driveways.
A. Design requirements.
(1) Driveways shall have two traffic lanes for their entire length, in
addition to any parking space, except that a single lane may be
used for short straight service driveways where two-way traffic is
not anticipated.
(2) Buildings, walls, fences, plantings and other sight obstructions
shall be so located and designed that a driver backing out of a
garage, carport or parking space can see approaching traffic speed
and volume.
B. Maintenance requirements. Driveways and parking areas shall be
maintained free of potholes or other unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
C. Parking in approach drives. No parking will be permitted in approach
drives to parking areas where such parking will obstruct ingress of firefighting
equipment.
D. Parking for handicapped residents.
(1) Any owner of a multiple dwelling with five or more dwelling units
which provides parking to the occupants thereof, and in which a
handicapped person resides, shall provide parking spaces for
occupants who are handicapped located at the closest possible
proximity to the principal accesses of the multiple dwelling.
(2) A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces provided
for the occupants of the multiple dwelling, but not less than one
parking space, shall be set aside as parking for the handicapped.
(a) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the International Symbol of Access
along with the following words: "This space reserved for
physically handicapped drivers."
(b) Each reserved space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for a
person in a wheelchair or on braces or crutches to get in and
out of either side of an automobile onto a level, paved surface
suitable for wheeling and walking and shall be located so that a
person in a wheelchair or using braces or crutches is not
compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
(c) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit a
handicapped person access from the parking area to the
sidewalk.
(3) For purposes of this section, "handicapped" means a physical
impairment which confines a person to a wheelchair; causes a
person to walk with difficulty or insecurity; affects the sight or
hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas is
§ 196-25 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-25
194:448
§ 196-26. Child-protection window guards; firesafety regulations.
insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty coordination; or
reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness to the
extent that facilities are needed to provide for the safety of that
person.
A. Child protection window guards; when required.
(1) Except as provided in § 196-26A(2) below, the owner or other
person responsible for the management or control of a multiple
dwelling shall, upon the written request of a tenant of a unit in
which a child or children 10 years of age or under reside, provide,
install and maintain approved child-protection window guards on
the windows of the dwelling unit and on any windows of the
dwelling unit and on any windows in the public halls of the multiple
dwelling.
(2) The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any window
which either gives access to a fire escape or is on the first floor, or
the unit that is owner-occupied, is part of a condominium or is held
by a proprietary lessee under a cooperative form of ownership or
occupied by a shareholder in a mutual housing corporation.
(a) For purposes of this chapter, a window in a room or hallway
shall not be considered to be on the first floor if the finished
surface of the floor of that room or hallway is more than six feet
above grade as measured at the location of the window.
(3) All leases offered to tenants in multiple dwellings, other than
condominium, cooperative or mutual housing form of ownership,
shall contain a clear and conspicuous notice advising tenants that
the owner is required by law to provide, install and maintain
window guards in the apartment of any tenant who has a child or
children 10 years of age or younger living in the apartment and
makes a written request to the owner or manager to install window
guards, and that owner is also required, upon written request of
any such tenant, to provide, install and maintain window guards in
the building hallways to which persons in the tenant's unit have
access without having to go out of the building. A lease offered to a
tenant of a first-floor unit shall not be required to refer to window
guards in the apartment but only to window guards in the hallways
above the first floor to which persons in the tenant's unit have
access without having to go out of the building.
(4) At least once in each calendar year, the owner or manager of a
multiple dwelling shall deliver to each tenant a clear and legible
notice containing the information required by § 196-26A(3) above.
This notice shall be hand-delivered or mailed by regular or certified
mail, return receipt requested.
§ 196-25 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-26
194:449
B. General installation requirements.
(1) Window guards shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23, and with manufacturer's instructions.
(2) Any window guard installed on an emergency egress window shall
be releasable or removable from the inside without use of a key,
tool or excessive force. For purposes of this chapter, "emergency
egress window" is any window in a sleeping room located on the
second or third floor, other than a window providing access to a fire
escape.
(3) Any window guard installed on a window that is not an emergency
egress window, including any window in a unit located above the
first floor that is not a sleeping room, shall be designed,
constructed and installed so that it cannot be removed, opened or
dislodged without the use of a key or tool; provided, however, that
no window guard shall be installed on any window giving access to
a fire escape.
C. Specifications for window guards.
(1) Window guards shall be constructed as to reject the passage of a
solid four-inch sphere at every space and interval.
(2) When fully extended, the guard shall bear 150 pounds of load at the
center.
(3) Window guards shall be constructed of metal or of other material of
comparable strength and durability. The diameter or width of metal
rods used in the guards shall not exceed 1/2 inch.
(4) Window guards shall be constructed and installed so as to serve
their intended purpose without any risk of collapse, breakage,
spreading of the bars or other malfunction.
(5) In a room, window guards shall be of at least a height sufficient to
allow a total openable window area, for all windows in the room, of
not less than 4% of the floor area of the room. In a public hallway,
window guards shall protect the full openable area of each window.
(6) Guards shall be securely fastened in order to bear the required
load.
(7) All window guards shall be installed as to prevent the lower
window from being raised four inches or more above the lowest
section of the top horizontal bar of the window guard. Where
necessary, rigid metal stops shall be installed securely in the upper
tracks of each side of the bottom window.
(8) Screws used to mount window guards and stopping devices shall
be:
§ 196-26 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-26
194:450
(a) Minimum size No. 10 and long enough to penetrate one inch
into a wooden window frame; or
(b) Of an adequate type, size and length to be securely fastened to
a metal window frame.
(9) The coating of all guards shall be unleaded.
(10) Guards shall be installed only in sound (nonrotting) mountings or
tracks.
(11)Window guards installed prior to November 20, 1995, shall be
accepted as being in conformity with this chapter if they were
designed and installed in accordance with the rules and
specifications established by the New York City Department of
Health and if such installation is not in violation of N.J.A.C.
5:10-27.2. Window guards installed on or after November 20, 1995,
that are so constructed as to reflect the passage of a solid four-inch
sphere at every space and interval and are otherwise designed and
installed in accordance with the rules and specifications
established by the New York City Department of Health, and not in
violation of N.J.A.C. 5:10-27.2, shall be accepted as being in
conformity with this chapter.
D. Additional specifications for window guards for other than double-hung
windows.
(1) Window guards intended for casements, sliders and other types of
combinations of windows in which the height of the openings is not
subject to limitation shall be of such size as to fill the entire
aperture and shall reflect passage of a solid four-inch sphere at
every space or interval.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in § 196-26D(3) hereinbelow, sliding
windows and vertical pivoting windows may be equipped with
stopping devices in place of window guards as follows:
(a) For sliding windows, solid metal blocks, measuring at least 1/2
the depth of the window track and 1/2 the width, shall be
securely fastened into the bottom and upper window tracks to
prevent the window from opening four inches or more.
(b) For vertical pivoting windows, metal stopping devices shall be
securely fastened to the upper and lower window frames so as
to prevent the window from pivoting open four inches or more.
The height of the stopping devices shall extend no less than
one inch nor more than two inches beyond the window frame
as needed to stop the window. The protruding edge of the
stopping device shall be smooth and rounded.
(3) Use of such stopping devices in lieu of window guards shall be
allowed within dwelling units only where they do not preclude
§ 196-26 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-26
194:451
meeting the requirement, as per N.J.A.C. 5:10-16.2, that the total
operable window and/or openable skylight area in each room be
equal to at least 4% of the floor area of the room.
E. Prohibited acts. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the
installation of child-protection window guards required under P.L.
1995, c. 120, the Robert E. Dwight, Jr., Raquan Ellis and Zahir Atkins
Memorial Child-Protection Window Guard Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-7.12
through 55:13A-7.16, and under this chapter, nor shall any person
remove or otherwise render ineffective such window guards; provided,
however, that the owner or the representative of the owner may remove
window guards from an unoccupied unit or, with the consent of the
tenant, from a unit in which no child 10 years of age or under resides.
F. Firesafety regulations.
(1) All buildings in compliance with the International Fire Code shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter insofar as issues
of firesafety are concerned.
(2) If, in the course of inspecting any hotel or multiple dwelling, any
Inspector performing inspections for the Township shall find a
condition which is, or appears to be, in violation of the
International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70, the Inspector shall give
prompt notice of that condition to the local enforcing agency.
(3) No certificate of inspection shall be issued for any hotel or multiple
dwelling subject to inspection, pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety
Act,81 by a local enforcing agency either as a life-hazard use or
pursuant to a notice given by the local enforcing agency to the
Division of Fire Safety, unless and until the ordinance shall have
received from the local enforcing agency a certification that the
building does not have any outstanding violations of the
International Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70, or the Township's
representative has, while at the premises, examined a current
certificate of inspection issued pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety
Act.
(4) Where battery-powered single-station units have been installed in
dwelling units, the following conditions must be met:
(a) The owner or his representative shall inspect, clean and test all
units and replace batteries in all units annually.
[1] Once a year, each apartment complex shall submit to the
North Brunswick Department of Community Development
certification that all smoke detector units have been
serviced. Certification shall include date of service, name
of person servicing unit and notation if smoke detector
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 196-26 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-26
194:452
was replaced. Certification shall be submitted by June 1 of
each year.
[2] The owner of a multiple dwelling or his representative
shall place a tag on each unit and shall place the date of
inspection and his initials on the tag.
(b) Entries shall be made on the tag upon initial installation,
whenever a change of occupant occurs, when any reported
malfunction of unit is corrected, and when required
maintenance is performed.
(c) An entry made on a tag shall constitute a certification that the
unit is operating properly.
(d) Tags shall be affixed so as not to impair the functioning of the
unit.
(5) Smoke detectors required for all existing dwelling or dwelling
units.
(a) No certificate of compliance shall be issued for any dwelling or
dwelling unit by the Inspector unless said official, after
inspection of the unit, certifies that such dwelling is equipped
with smoke detectors as defined hereinabove.
(b) No person shall rent to another or suffer or permit occupancy
by another of any rental dwelling unless said rental units are
equipped with smoke detectors.
(c) The owner of any vacant rental dwelling unit shall be
responsible for maintaining and replacing the batteries as
needed in battery-powered smoke detectors and provide power
in vacant units equipped with hard-wired smoke detectors.
(6) Location of smoke detectors. A minimum of one on each level shall
be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
§ 196-26 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-26
194:453

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
[Amended 8-2-2010 by Ord. No. 10-19]
§ 196-27. Violations and penalties.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, a life hazard violation shall be any
violation of this chapter or of any violation of the Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70, that is incorporated into this chapter by reference, that
presents a hazard to the life safety of occupants of the building or of the
public generally.
B. Abatement of violations. Whenever any nuisance or any unsanitary or
unhealthy condition in violation of this chapter is found on any hotel or
multifamily dwelling premises within the Township of North Brunswick,
the North Brunswick Department of Community Development shall
order the owner to correct the violation or to remove and abate the
nuisance or condition by notice in writing, which shall be served on the
owner in the following manner:
(1) Written notice shall be mailed to the owner by certified and regular
mail to the address provided under the certificate of registration
required under § 196-3C.
(2) Written notice may also be served by delivering a copy personally
to the agent appointed by said owner in § 196-C(1)(a)[3], only when
said agent is located within the Township of North Brunswick.
C. Penalties.
(1) No person shall:
(a) Violate, or cause to be violated, any of the provisions of this
chapter, Hotels and Multifamily Housing;
(b) Obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere with, by force or otherwise,
the North Brunswick Department of Community Development
in the exercise of any power or the discharge of any function or
duty under the provisions of this chapter;
(c) Prepare, utter or render any false statement, report,
document, plans or specifications permitted or required to be
prepared, uttered or rendered under the provisions of this
chapter;
(d) Render ineffective or inoperative any protective equipment
installed, or to be installed, in any hotel or multiple dwelling;
(e) Refuse or fail to comply with any lawful ruling, action, order or
notice of the North Brunswick Department of Community
Development.
§ 196-27 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-27
194:455
(2) Where any violation of § 196-27B is of a continuing nature, each
day during which such continuing violation remains unabated after
the date fixed by the Department of Community Development in
any order or notice for the correction or termination of such
continuing violation shall constitute an additional, separate and
distinct violation, except during the time on arbitration or appeal
from said order or notice may be taken or is pending.
(3) Any person who violated, or causes to be violated, any provision of
§ 196-27B(1) shall be assessed penalties through the North
Brunswick Municipal Court for each area in which one or more
violations are found. Violation areas shall be:
(a) Each dwelling unit;
(b) Interior common areas; and
(c) Building exterior.
(4) Absent any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, the first
continuing violation penalty shall be as follows:
(a) In a dwelling unit for which a life hazard violation is cited:
$325.
(b) In an interior common area of building exterior for which a life
hazard violation is cited: $500.
(c) In any area for which none of the violations cited is a life
hazard violation: $175.
(5) Absent any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, the second
continuing violation penalty shall be as follows:
(a) For each violation area in which a life hazard violation is cited:
$1,500.
(b) For each violation area in which no life hazard violation is
cited: $1,000.
(6) Absent any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, the third
continuing violation penalty shall be as follows:
(a) For each violation area in which a life hazard violation is cited
$2,500; and
(b) For each violation area in which no life hazard violation is
cited: $1,000.
(7) Absent any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, the fourth
and any subsequent continuing violation penalty shall be in the
amount of $5,000 per violation.
§ 196-27 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 196-27
194:456
D. The owner of any building subject to an unsafe building notice and
order issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.13 who shall fail to comply with
such notice and order after issuance of the first continuing violation
penalty shall be subject to a continuing violation penalty of $5,000 per
day per violation until all life hazard violations are abated.
E. The North Brunswick Department of Community Development may
cancel and revoke any permit, approval or certificate required or
permitted to be granted or issued to any person pursuant to the
provisions of this act if the North Brunswick Department of Community
Development shall find that any such person has violated, or caused to
be violated, any of the provisions of § 196-27B.
§ 196-27 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 196-27
194:457
Chapter 197
HOUSING STANDARDS AND OCCUPANCY LIMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42.
Dwellings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 161.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
Rental housing — See Ch. 266.
§ 197-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all residential housing in
the Township of North Brunswick meets applicable standards for safe and
sanitary housing standards and occupancy limits.
§ 197-2. Enforcing agent.
The Director of Community Development of the Township of North
Brunswick, or his designee, is hereby designated as the enforcement officer
to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and he shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 197-3. Acceptance of housing standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1), the
New Jersey State Housing Code as approved by the Departments of Health
and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the office of the
Secretary of State, and the most recently adopted International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC) as amended, are hereby accepted, adopted and
established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining whether
dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation
and rental, except that the occupancy and square footage requirements
contained in § 197-8 herein shall be applicable in lieu of those requirements
set forth in the New Jersey State Housing Code and the IPMC. The New
Jersey State Housing Code and the IPMC are incorporated herein by
reference, and three copies of the same have been placed on file in the office
of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick and are available to all
persons desiring to use and/or examine the same.
§ 197-4. Authority to promulgate regulations.
A. The Director of Community Development or his designee is hereby
authorized and empowered to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof.
§ 196-27 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-4
194:458
§ 197-5. Authority to make inspections.
B. The Director of Community Development or his designee shall file a
certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt in his
office and in the office of the Clerk of North Brunswick Township.
A. The Director of Community Development or his designee is hereby
authorized to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises, including all interior and
exterior spaces, located within the Township of North Brunswick in
order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public and shall
be referred to hereinafter as the "Enforcement Officer." The
Enforcement Officer shall not be accompanied by uniformed police
officer during such inspection, unless there is a reasonable concern of
unlawful conduct or violence at or during the inspection.
B. For the purpose of making such inspections, after receiving appropriate
authority through consent or administrative search warrant, the
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey,
during reasonable hours, i.e., 8:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., the interior
and exterior of all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit and rooming
unit shall give the Enforcement Officer free access to the exterior and
interior of such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises
at all reasonable times, i.e., 8:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., for the
purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of
a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or his agent or
employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its
premises, whether interior or exterior, at all reasonable times, i.e., 8:00
a.m. through 9:00 p.m. for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Inspections shall be made based on complaints and independent
observations that indicate that a violation or violations of the housing
standards, occupancy limits regulations, the Zoning Ordinance82 and/or
the Uniform Construction Code has occurred.
D. Inspections shall not be based on any form of discrimination such as
race, color, creed, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, etc.
E. Inspections may be conducted pursuant to consent from the owner or
lessee of the property or a validly issued administrative search warrant.
F. If the Enforcement Officer does not have a warrant and requests
consent to inspect the premises, he must inform the residents that they
have a right to refuse to consent to the inspection and that if consent to
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 197-4 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-5
194:459
§ 197-6. Occupancy or rental of property not in conformance with
provisions; certificate of maximum occupancy and use. [Amended
5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11]
the inspection is denied, refused or revoked, additional legal steps
will be taken by the Township. Consent from the owner, lessee or
consenting adult must be knowing and voluntary, and the consenting
party should sign a form acknowledging the knowing and voluntary
consent. The basis for belief that a violation has occurred and the
reason consent is requested should be detailed in records or written
notes regarding the inspection, which shall be maintained in an
enforcement file. Enforcement Officers should be aware that consent to
the inspection may be revoked at any time.
G. If consent is not obtained to conduct a search of the premises, the
Enforcement Officer shall leave the premises and prepare a
certification in support of a request for an administrative search
warrant. The certification shall state the facts surrounding the request
for inspection and the refusal and a request from the municipal court
for an administrative search.
H. When conducting a search the Enforcement Officer shall knock on all
doors before opening them. The Enforcement Officer may take notes or
photographs of the premises or draw a floor plan of the residence.
A. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living
therein which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey
State Housing Code established hereby as the standard to be used in
determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation, except for the provisions of § 197-8 herein regarding
occupancy requirements and square footage requirements which are
adopted as the standards for the Township of North Brunswick.
B. No two-family, three-family or any other multifamily units, or any units
with habitable spaces used for sleeping purposes in an attic or
basement, shall be sold or transferred without first obtaining a
certificate of compliance from the Department of Community
Development
C. A purchaser of any two-family, three-family or any other multifamily
units, or any units with habitable spaces used for sleeping purposes in
an attic or basement, shall certify that he or she has been informed of
the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the premises and
has reviewed § 197-7, Single-family dwelling units, and § 197-8,
Occupancy requirements; square footage, of this chapter and does not
intend to use or occupy such property in violation of the provisions of
§ 197-7, Single-family dwelling units, and § 197-8, Occupancy
requirements; square footage, of this chapter. Such purchaser must
obtain a certificate of compliance from the Deportment of Community
Development as to the validity and compliance of said units prior to the
§ 197-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-6
194:460
§ 197-7. Single-family dwelling units.
A single-family dwelling unit is a unit which may only be occupied by a
single housekeeping unit, i.e., a group of people, regardless of familial
relation, wherein all members have access rights to all common areas of
the single-family dwelling unit and all common appliances, including the
main kitchen, the main refrigerator, the cooking range, washing machines,
the garage, the family room, the living room, and the dining room. Any
individual occupying a room that contains a private refrigerator, a
microwave or a hot plate shall specifically not be deemed a member of
the housekeeping unit. The essence of the single-family dwelling unit is
that all members thereof, i.e., the single housekeeping unit, shall be the
equivalent of a family, without blood relation, and shall constitute a single,
economic entity, characterized by stability, permanency and functionality of
such single housekeeping unit, by maintaining the single-family dwelling
unit in common. Any use of a single-family dwelling unit by more than a
single housekeeping unit shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
penalties and violations as set forth herein.
§ 197-8. Occupancy requirements; square footage. [Amended
5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11]
All housing shall comply with the following codes and regulations, which are
hereby made a part of this chapter. The following minimum standards shall
be required:
closing of title. Failure to comply with these requirements may affect
the validity of the transfer of title and ownership.
D. A real estate agent licensee who is involved in the sale of a two-family,
three-family or any other multifamily units, or any units with habitable
spaces used for sleeping purposes in an attic or basement, must obtain
or ensure that the purchaser obtains a certificate of compliance from
the Department of Community Development as to the validity and
compliance of said units prior to and as a condition of the validity of the
title and ownership.
E. It shall be unlawful for any purchaser or real estate licensee involved in
a sale to knowingly transfer or assist in the transfer of ownership in
violation of this section. In addition to the applicable penalties provided
in this chapter, the Township may, in its discretion, report any real
estate licensee found to have violated the requirements of this section
to the New Jersey Real Estate Commission.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less
than 175 square feet for the first occupant, and 125 square feet for each
additional occupant.
B. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied or intended to be occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum usable
floor area of 70 square feet and every room occupied or intended to be
§ 197-6 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-8
194:461
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall have
a usable floor area of at least 50 square feet for each such occupant;
provided, however, that children under the age of three shall not be
considered to be additional occupants.
C. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one
lavatory without passing through another bedroom.
D. The following shall constitute the minimum occupancy area
requirements:
Minimum Occupancy Area in Square Feet
Space 1 - 2 Persons 3 Persons 4 or more Persons
Living
room/
dining
room
No
requirements
100 100 square feet with an
additional 25 square feet
for each person 3 years old
or older
Kitchen 50 50 70
Bedrooms Shall comply with § 197-8B of the Code of the Township of
North Brunswick
E. Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior public areas such as
hallways and all portions of living and dining rooms shall not be
occupied for sleeping purposes.
F. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet
in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not
less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter
fronts and walls.
G. The following minimum standards for ceiling heights shall apply:
(1) Other than a kitchen, basement or attic, ceiling heights in habitable
rooms, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry
rooms on the first or second floor shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven feet. The required height shall be measured from
the finished floor to the lowest projection from the ceiling.
Exception: Beams and girders spaced not less than four feet on
center may project not more than six inches below the required
ceiling height.
(2) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces to be used for
sleeping purposes may project to within six feet, eight inches of the
finished floor; and beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions may
project to within six feet, four inches of the finished floor.
(3) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces not to be used
for sleeping purposes may project to within six feet two inches of
the finished floor; and beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions
may project to within five feet 10 inches of the finished floor.
§ 197-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-8
194:462
(4) Not more than 50% of the required floor area of a room or space is
permitted to have a sloped ceiling less than the height required
herein, with no portion of the required floor area less than five feet
in height. Portions of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring less
than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not
be considered as contributing to the minimum required habitable
area for that room.
H. If there is a room occupied or to be occupied for sleeping purposes
located in a basement or an attic, an inspection of the premises to be let
or sold shall be made and a certificate of compliance from the
Department of Community Development must be issued for such rooms
to be used for sleeping purposes.
I. Emergency escapes and rescue openings shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(1) Basements with habitable space to be used for sleeping purposes
must contain emergency escape and rescue openings in the
room(s) used for sleeping purposes. All emergency escape and
rescue openings shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5.7
square feet. Exception: Grade floor openings shall have a minimum
net clear opening of five square feet. The minimum net clear
opening height shall be 24 inches. Emergency escape and rescue
openings shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater
than 44 inches measured from the floor. The minimum net clear
opening width shall be 20 inches. Emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without
the use of keys or tools.
(2) Window wells required for emergency escape and rescue shall have
horizontal dimensions that allow the door or window of the
emergency escape and rescue opening to be fully opened. The
horizontal dimensions of the window well shall provide a minimum
net clear area of nine square feet with a minimum horizontal
projection and width of 36 inches. Exception: Ladder(s) or steps
required shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of six inches
into the required dimensions of the window well.
(3) Window wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches below
the adjacent ground level shall be equipped with a permanently
affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in the fully open
position. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of at least 12
inches and shall project at least three inches from the wall and
shall be spaced not more than 18 inches on center vertically for the
full height of the window well.
J. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a
sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the
§ 197-8 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-8
194:463
§ 197-9. Information required to be distributed to tenants. [Added
7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1283]
Beginning May 1, 1995, the following information shall be provided to each
tenant by the landlord or the landlord's agent:
§ 197-10. Rental housing landlord registration requirements.
[Added 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-12]
sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
K. Any persons violating the provisions of §§ 197-7 and 197-8 shall be
subject to reinspection of the subject premises twice a year for three
years and shall be charged a reinspection fee of $150 for each such
reinspection taking place during the three-year reinspection period,
provided that such violation has not been overturned by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
L. All interior doors and hardware within any dwelling unit shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks on any such door shall be of a
passage or privacy type only. Deadbolts or similar security door locks
shall be expressly prohibited on any interior door leading to living space
and are limited to closets and storage units that cannot be occupied.
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
A. A truth-in-renting statement prepared by the Department of Community
Affairs in accordance with the Truth-in-Renting Act (N.J.S.A. 46:8-43 et
seq.) shall be distributed to all tenants living in buildings with more
than two dwelling units.
B. A copy of the registration statement filed with the Enforcement Office
and/or New Jersey Bureau of Housing Inspection.
C. A copy of the new tenant notification form provided by the Township of
North Brunswick. Said form shall be signed by the tenant and
maintained by the owner during the term of the tenancy. For buildings
with more than four units, the form shall be maintained in a log at the
rental office.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own, or purport to own, or
exercise control of any building or project in which there is rented or
offered for rent housing space for living or dwelling purposes under
either a written or oral lease.
RENTAL HOUSING — This definition shall include single-family, twofamily,
and owner-occupied two-family premises which are rented by
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 197-9
through 197-11 as §§ 197-11 through 197-13, respectively.
§ 197-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-10
194:464
a landlord, as well as any multiple dwelling subject to the Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
B. Every landlord of any building or structure which comes under the
provisions of this chapter shall, by May 1, 1995, file with the
Enforcement Office a written registration statement. For buildings with
three or more units, the registration statement shall be the certificate
of registration filed with the New Jersey Bureau of Housing Inspection,
plus conformance with the local registration requirements pursuant to
Chapter 196, Hotels and Multifamily Housing, of the Code of the
Township of North Brunswick. For buildings with fewer than three
dwelling units, the registration statement shall contain the following
information on a form to be provided by the Township of North
Brunswick:
(1) The names and addresses of the owners in title of the housing
property.
(2) If the record landlord is a corporation, the name of the registered
agent that will accept all legal notices on behalf of the corporation.
(3) If the landlord is an entity other than an individual (i.e., a
corporation, company, trade name, partnership, trust,
condominium association, LLC, LLP, or other legal entity), the name
and address of each partner and/or owner or person having a
beneficiary interest; in the case of a corporation, the names and
addresses of each stockholder if the total number of stockholders is
20 or fewer. In any event, with regard to corporate ownership, the
registry shall disclose the name and address of any stockholder
who owns, either directly or beneficially, 10% of the stock of the
corporation.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the managing agent of
the premises, if any.
(5) The name, address and telephone number, including the dwelling
unit, apartment or room number, of the superintendent, janitor,
custodial or other individual employed by the record owner or
managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if
applicable.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the landlord or managing agent who may be
reached or contacted at any time in the event of an emergency
affecting the premises or property, or any unit or dwelling or
commercial space therein, and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building or property and any
repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.
(7) The number of dwelling units by unit type.
§ 197-10 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-10
194:465
C. For single-family, two-family, and two-family owner-occupied units,
there shall be a landlord registration fee of $30, which fee shall be
renewable and due for payment every three years on October 1. For
three-family or any other multifamily units, the landlord registration fee
shall be made in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 196, Hotels
and Multifamily Housing, of the Code of the Township of North
Brunswick.
D. All single-family, two-family, and owner-occupied two-family unit
landlord registrations shall expire on the third September 30 following
their filing. The registration fee shall not be prorated for those
registrations received after October 1 of any year.
E. Penalty for not registering; emergency inspection.
(1) A landlord of single-family, two-family, and owner-occupied twofamily
units who is determined to be renting a dwelling not
previously or currently registered shall be required to pay a
registration fee of $30 and a penalty fee as follows:
(a) A penalty fee of $250 for the first offense; and
(b) A penalty fee of $500 for a second or subsequent offense, all
such fees to be cumulative. A summons and complaint may be
issued to the owner for appearance in Municipal Court for a
second or subsequent offense, all such offenses to be
cumulative.
(2) The affected dwelling shall immediately be subject to an
emergency inspection pursuant to Subsection E of § 266-7,
Procedures for inspections and issuance of certificates of rental
housing compliance, of Chapter 266, Rental Housing, of the Code
of the Township of North Brunswick. The landlord shall be required
to pay, in addition to the landlord registration fee of $30 and
penalty fee of $50, the fee of $70 for such emergency inspection, as
set forth in § 266-8, Fees.
F. If there is any change in any of the information on the landlord
registration statement, an amended registration statement must be
filed within 20 days, and the amended statement posted and distributed
to tenants within seven days of filing. Failure to file such amended
registration statement shall result in the following administrative
penalties:
(1) A penalty fee of $150 for failure to register within 30 days;
(2) A penalty fee of $250 for failure to register within 60 days; and
(3) A penalty fee of $500 for failure to register within or after 120 days,
such fees to be cumulative.
G. The certificate of registration shall be posted in an inconspicuous area
to be designated by the landlord, but observable by the tenant.
§ 197-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-10
194:466
§ 197-11. Enforcement procedures. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
11-12]
H. The initial registration for all buildings shall also be accompanied by a
floor plan and the square footage for each unit type to be used by the
Township in establishing maximum occupancy limits for each unit type.
I. Any unpaid fees or penalties required pursuant to this § 197-10 shall be
charged against the owner of the said premises, and the amount thereof
shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner as
taxes. The Township shall have the right to bring a summary action for
collection of such costs incurred in the Superior Court of New Jersey,
Law Division, Middlesex County.
A. Violation notices.
(1) Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there is or has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he may give a
violation notice of such violation to the person, persons or entities
responsible therefor. Such violation notice shall be in writing and
shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance.
Such violation notice shall be deemed to be properly and
sufficiently served if a) a copy thereof is sent by certified mail and
regular mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon
which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax records
of the municipality; or b) a copy thereof is handed to said person or
persons; or c) a copy thereof is left at the usual place of abode or
office of said persons or entities. A violation notice shall be given as
aforesaid within or without the municipality.
(2) The violation notice shall also state that, unless the violation is
abated, cured, prevented or desisted within the compliance period
designated in the violation notice, exclusive of the date of service,
the Township may issue a summons for the violation. The
Enforcement Officer may extend the period for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter in regard to the violation stated in the
violation notice for a period in excess of the compliance period if, in
his judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or
cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within
the compliance period, and in such cases, the Enforcement Officer
shall state such reasonably required extended period in the notice,
which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid compliance
period.
B. Summonses.
(1) Initial violation. Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines
that there is or has been a violation of any provision of this chapter
§ 197-10 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-11
194:467
which, after notice of violation has been issued, has not been
abated, cured, prevented or desisted within the compliance period
designated in the original violation notice, the Enforcement Officer
may issue a summons of such violation to the person, persons or
entities responsible therefor. Such summons shall be deemed to
be properly and sufficiently served if a) copy thereof is sent by
certified mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon
which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax records
of the municipality, or b) a copy thereof is handed to said person or
persons, or c) a copy thereof is left at the usual place of abode or
office of said persons or entities. The summons shall be served as
aforesaid within or without the municipality.
(2) Repeat violations. Whenever any violation reoccurs within one year
from the prior violation, or said person, persons, or entities violate
a similar provision under this chapter, the Enforcement Officer may
issue additional summonses without the necessity of an additional
violation notice and cure period, such summons to be in writing and
to include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such
summons shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if
a) a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to the last known address
of the person or entity upon which the same is served, as shown by
the most recent tax records of the municipality; or b) a copy thereof
is handed to said person or persons; or c) a copy thereof is left at
the usual place of abode or office of said persons or entities. The
summons shall be served as aforesaid within or without the
municipality.
(3) Continued violations. At the discretion of the Enforcement Officer,
additional summonses may be served each and every day that the
violation continues. Service of such summonses shall be in
accordance with the provisions set forth hereinabove.
C. Abatement of violations by Township. Whenever any violation or
nuisance, as defined under this chapter, is not removed and abated and/
or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition in violation of this chapter is
not corrected after notice, summons and hearing before the Municipal
Court or Board of Health or other appropriate tribunal, as applicable,
the Township may, either with Township equipment and labor or by
contract with third parties, undertake to abate and cure such violation,
nuisance and/or correct any such unsanitary or unhealthy condition or
to generally put the premises in proper condition so as to comply with
the requirements of this chapter. The remuneration of the Township's
expenditure for such abatement, cure and/or removal shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 197-11D hereinbelow.
D. Assessment for Township's cost of removal; lien. Where abatement of
any nuisance, violation or offense, as defined herein, or correction of
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition requires expenditure of the
Township of North Brunswick monies therefor, in addition to other
remedies provided by law, the Enforcement Officer or the Health
§ 197-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-11
194:468
§ 197-12. Notice for evictions due to overcrowding violations.
[Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-12]
Any evictions that may be required for cases of violations of housing
standards and/or occupancy limits shall be made in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:11-2.3, which requires that when a landlord is cited for a violation
pursuant to illegal occupancy which could potentially result in an eviction
of this tenants, the following must be included as an insert sent with the
violation notice:
"If, in seeking to correct the illegal occupancy for which you have been
cited, it is necessary for you to evict one or more tenants to comply,
you must notify those tenants of their potential eligibility for relocation
assistance. Further information regarding your responsibilities as owner
pursuant to regulations concerning eviction and relocation may be
obtained by contacting the following:
Department of Community Affairs
Division of Codes and Standards
Office of Landlord-Tenant Information
P.O. Box 805
Trenton, NJ 08625-0805
Telephone: 609-633-6606"
Officer may, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f,
arrange for the cost of said abatement to be charged against the
premises, and the amount thereof shall become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers in the same manner as taxes. The Township shall have the right
to bring a summary action for collection of such costs incurred in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Middlesex County.
E. Emergencies. Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, if such emergency
exists, such order shall be effective immediately and any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but,
upon petition to the Enforcement Officer, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Enforcement
Officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify it or revoke it.
§ 197-11 HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX § 197-13
194:469
§ 197-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
11-12]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a minimum
mandatory fine of $500 up to a maximum mandatory fine of $1,250,
provided that the owner of the subject property shall be afforded a thirtyday
period to cure or abate such condition and shall also be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing before the Municipal Court for an independent
determination concerning said violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day cure period, a fine greater than $1,250, but not greater than
$2,000, may be imposed if the Municipal Court has determined or, upon
reinspection of the subject property, it is determined that the abatement
or cure of the condition has not been substantially completed.
Notwithstanding the above to the contrary, solely in cases of illegal
occupancy, overcrowding and conditions constituting unsafe ingress and
egress in violation of the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code,
there shall be a minimum fine of not less than $1,000.
Chapter 198
HOUSING PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 195.
Housing standards — See Ch. 197.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
§ 197-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 197-13
198:470
ARTICLE I
Grants/Deferred Loans
[Adopted 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 198-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the terms and conditions under
which eligible income-restricted homeowners within the Township, as
determined by the Director of the Department of Community Development,
or his designee, may obtain grants/deferred loans from the Township to
repair and/or rehabilitate their homes.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INCOME — All regular gross income received by the head of household and
spouse, including that of any other household member over 18 years of age
and not a full-time student, which income shall be verified by the production
of federal income tax returns (IRS 1040s or valid equivalent substitute) for
the year prior to the date of the application.
§ 198-3. Eligibility criteria.
A. Property to be repaired or rehabilitated must meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) Single-family house.
(2) Owner must live in house (owner-occupied).
(3) Must be located in North Brunswick Township.
B. Applicants shall meet the maximum income limits as established by the
Middlesex County Housing and Community Development criteria.
C. All applications must be approved by the Director of the Department of
Community Development or his designee before bids, quotes or
proposals for property repair or rehabilitation are accepted.
D. Three itemized bids, quotes or proposals from approved contractors for
the work as detailed on the Department of Community Development
scope of work documents must be received for the proposed property
repair or rehabilitation before bids, quotes or proposals are reviewed
and/or awarded.
E. A contractor may be selected by an applicant but must be approved by
the Director of the Department of Community Development or his
designee.
§ 198-1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 198-3
198:471
§ 198-4. Trust account.
The maximum amount of the repair or rehabilitation grant/deferred lien
available to qualified candidates shall be limited to $10,000 per year. The
grant/deferred loan for property repair or rehabilitation shall be placed in
a Township controlled trust account along with matching funds, if required,
from the homeowners prior to beginning the property repair or
rehabilitation work.
§ 198-5. Repayment terms.
All homeowners who are provided grants/deferred loans under this program
shall sign a note and mortgage which shall require repayment to the
Township of the grant/deferred loan monies, such payment to be reduced,
proportionately, per each year subsequent to the completion and
acceptance of the property repair or rehabilitation project work that the
homeowner resides in the repaired or rehabilitated properties as follows:
F. All required permits for the proposed property repair or rehabilitation
must be obtained by the selected contractor, at its sole cost and
expense, prior to commencing the work.
G. The structure must have all serious code violations, as determined in
the discretion of the Director of the Department of Community
Development or his designee, abated when the property repair or
rehabilitation is complete.
A. End of first year: 20% forgiveness; 80% to be repaid.
B. End of second year: 40% forgiveness; 60% to be repaid.
C. End of third year: 60% forgiveness; 40% to be repaid.
D. End of fourth year: 80% forgiveness; 20% to be repaid.
E. End of fifth year: 100% forgiveness; 0% to be repaid.
§ 198-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 198-5
198:472
Chapter 205
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development Committee — See Ch. 21.
Department of Planning and
Development — See Ch. 62.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 147.
Dwellings unit for human habitation — See
Ch. 161.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 180.
Housing standards — See Ch. 197.
Parkland dedication — See Ch. 231.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
§ 198-5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 198-5
198:473

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "North Brunswick
Township Land Use Ordinance."
§ 205-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law84 in order
to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
and in furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
A. To encourage Township action to guide the appropriate use or
development of all lands in a manner which will promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of the Township does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
county and the state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all citizens.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 205-1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-2
198:475
K. To encourage planned development which incorporates the best
features of design and relates the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
M. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development, with a view to lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 205-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-2
198:476
ARTICLE II
Zones; Zoning Map; Schedule of District Regulations; Boundaries
[Amended 1-21-1980; 11-17-1980; 3-2-1981; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-3. Establishment of zones. [Amended 8-1-1994; 8-2-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-19; 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-33; 2-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-04; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12; 4-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of North Brunswick is
divided into the following zones:
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
R-4 Single- and Two-Family Residential
R-5 Garden Apartment Residential
R-6(PRD) Planned Residential Development
R-7 Multistoried Senior Citizen Apartment Residential
R-M Manufactured Housing Residential
R-T-D Townhouse-Duplex Residential
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Restricted Neighborhood Commercial
C-4 Nonrestricted Commercial
G-O General Office
O-R Mid-Rise Office Research
I-1 Industrial
I-2 Industrial
TMU Transitional Mixed Use
PUD Planned Unit Development
PUD-II Planned Unit Development
ERR Education-Recreation-Research
PAC Planned Adult Community
§ 205-4. Zoning Map. [Amended 8-1-1994]
The boundaries of all zone districts set forth in this chapter shall be shown
on a map entitled "Zoning Map, North Brunswick Township, Middlesex
County, New Jersey." Such map is hereby made a part of this chapter.85
85.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-4.1
198:477
§ 205-4.1. Schedule of District Regulations.
§ 205-5. Designation of boundaries.
Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the streets,
railroad rights-of-way, electric transmission line rights-of-way,
watercourses, existing lot or property lines or municipal boundary lines,
all as shown on the Zoning Map, but where a zone boundary line does
not follow such a line, its position is shown on said Zoning Map by a
specific dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other
boundary line as indicated. If a zone boundary line falls within 20 feet of
a lot line existing at the time or passage of this chapter, then the lot line
shall be considered the zone boundary. In the event that the zone boundary
is unclear, the exact location of the zone boundary line shall be decided
by the Department of Planning and Development and may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Where a zone boundary line divides one
or more lots which are in single ownership at the time of passage of this
chapter, any use authorized in either district on such lot or lots may extend
not more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which such
use is permitted. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
A. The schedule of regulations applying to each zoning district, entitled
"Schedule of Area", Yard and Building Requirements" (hereafter called
the "schedule"), is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter and is
attached hereto.86
B. The schedule is intended to summarize the major regulations by zoning
district, including those applying to lot size, yards, building heights,
and other regulations that may be easily summarized in tabular form. It
is not meant to provide comprehensive coverage of all requirements
and provisions of this chapter. Areas and dimensions therein are
minimum requirements.
86.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 205-4.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-5
198:478
ARTICLE III
Word Usage; Definitions
[Amended 11-3-1980; 5-17-1982; 8-16-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-6. Word usage.
In the chapter, words used in the present tense include the future. The
singular number includes the plural; and the plural, the singular; the word
"lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "zone" includes the word "designed" and the phrase
"intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 205-7. Definitions.
Certain words, phrases and terms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose herein as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A building or use that is incidental to
the principal building or use on the same lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Township of North
Brunswick.[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-02]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY — The Affordable Housing Agency of the
Township of North Brunswick created pursuant to ordinance.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORDINANCE — The ordinance adopted by the
North Brunswick Council to regulate the sale, resale, rental and
construction of low- and moderate-income housing.
ALLEY — A public or private way less than 30 feet in width.
ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the
existing facilities which alters the use of the building or an enlargement,
whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height or by a move from
one location or position to another.
APARTMENT — Same as "dwelling unit."
APARTMENT HOUSE — Same as "dwelling, multiple."
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment of the Township of North Brunswick unless a different agency
is designated by this chapter when acting pursuant to the authority of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
AUCTION MARKET — Premises on which auction sales of merchandise or
any other personal property are held at periodic times.
§ 205-6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:479
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — See "junkyard."
BASEMENT — See "cellar."
BILLBOARD — An off-site sign used to identify the product made or the
activity being pursued by any individual, business, service, commercial or
industrial enterprise for the purpose of apprising the public of the location
of such enterprise and/or the type of activity in which it is engaged.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling wherein
furnished rooms for rent are provided in which more than two persons are
housed or lodged, with or without meals.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
BUFFER — An area consisting of trees, shrubs or solid fencing, or a
combination of all of these, so installed as to provide both a visual and an
acoustical barrier between properties. No building, parking area, street,
sign (except traffic directional sign) and storage of materials shall be
permitted.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The total area measured on a horizontal plane at the
grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That area of a lot which is occupied by a building
or structure, but not including uncovered walkways, steps, patios or a
parking lot or area or any similar improvements thereto.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the mean
height of the gable of the roof. Chimneys, spires, water towers, elevator
penthouses, tanks and similar projections, other than signs, shall not be
included in calculating "building height."
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered section of a
building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface.
BUILDING PERMIT — See "construction permit."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which the building is situated.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A business establishment which does not offer a
product or merchandise for sale to the public but offers a service to the
public. However, personal services, such as barber- and beauty shops, and
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:480
repair services, such as radio and television repair shops, are not to be
included within the definition of "business office."
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
a major construction project.
CELLAR OR BASEMENT — A story wholly or partly underground, not
designed for living quarters or habitable use and having more than 1/2 of
its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Official upon completion of the construction of a new building in accordance
with the construction permit or upon a change in the occupancy or use
of a building which certifies that all requirements of this chapter, or such
adjustments thereof which have been granted by the Board of Adjustment,
and all other applicable requirements have been complied with.
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, such as auditoriums, designed or intended for public
worship. The word "church" shall include chapels, congregations,
cathedrals, temples and other similar designations, as well as parish
houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY — Any use of a building or part
of a building or premises wherein recreational activities are operated by
a private utility for profit. For purposes of this definition, "commercial
recreational activities" shall include, but not be limited to, theaters, bowling
alleys, roller-skating and ice-skating rinks and mechanical amusement
game rooms.
COMMERCIAL SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated development of six
or more uses of retail stores and shops, personal service establishments,
professional and business offices, banks, post offices, restaurants and
auditoriums, housed in an enclosed building or buildings and utilizing such
common facilities as customer parking, pedestrian walkways, truck loading
and unloading space, utilities and sanitary facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. "Common open
space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:481
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include but not
be limited to group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health-care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act [P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq.)]. In the case of such a community residence housing mentally ill
persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service
contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be
established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of
the Department of Human Services.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — An authorization to begin construction work
in compliance with the State Uniform Construction Code and the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, which may
be amended from time to time.
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development.
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land fronting on two or more intersecting
streets.
COURT — An open unoccupied space bounded on at least two opposing
sides by a building wall, but not a front, side or rear yard.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the front lot line.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Experiencing a disability which
originates before 18 years of age which has continued or is expected to
continue indefinitely, which constitutes a substantial handicap and which is
attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism or other
conditions found by the Commissioner of Human Services to give rise to an
extended need for similar services.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:482
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — The Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance, Site Plan Ordinance, Official Map Ordinance or other Township
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted and filed pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
DISTRICT — Any part of the territory of North Brunswick Township which
is designated on the Zoning Map to which certain uniform regulations and
requirements of this chapter apply.
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the Department
of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — An establishment which is designed to provide,
either wholly or in part, service to customers outside the confines of the
principal building while in their automobiles parked or standing upon the
premises, regardless of whether or not seats or other accommodations are
provided for the customers.
DWELLING, DUPLEX (SEMIATTACHED) — A semiattached dwelling on an
independent lot that is attached on one side along a common or party wall,
which is jointly owned, to a similar dwelling on an adjacent lot designed for
occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One of several individual dwelling
units designed and erected as an integral development with singleness of
use and operation and which utilizes such common facilities as pedestrian
walkways, parking and garage areas, open space or recreation areas and
utility and sanitary systems.
DWELLING, GARDEN STYLE — A multiple dwelling with a common exterior
ingress and egress in which individual units share at least one common wall
and/or are located one above the other.
DWELLING, LOW-RISE — A multiple dwelling with up to three residential
stories, a common lobby and common access corridors. Parking may be
incorporated in the structure.
DWELLING, MAISONETTE — A multiple dwelling characterized by a backto-
back townhouse configuration with no more than three common party
walls.
DWELLING, MID-RISE — A multiple dwelling with up to six residential
stories, a common lobby and common access corridors. Parking may be
incorporated in the structure.
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:483
DWELLING, MULTIPLE (MULTIPLEX) — A building designed for or
occupied by three or more families living independently of each other
and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses, garden
apartments, townhouses, etc., but not including motels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — An independent dwelling with cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities, designed for occupancy by one family, which
is attached to similar dwelling types by not more than two party walls
extending from the foundation to the roof. There shall be two means of
access directly from the outside for each unit, which shall not provide
access in common with any other unit. In no case shall a townhouse contain
more than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied by two
families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A house or other structure or a portion of any building
or structure designed, arranged or used for living quarters for one or more
persons as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of a single
room or common space exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallways, closets or
dining room directly off the principal room.
EDUCATIONAL USE — Public, parochial and private elementary and
secondary schools duly licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance at
which is sufficient compliance with the compulsory education requirements
of the state. Summer day camps shall not be considered as "educational
uses" or accessories to such uses.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING EQUIPMENT — The physical device that
provides a connection from a power source to an electric vehicle.[Added
9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION — A public or private space that
is served by electric vehicle charging equipment that has as its primary
purpose the transfer of electricity to a battery or other energy storage
device in an electric vehicle.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
ELEEMOSYNARY USE — Any nonprofit organization which is primarily
supported by charitable contributions.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:484
furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare.
"Essential services" shall include firehouses and first-aid and emergency-aid
squads.
FAMILY — One or more persons living as a single nonprofit housekeeping
unit, as distinguished from individuals or groups occupying a hotel, club
or fraternity or sorority house. The "family" shall be deemed to include
necessary servants when servants share the common housekeeping
facilities and services.
FARM — Any parcel of land five acres or larger in size which is used
primarily for gain in the raising of crops, hay, sod, trees, fruit, livestock and
poultry, but which does not include any sale of produce not actually grown
on the premises.
FARM BUILDING — Any building used for the housing of agricultural
equipment, produce, livestock or poultry or for the incidental or customary
processing of farm products, provided that such building is located on,
operated in conjunction with and necessary to the operation of a farm.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any manufactured material or combination of materials used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, OPEN — A fence in which 2/3 of the area between grade level and
the top cross member is open.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed
or guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — A control on the intensity of land use
which is calculated as the ratio of the gross floor area under the roof
of the main building, including basement, to the total area of the lot on
which the building is located. Off-street parking space within the building is
specifically excluded from this calculation.
GARAGE — A building or structure in which motor-driven vehicles are
stored.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal building
used only for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no occupation,
business or services for profit are carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part of a building or premises used
or designed to be used for storing, repairing, servicing, selling, renting,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles and other motor vehicles, but not
used for the storage of trailers, dismantled, wrecked or inoperable motor
vehicles, parts thereof or junk.
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:485
GARAGE SALES — All sales known as "garage sales," "lawn sales," "attic
sales," "rummage sales," "porch sales" or "flea markets" or any similar
casual sales of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building of not more than 2 1/2 stories and 30
feet in height as measured from the average level of the ground immediately
adjacent to the base of the structure to its highest point, exclusive of
chimneys or towers, on one lot containing multiple-dwelling units and
sharing joint utility services or facilities, or both.
GARDEN APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT — Two or more garden apartments
on a single lot.
GENERAL OFFICE USE — A more general use of office space than that
limited by the definition herein of "professional office," which "general office
use" shall include general business, executive or administrative use.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of
North Brunswick.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit which must be obtained from the Zoning
Officer prior to the alteration of the existing grade on a lot. The alteration
of the existing grade on a lot shall be in accordance with the grading plan
approved by the Township Engineer.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The area of all floors of a building, including
interior balconies and mezzanines, measured from the interior walls of each
story of a building. The "gross floor area" of all buildings on a lot shall
include the floor area of accessory buildings on the same lot, measured the
same way.
GROSS HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the floor or several floors of a dwelling designed for habitable use
measured from the interior walls of each floor, but not including any cellar
or basement, garage space, breezeway, interior patios, enclosed porches
or accessory building space. A basement or cellar or portion thereof may
qualify for inclusion if its area is designed for habitable use.
HIGHLY FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR GASES — Liquids or gases having a
flash point of 100° F. (37.7° C.) or less or autoignition temperatures of 140°
F. (560° C.) or less.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the State
of New Jersey, its communities or the nation and has been so designated
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
HOSPITAL — A building or group of buildings providing health services
under the supervision of licensed physicians, primarily for human
inpatients, medical and surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facilities.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:486
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building containing furnished rooms to be occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests, without kitchen facilities being used, rented or
hired out.
IMPROVED STREET — A street curbed and paved in accordance with
the standards set forth in this chapter for new streets or, alternately, a
street which has been accepted and maintained by the Township of North
Brunswick.
INTERESTED PARTY —
INTERIOR OR INSIDE LOT — A lot bounded by a street on one side only.
INTERIOR STREET OR ROAD — A street or road that is developed wholly
within a parcel under one ownership and that meets all Township standards.
JUNK- OR SALVAGE YARD — Any lot and/or structures used for the
collection, storage or abandonment of any waste, discarded or used
material or the dismantling, demolition, salvaging or abandonment of
structures, automobiles or other vehicles, equipment and machinery or
parts thereof.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land
proposed to be included in a planned unit development. The holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in, such land shall be deemed to be a "landowner" for
the purpose of this chapter.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or space at the rear of the building
or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading or unloading. Such space must have clear means of ingress
and egress to a public street at all times.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot line
bounding the area and shall be expressed in terms of square feet or acres.
Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey.
A.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the Township, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under the Municipal
Land Use Law or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under
the Municipal Land Use Law or under any other law of this state or of
the United States has been denied, violated or infringed by an action or
a failure to act under this chapter.
B.
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:487
in calculating "lot area." Portions of lots encumbered by easements shall be
included in the calculation of "lot area."
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by buildings and structures
expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance of a line drawn from the street line to
the rear lot line at right angles to the front property line. When the front
property line is an arc of a circle or irregular in shape, the depth shall be
the average distance between the front and rear lines. The greater frontage
of a corner lot is its width, and its lesser frontage is its depth.
LOT LINE — Any line designating the extent or boundary of a lot, which
shall further be defined as follows:
LOT, THROUGH — A lot running through from one street to another.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured at right
angles to the lot's depth. Required "lot width" shall be measured at the
permitted building front setback line.
LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME UNITS — Dwelling units which are
subject to the price and occupancy requirements of the Affordable Housing
Ordinance, and whose sales prices and rental charges do not exceed the
maximum amounts determined to be affordable by low- and moderateincome
households.
LOW-INCOME FAMILY — A household with a gross aggregate family
income which does not exceed 50% of the regional median income, with
adjustments for household size.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Township as set forth and adopted pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the Township of North Brunswick.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic video
FRONT LOT LINE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent
with a street line.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line most distant and generally opposite
from and parallel to the front lot line.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:488
games and all games and operations similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT GAME ROOM — Any use of a building or
part of a building or premises wherein there are located more than four
mechanical amusement devices.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve:
MOBILE HOME — Same as "trailer" and as defined in § 205-92.5.
MODERATE-INCOME FAMILY — A household with a gross aggregate family
income which is greater than 50% of the regional median income, but which
does not exceed 80% of said regional median income, with adjustments for
household size.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building or portion of a building
in which autobody work or the overhauling or replacement of engines is
conducted.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including
structures thereon, used for the servicing of motor vehicles, whose primary
service is the retail sale of gasoline. This use may also include minor repairs
such as replacing of mufflers and tail pipes, motor tuneups, changing of
tires, polishing, washing and lubrication, all of which are incidental to the
primary service rendered. Autobody work of any nature shall be excluded.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
Township Council or any agency created by or responsible to the Township
when acting pursuant to this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of North Brunswick.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
A. The creation of more than four lots fronting on an existing street.
A lot or lots having been previously subdivided within the past 12
months.
B.
C. A planned development.
D. Any new streets.
E. Extension of any off-tract improvements.
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:489
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSERY — A place where trees, shrubs, vines and ornamental plants are
propagated and grown for gain.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to six years of age, inclusive,
and operated on a regular basis.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map with changes and additions therein,
adopted and established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
OFF-SITE — The area located outside of the lot lines of the lot in question,
but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — The area not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
ON-SITE — The area located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — The area located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An open area, other than streets, for the same
use as a private garage.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — A paved open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public,
whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space provided for the parking of a motor
vehicle designed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter,
exclusive of driveways or access drives.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For the purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:490
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under the
Municipal Land Use Law.
PATIO — An area of land, not used for receiving and storing material,
where the ground has been surfaced with a construction material, such as
brick, stone, cement or lumber, which does not project above the official
grade ground level and which is entirely uncovered by a roof or any
superstructure.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Township in the form of cash, certified check, performance bond or surety
bond, as may be required by the approving authority, provided that the cash
amount, if any, shall not exceed 10% of the total performance guaranty.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a minimum of 50 acres
of one or more parcels to be developed as a single entity according to a
plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential
developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses as specified
hereinafter.
PLANNING BOARD — The Township Planning Board established pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49 of the Municipal Land Use
Law prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan
have been agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRIMARY OR PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or principal purpose for
which a building, structure or lot is used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of his profession. Such professions
shall be limited to those of medicine, law, architecture, engineering, art,
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:491
religion, music and other professions which require similar degrees of
training and experience.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A Master Plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, a Township agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a Township
agency.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan, containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area, including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises, but normally to patrons seated within
an enclosed building. However, a snack bar at a public or a community
playground, playfield, park or swimming pool operated solely by the agency
or group operating the recreational facility, for the convenience of patrons
of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a "restaurant."
RESUBDIVISION —
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law.
A.
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
B.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:492
RETAINING WALL — A structure more than 18 inches high erected between
lands of different elevations to prevent the washing down or erosion of earth
from the upper slope level.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site or origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between a building or structure and
any front, side or rear lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot lines at
the point where the building is closest to such lot lines.
SETBACK LINE — A line within any lot parallel to any street or property
line beyond which a building shall not extend, except as otherwise provided
for in this chapter.
SIGN — Any device, structure or object, including painted wall signs, for
visual communication that is used for the purpose of advertising the
property or establishment upon which the display is exhibited, but not
including any flag, badge or insignia of any public, quasi-public, civic,
charitable or religious group.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than on the premises.
SIGN AREA — The area enclosed by the outermost frame or edge of a sign.
In case of lettering attached to building facades, the "sign area" shall be
the product of the maximum vertical dimension multiplied by the maximum
horizontal dimension of all lettering and symbols which form the sign,
including the empty space between.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted on the premises. A "for sale" or "for rent" sign relating
to the property on which it is displayed shall be deemed a "business sign."
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — Any sign which shall be used to advertise and
identify the business conducted on the premises where the sign is located.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination as to approval of the plan by the
C.
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:493
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE —
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the
ceiling immediately above.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not
more than two feet above the floor of such "half-story." A basement shall
also be included as a "half-story."
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which:
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION —
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment and as may be hereinafter
required by this chapter.
Standards adopted regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic
vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of
unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may
be reasonably required by the Township.
A.
Standards required by applicable federal or state laws and Township
ordinances.
B.
A. Is an existing state, county or Township roadway.
B. Is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law.
C. Is approved by official action as provided by this chapter.
Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines.
D.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning of
this chapter if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
(3) Divisions of property upon court order.
A.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:494
SUPERMARKETS — Commercial retail stores which primarily sell
foodstuffs as well as other convenience and household goods. This definition
shall include large-scale retail stores, sometimes known as “big box” stores,
which are generally defined as retail sales establishments in freestanding
industrial-style one- or two-story buildings with individual users occupying
in excess of 50,000 square feet, of which foodstuffs are a substantial
component.[Added 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12; amended 10-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-30]
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL AND/OR PUBLIC — A swimming pool
that is operated for profit and open to the public or to a limited number
of members and their guests, upon payment of an hourly, daily, weekly,
monthly, annual or other fee or operated as a service rendered by a hotel,
motel or apartment development whose units are rented to transient or
permanent residents.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool located on a single-family
lot with a residence on it, utilized by the owner or his nonpaying guests, but
which is not operated for profit.
TRAILER — Any unit designed for living or sleeping purposes which is
equipped with wheels or some device used for the purpose of transporting
such unit from place to place, whether by motor vehicles or other means,
or any unit used for living or sleeping purposes, whether the same is on
blocks, posts or any other type of foundation. This term shall also include
automobile trailers, mobile homes, house trailers and trailer coaches used
as offices, residences or accessory structures for storage purposes for both
residential and nonresidential uses, except travel trailers which are under
eight feet in width and under 25 feet in length and which are not used for
purposes of day-to-day habitation.
TRAILER COURT OR PARK — Land and premises upon which two or more
trailer coaches occupied for living or sleeping purposes are located.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A location at which trucks are parked or privately
serviced that transport goods and materials not produced, received for sale,
warehoused or used in manufacturing at that location.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED — A use of a building or land that conforms to the
provisions of this chapter.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, 40:55D-70c and 40:55D-70d of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
WAREHOUSE — A structure or building, the principal use of which is
for the storage of merchandise or commodities on a short- or long-term
Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
(4)
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 205-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-7
198:495
basis, having shipping and receiving facilities as a secondary use. Trucking
terminals having facilities designed to store, deposit or hold merchandise
on a temporary basis for further shipment or distribution shall not be
considered "warehouses" under this definition.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, which
space is unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot and not less in
depth than the minimum distance required between the street line and the
front setback line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the entire width of the lot between
the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard
to the rear yard and the nearest part of the principal building.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer which:
Is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building.
A.
Acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a Township agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and 40:55D-70 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B.
§ 205-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-7
198:496
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
[Amended 11-3-1980; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-8. Precedence of more restrictive provisions.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land which
appear in other ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick or are
established by law and which are greater than those set forth herein shall
take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-9. Conformity required.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, added to, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any
land be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose other than
those included among the uses listed as permitted uses in each zone,
nor shall any open space contiguous to any building be encroached upon
or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area,
building location, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking space and
such other regulations designated in this chapter for the zone in which
such building or space is located. In the event of any such unlawful
encroachment or reduction, such building shall be deemed to be in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued therefor.
§ 205-9.1. Site plan requirement.
Except as hereafter exempted, no building permit shall be issued for any
building or use or for the enlargement of any building or use unless a site
plan is first submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXVIII of this chapter, and no certificate of occupancy shall be given
unless all construction conforms to the approved plan; except that site plan
approval shall not be required for single-family and two-family dwellings or
accessory uses incidental to one- and two-family dwellings.
§ 205-10. Yards and open space.
No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose
of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other buildings, and no yard or other
open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for a building on any other lot.
§ 205-11. Off-street parking.
No off-street parking area, loading or unloading area provided to meet the
minimum off-street parking, loading or unloading requirements for one use
or structure shall be considered as providing off-street parking, loading or
§ 205-8 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-11
198:497
unloading area for a use or structure on any other lot, unless specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 205-12. Installation of underground tanks.
Installation of underground tanks shall be governed by the provisions of the
Township of North Brunswick Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code.87
§ 205-13. Railroad tracks restricted. [Amended 8-1-1994]
No railroad track or portion thereof shall be installed, erected, constructed,
laid or moved within the limits of North Brunswick until the plans shall
first have been submitted to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment
and the Bureau of Rail in the Department of Transportation and approved
by the Board after public notice and a public hearing, which public notice
and public hearing shall be in conformity with the usual notices and public
hearings prescribed for all matters to be heard by the Board as specifically
set forth in this chapter.
§ 205-14. Construction in certain areas restricted.
§ 205-15. Prohibition on removal of trees. [Amended 4-4-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-7]
A. No structure shall be constructed within the following areas:
(1) Within delineated flood hazard areas, unless in accordance with the
standards of applicable flood hazard regulations.
(2) Along the length of the Six-Mile Run up to United States Coast and
Geodetic Elevation 90 as it relates to the future Six-Mile Run
Reservoir.
B. All brush, grass and natural vegetation within 50 feet of the bank of a
lake, pond, run, stream or major drainage ditch shall be retained, if
possible.
A. No tree over three inches in diameter measured three feet above
ground within 100 feet of any stream shall be removed, nor shall any
area 15 feet square within 100 feet of any such stream be cleared of all
smaller trees, except as follows:
(1) Pursuant to a site plan approved by the Township of North
Brunswick.
(2) Any tree growing in a public or private right-of-way.
(3) Pursuant to the provisions of § 243-31A(15), Stream maintenance.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention.
§ 205-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-15
198:498
§ 205-16. Stripping and excavations.
No persons, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove
topsoil for sale or for use except in connection with the construction or
alteration of a building on such premises and excavating or grading incident
thereto. No fill or soil shall be removed from the site without prior written
approval of the Township Engineer and Construction Official.
§ 205-17. Retention of natural features.
Existing natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and
views shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed
use of such property, a retention of the maximum amount of such features
consistent with the use of the property shall be required.
§ 205-18. Storage of solid wastes.
Solid wastes, if stored outdoors, shall be placed in metal or plastic
receptacles with tight-fitting covers. Such receptacles shall not be stored or
placed within any front yard area prior to the time at which solid wastes
are permitted to be placed at the curblines for collection. Such receptacles
may be stored in either the rear or side yard area. They shall be completely
screened from view of adjoining property and street areas with planting or
fencing.
§ 205-19. Dumping restricted.
The dumping of refuse, waste materials or other substances is prohibited in
all districts within the Township, with the exception of designated landfill
sites. Only organic matter may be used for the purpose to fill in order to
establish grades.
§ 205-20. Storage of materials.
No persons shall store materials of any kind on the premises in any district
except for the construction of a structure to be erected on the premises,
unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 205-21. Compatibility of architecture.
The architecture of all buildings shall be compatible with structures on
adjacent lands and in the neighborhood.
§ 205-22. Vision clearance on corner lots.
In any district on any corner lot within the triangular area determined as
provided in this section, no wall, fence, sign or other structure shall be
B. Removal of diseased and dead trees may not be prohibited, except that
girding or poisoning of trees in order to avoid compliance with
approved plans shall constitute a violation.
§ 205-15 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-22
198:499
erected to a height in excess of three feet above curb level, and no vehicle,
object or other obstruction of a height in excess of three feet shall be
parked or placed, and no hedge, shrub or other growth shall be maintained
at a height in excess of three feet, except that trees whose branches
are trimmed away to height of at least 10 feet above curb level shall be
permitted. Such triangular area shall be formed by the two intersecting
street center lines and by a diagonal line connecting points on these street
center lines which are 25 feet from the intersection of the street center lines
for local roads and 75 feet for all other roads.
§ 205-23. Setback encroachments.
For the purpose of calculating the average setback of a building,
overhanging eaves and cornices shall always be excluded, but porticos and
open and closed porches shall be included as part of the building, but steps
on the side of the building shall always be included as part of the building.
Chimneys shall also be excluded from setback requirements, provided that
they are not closer than five feet to any property line.
§ 205-24. Building lot to abut street. [Amended 8-1-1994]
§ 205-25. Measurement of front yard area from proposed right-ofway.
Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the Master Plan or
the Official Map of the Township indicates is proposed for right-of-way
widening, the required front yard area shall be measured from such
proposed right-of-way line.
§ 205-25.1. Compliance with prevailing front yard setbacks.
In residential zones where structures have already been erected, the
average setback line observed by dwellings on the same side of the street
A. No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or
structure. Such street shall be
(1) An existing state, county or municipal street or highway.
(2) A street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board.
(3) A street on a plat duly filed in the office of the county recording
officer prior to the passage of this section.
B. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Township
Council or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by
means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with standards and
specifications for road improvements approved by the governing body,
as adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare
of the special circumstance of the particular street.
§ 205-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-25.1
198:500
within 200 feet on each side of any vacant lot shall determine the setback of
all structures on such lot.
§ 205-26. Front yards on corner lots.
All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and shall
conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone for both
intersecting streets, for both principal and accessory buildings.
§ 205-26.1. Location of accessory buildings.
Unless elsewhere specified in this chapter, accessory buildings shall
conform to the following regulations as to their locations on the lot:
§ 205-26.2. Size limits for detached accessory structures. [Added
6-7-1993; amended 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-24]
The following size limitations shall apply to all detached accessory
structures in residential zones and properties developed for residential use:
§ 205-26.3. Portable storage units. [Added 7-7-2008 by Ord. No.
08-15]
A. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in
all respects with yard requirements of this chapter for the principal
buildings.
B. Detached accessory buildings, yard utility buildings and storage
buildings are permitted in the rear yard only.
C. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to a rear or side
property line.
D. On through lots, no accessory building erected in the rear yard shall be
nearer the street line than the minimum distance specified for a front
yard setback on that part of the street which said yard abuts.
A. Detached garages. Detached garages shall not exceed 24 feet in width,
24 feet in depth and 15 feet in height.
B. All other accessory structures. With the exception of detached garages,
no other accessory structure shall exceed 240 square feet in area and
12 feet in height.
A. Definitions. Portable storage units (hereinafter referred to as "PSU(s)")
are units loaded with materials and placed on a property authorized for
residential use for the purpose of storing materials including any
container, storage unit, shed-like container or other portable structure
that can be or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind
and which is located for such purposes outside an enclosed building
other than an accessory building or shed complying with all building
codes and land use requirements.
§ 205-25.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-26.3
198:501
B. Permitted temporary uses. PSUs may be utilized as a temporary
structure within the Township when in compliance with the standards
of this subsection. It shall be the obligation of the owner and/or user of
such temporary structure to secure it in a manner that does not
endanger the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the
temporary structure. Any use of such structures within the Township
not in compliance with this subsection shall be unlawful.
C. Permit required; application; fee. Before a PSU is placed on any
property, the owner, tenant or contractor working on the subject
property must submit an application for a zoning permit approving such
placement from the Department of Community Development. If the
permit application is made by a tenant or contractor, written permission
of the owner of the subject property for the placement of such PSU on
the subject property must be provided to the Department of Community
Development before a permit is issued. Permits shall be issued for a
time period of 60 days for a fee of $30.
D. Number of PSUs. Only one PSU may be placed at any residential
property at one time.
E. Size of PSUs. PSUs may not exceed eight feet six inches in height, 10
feet in width or 20 feet in length.
F. Duration.
(1) PSUs may be located as a temporary structure on property within
the Township for a period not exceeding 60 days in duration from
time of delivery to time of removal. Such temporary structure may
not be located on the same specific property more than two times in
any given one-year period.
(2) In the event of high winds or other weather conditions in which
such structure may become a physical danger to persons or
property, the Zoning Officer or a Code Enforcement Officer may
require the immediate removal of such temporary structure.
(3) In the event of fire, hurricane or natural disaster causing
substantial damage to a structure, the property owner may apply to
the Township for permission to extend the time that a PSU may be
located as a temporary structure on the property. Application for
such extended duration shall be made in writing and filed with the
Department of Community Development and shall give sufficient
information to determine whether such extended duration should
be granted. The Zoning Officer shall determine whether or not to
grant such extended duration and the length of such extension. In
the event of an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer, the
applicant may appeal such decision to the Township Council. In the
event of such appeal, the decision of the Township Council shall be
final.
§ 205-26.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-26.3
198:502
§ 205-27. Underground services.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary underground
essential services, except that all facilities such as pumping stations,
G. Location. PSUs are prohibited from being placed in streets, public
rights-of-way, or on unimproved surfaces in the front yard of a property
and may only be placed upon driveways, side and rear yards, if such
locations meet the requirements of this section. All such locations must
be paved, off-street surfaces at the furthest accessible point from the
street, and all must comply with the side yard accessory structure
setback requirements for any accessory structures in the zone in which
such PSU is located. If the property does not have a driveway, or cannot
meet the standards described herein, the Zoning Officer may, as part of
the permit approval process, approve the placement of a PSU in the
front yard. If such PSU is to be permitted to be located in the front yard,
the PSU must be kept at the furthest accessible point from the street
and the surrounding area must be maintained in a weed-free condition.
Wherever PSUs may be placed, they shall be subject to all property
maintenance standards applicable to accessory structures. No PSU
shall be allowed to remain outside in a state of disassembly or disrepair.
H. Violations and penalties. Any PSU placed in violation of this section or
which is not removed at the end of the time for which it may lawfully
remain in place, or immediately upon the direction of the Zoning Officer
or a law enforcement officer for removal of such temporary structure
for safety reasons, shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a
fine not to exceed $1,250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days, or both, for each violation committed hereunder.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, a violation
of any portion of this section may be punishable by a fine exceeding
$1,250, but not more than $2,000, provided that the owner of the
subject property be afforded a thirty-day period to cure or abate such
violation and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before
the Municipal Court for an independent determination concerning said
violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day cure period, a
fine greater than $1,250, but not more than $2,000 may be imposed if
the Municipal Court has not determined otherwise, or, upon
reinspection of the subject property it is determined that the abatement
of the violation has not been completed. Every day that a violation
continues after service of written notice by certified and/or regular mail
on the owner of the subject property as shown in the latest tax duplicate
shall be deemed a separate offense. The court may also order the
removal of the violation by the Township, and the cost of such removal,
together with the cost of administration of its removal, may be assessed
against the property on which the temporary structure or PSU was
located and may be filed as a lien against such property by the
Township Clerk. Such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other liens
or encumbrances upon the property, including the lien of a mortgage,
and shall be equal in dignity to the lien of ad valorem taxes.
§ 205-26.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-27
198:503
repeater stations and electric substations which require a structure above
the grade shall require a conditional use approval subject to the provisions
of Article XXIX of this chapter.
§ 205-28. Underground installation of utility lines.
All utility lines and accessory appurtenances, including but not limited to
electric distribution, communications, streetlighting and cable television,
shall be installed underground within easements or dedicated public rightsof-
way. The developer shall arrange with the serving utility for the
underground installation of the utility's distribution lines and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard
terms and conditions of its tariff as the same are then on file with the State
of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and shall submit to the
Planning Board, prior to granting of approval, a written instrument from
each serving utility, which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions
of this section; provided, however, that lots which abut existing easements
or public rights-of-way where overhead utility lines have theretofore been
installed may be supplied with service from such overhead lines where no
new utility poles are required, and the new service connection from the
utility's overhead lines shall be installed underground.
§ 205-29. External appearance of houses in residential subdivisions.
[Amended 8-1-1994]
All single-family houses on adjoining lots and directly across the street
are to be definitely different in external architectural appearance. Right
or left versions of substantially the same architectural designs shall not
be considered different. Each floor plan shall have adopted to it a variety
of elevations (particularly the front) so that in architectural appearance
the houses shall not look alike. Houses built to these plans shall be so
distributed in the subdivision that two neighboring houses on each side
of any house and the house across the street shall present a definitely
different appearance, but need not differ in floor plan. There shall be not
fewer than two floor plans differing considerably in arrangements of rooms
and in foundation outline. The application for any building permits for the
construction of any buildings shall show the architectural plans and shall be
reviewed for approval to meet these requirements.
§ 205-30. Raising of vegetables and fruit for personal use.
The raising of vegetables and fruits for personal use, but not for sale, shall
be permitted on any lot in any zone, provided that no such vegetables or
fruits may be grown in the required front yard area, with the exception of
the fruit-bearing trees.
§ 205-31. Standards for keeping chickens. [Added 5-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-0588]
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 205-31 as § 205-33.
§ 205-27 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-31
198:504
A. Minimum residential lot size. A minimum residential lot size of 50 feet
by 100 feet is required to keep chickens pursuant to this section.
B. Number of allowable chickens. No more than eight female chickens
(pullets and hens) may be kept on any residential lot.
C. Roosters and cockerels are prohibited.
D. Slaughtering. The slaughtering of chickens in public view is prohibited.
E. Required shelters.
(1) Chickens shall be provided a fully enclosed shelter with a fenced
enclosure. Shelters and enclosures shall be located in the rear yard
or, if on a corner property, in a side yard fronting a public street
only when the yard is fully enclosed by a privacy fence.
(2) Shelters and enclosures shall be located not less than 10 feet from
neighboring property lines and 30 feet from any residential
structure on an adjoining property.
(3) Shelters shall not exceed 60 square feet in size or six feet in height.
(4) Fences shall not exceed six feet in height and shall be constructed
so that the shelter cannot be seen by the public.
(5) Shelters and enclosures shall be maintained and kept clean at all
times.
F. Feed storage. Animal feed stored outdoors shall be kept in a metal
container or other approved containers with tight-fitting lids.
G. Waste storage. Storage of manure or other waste, or odor- or dustproducing
substances associated with keeping chickens shall comply
with all state and local health guidelines and be disposed of properly off
site.
H. No running at large. No person owning, keeping or maintaining
chickens shall permit or allow chickens to run at large upon any public
or private roadways or upon any public or private property.
I. No disturbing of peace. No person owning, keeping or maintaining
chickens shall permit or allow chickens to disturb the peace or harmony
of the neighborhood by creating a noise nuisance across a residential
property line for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes, unless
provoked.
J. Permit required. A zoning permit from the Department of Community
Development shall be required to permit the keeping of chickens.
K. Restrictions. Any homeowner seeking to keep chickens on their
property shall be responsible and required to review their respective
property deeds for any deed restrictions against such use, or where the
rules and regulations of any homeowners' association may apply, to
§ 205-31 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-31
198:505
§ 205-32. Electric vehicle charging stations.90 [Added 9-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-10]
determine whether or not the keeping of chickens would be
contractually prohibited on their real property. Nothing within this
section shall override any such restrictions.
L. Exemption from restrictions. The restrictions set forth in this article
shall not apply to properties qualifying under the Right to Farm Act.89
M. Disease. If a majority of the chickens maintained on the property perish
due to disease or suspected disease, the property owner and/or the
person owning, keeping or maintaining the chickens shall immediately
notify the Health Official.
N. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, or his
designated representative, and the Health Official to inspect and
require correction of any conditions found to exist in violation of this
chapter, and he shall have the right of inspection to enter any premises
or associated enclosure during the daytime in the course of his duties.
O. Violations and penalties. Any person or entity who shall violate any of
the provisions of this section or any order promulgated hereunder shall,
after a summons is issued under the terms hereof, be punished under
the terms established in Chapter 243, Property Maintenance, § 243-33,
Violations and penalties.
A. Electric vehicle charging equipment (EVCE) and electric vehicle
charging stations (EVCS) shall be considered permitted accessory uses
in all zoning districts. Electric vehicle charging equipment and electric
vehicle charging stations shall be permitted accessory uses in all zoning
districts of the Township of North Brunswick, subject to the limitation
that an electric vehicle charging station located on the property of a
one- to four-family home shall not be made available for use of the
general public.
B. EVCE shall be permitted in a front yard area, subject to meeting all
other setback requirements.
C. Each EVCS space shall count as two required parking spaces for
purposes of zoning compliance.
D. Each EVCS shall provide unobstructed access to the EVCE and shall
contain signage indicating that vehicles parked in the EVCS space shall
be connected to the EVCE.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 205-32, Display of goods restricted, was repealed 11-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-35.
§ 205-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-32
198:506
§ 205-33. Electric vehicle charging stations in new and modified
developments required. [Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
The following requirements to provide electric vehicle charging stations
shall apply to all new site plans and all site plans coming before either the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment for substantial modifications to
a previously approved preliminary or final site plan approval. A revised site
plan shall be considered a substantial modification if there is any significant
alteration in the layout of the buildings, public or private roadways, parking
aisles or parking lots from what was previously approved by the applicable
board.
E. One of the first two EVCS shall be an accessible space designed to meet
the requirements for accessible parking spaces, but shall not be
restricted to handicapped drivers.
A. All single-family homes and condominium units that are assigned a
specific garage for the parking of their motor vehicle shall provide a
240-volt electric outlet in the garage in order to accommodate Level 2
electric vehicle charging equipment.
B. The use groups specified below shall provide either Level 2 EVCE with
a minimum output rate of 7.2 kilowatts per hour or DC fast charging
stations in the common parking areas in an amount equal to 3% of the
required number of parking spaces, subject to a minimum of two EVCS
per location. In addition, appropriately sized electrical conduit shall be
installed to additional spaces in order to allow for future expansion of
the number of EVCS to 7% of the required number of parking spaces.
These additional EVCS shall be installed within six months of
notification by the Township that the number of plug-in electric vehicles
sold in the state annually exceeds 100,000 vehicles based upon figures
provided by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Mobile Sources.
(1) All apartment complexes, townhouse complexes, condominium
complexes and cooperative complexes in excess of 20 residential
units that do not provide individual garages for parking of vehicles.
(2) All office developments and warehouse developments in excess of
20,000 square feet.
(3) All hotels and motels in excess of 50 rooms.
(4) All large retail establishments referred to as "big box stores,"
grocery stores, and other retail establishments in excess of 10,000
square feet, as well as all gymnasiums and health clubs in excess of
10,000 square feet.
(5) All restaurants not classified as a "drive-in restaurant" in excess of
2,000 square feet.
§ 205-32 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-33
198:507
§ 205-34. Exceptions to height limitations.
Height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to chimneys, church spires,
gables, parapet cupolas, standpipes, flagpoles, monuments, transmission
towers, radio and television antennas, cables, water tanks and conditioners
and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances for the
zone in which the building is located, provided that no such exception shall
cover at any level more than 10% of the area of the roof or ground on which
its is located.
§ 205-35. Required increases in yards.
Public and quasi-public buildings, schools, churches and other similar
permitted uses shall increase the front, rear and side yards one foot for each
foot by which the building exceeds the height limit herein established for
such zone in which it is located, but in no case shall any building have a
height exceeding 40 feet.
§ 205-36. Freestanding aerials and antennas.
Freestanding aerials or antennas shall be located or placed in the rear yard
and shall be not more than 15 feet higher than the highest building within
a radius of 200 feet, and if the aerial or antenna is more than 20 feet in
height, it shall be built to withstand winds up to 100 miles per hour.
§ 205-37. Attached aerials and antennas.
An aerial or antenna attached to or on a building shall extend not more
than 15 feet above the highest building within a radius of 200 feet, and if
it extends more than 20 feet above the point of attachment, the aerial or
antenna shall be constructed so that it will be able to withstand winds up to
100 miles per hour.
§ 205-38. Flagpoles.
Freestanding flagpoles may be erected or placed in any yard, and if the pole
is more than 20 feet in height, it shall be so built as to be able to withstand
winds up to 100 miles per hour.
(6) All movie theatres, roller skating rinks, commercial recreation
establishments, mechanical amusement game rooms and other
places of assembly.
C. The use groups specified below shall provide two EVCS in the common
parking area, consisting of either DC fast charging stations or Level 2
EVCS with a minimum output rate of 15 kilowatts per hour.
(1) All automobile service stations that include a convenience store in
excess of 4,000 square feet.
(2) All drive-in restaurants in excess of 2,000 square feet.
§ 205-33 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-39
198:508
§ 205-39. Irregularly shaped lots.
In a case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum lot width may be
measured at the building line, provided that in no case shall the lot frontage
be less than 75% of the minimum lot width requirements, and that the lot
areas shall be the minimum required size for that zone.
§ 205-40. Uses prohibited in all zones.
Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by this
chapter is hereby expressly prohibited from that district, and further, the
following uses and activities shall be specifically prohibited in any zone:
§ 205-40.1. Garage sales. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 3-35]
There may be no more than two sales commonly known as garage sales,
as defined herein, at any one location during one calendar year. Said
A. Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly yards; and the sorting
or baling of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap or waste material.
B. The keeping and raising of any animal other than horses or more than
five domestic pets.
C. Trailers, mobile homes, trailer courts or trailer coaches, except upon a
duly licensed mobile home park.
D. Privately operated dumps for the disposal of garbage, trash, junk,
refuse and similar materials.
E. The manufacturing of paints and varnishes.
F. Any use of any building or premises in such a manner that the health,
morals, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered.
G. Any use which emits excessive and objectionable amounts of dust,
fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.
H. Truck terminals when not a part of a permitted commercial or industrial
use.
I. Dealerships devoted entirely to the sale of used automobiles or trucks.
J. Use of animated, flashing, pulsing or twirling signs, windmills or similar
banners or moving reflectors.
K. Foundry and steel fabricators.
L. The use of trucks, trailers or other type of vehicles for storage or
advertising purposes, including mobile signs.
M. Palmistry, fortune-telling, spirtualists and other similar practitioners.
N. Outside storage of materials or products. [Added 10-20-1986]
§ 205-39 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.1
198:509
sales shall not commence earlier than 7:30 a.m., terminating by sundown,
and extending no more than a three-day period. Garage sales shall offer
only used items and personal property when the sale is held. Any person
intending to conduct a garage sale shall, prior to the sale, register with the
Township Administrative Officer. Freestanding temporary signs advertising
such garage sale and not exceeding an area of more than four square feet
each shall be permitted in the public right-of-way for no more than three
days; provided, however, no such sign shall be located within 10 feet of any
public monument or memorial. Failure to remove all signs at the end of such
three-day period shall be a violation of this section.
§ 205-40.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.1
198:510
ARTICLE IVA
Tree Conservation and Replacement Program
[Added 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 00-22]
§ 205-40.2. Definitions.
The following words and expressions as used in this article shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The administrative officer shall be the
Director of Community Development or his designee.
AESTHETIC IMPROVEMENT CUT — The removal of the minimum extent
possible of the smallest and poorest specimens of trees so as to permit land
development while retaining the maximum number of larger and healthier
specimens of trees.
AVERAGED WOODED LOT — An inventory of a portion of each property
subject to the provisions of this article shall be made to establish the
average number of each species of tree within the area to be disturbed
(which includes any area from which trees are to be removed or cut down).
This inventory shall constitute the averaged wooded lot and shall be
determined as follows: the applicant shall select random one-tenth-acre
representative plots throughout the area to be disturbed, which plots shall
have comparable tree populations to the area to be disturbed generally.
Each representative plot shall be visibly marked by stakes or other
appropriate markers. The location of the representative one-tenth-acre
plots shall be subject to approval by the administrative officer. The number
of representative one-tenth-acre plots shall be equal to 50% of the number
of acres within the area to be disturbed (including any area from which
trees are to be removed or cut down); provided, however, that the number
of representative one-tenth-acre plots shall not be less than 10 unless
the area to be disturbed is one acre or less, in which event the entire
area to be disturbed (including the area from which trees may be cut
down or removed) shall be inventoried. Once the representative plots have
been identified and approved, each tree on each representative one-tenthacre
plot shall be inventoried by species and the average of each species
calculated from the total of each representative one-tenth-acre plot shall
be determined for the total of representative one-tenth-acre plots. That
average number of species shall represent the number of species of each
tree within the disturbed area and the composite of an averaged tree
species shall constitute the averaged wooded lot. (Specimen trees are not
part of the averaged wooded lot, as they are inventoried individually
throughout the entire tract.)
BOARD — The municipal agency, either Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
CLEAR CUTTING — The removal of all standing trees on a lot or portion of
a lot.
§ 205-40.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.2
198:511
DIAMETER AT POINT OF MEASUREMENT — The diameter of a tree
measured 4 1/2 feet above the ground level on the downhill side for existing
trees to be surveyed in the field and shown on a replacement plan. Trees
utilized in the replacement of existing trees shall be measured six inches
above the ground for trees with a four-inch caliper or less, and measured
12 inches above the ground for trees over a four-inch caliper. Diameter at a
point of measurement may appear in this section as the abbreviation "DPM."
DRIPLINE — A limiting line established by a series of perpendicular drop
points marking the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree, but not
less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater.
HOMESTEAD LOT — A preexisting lot located within a zone permitting
single-family detached dwellings upon which is constructed one singlefamily
detached dwelling or upon which is proposed to be constructed one
single-family detached dwelling, and which property as a result of zoning
restrictions could not be further subdivided.
REPLACEMENT PLAN — A specific plan for replacement of removed trees
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A nursery-grown certified tree, 2 1/2 inches DPM,
properly balled, marked with a durable label indicating genus, species
and variety and satisfying the standards established for nursery stock and
installation thereof set forth by the American Association of Nurseryman.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The removal of larger trees on an individual basis
while leaving trees of lesser size.
SILVICULTURE — The management of any wooded tract of land to ensure
its continued survival and welfare, whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Bureau of Forestry.
SLASH — The forest debris remaining after a tree removal operation.
SPECIMEN TREE — Any tree with a DPM of 24 inches or greater.
THINNING — The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or
damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the development of remaining
trees on the lot.
TOPPINGS — The uppermost 20% of height of a tree constituting its crown.
TREE — Any tree species which has a DPM of six inches or greater.
§ 205-40.3. Cutting or removal required.
No person shall cut down or remove or permit, suffer or allow the cutting
down or removal of any tree or specimen tree without first having complied
with this article.
§ 205-40.4. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from this Article IVA:
§ 205-40.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.4
198:512
§ 205-40.5. Permit required.
A. Commercial nurseries and fruit tree orchards.
B. Christmas tree plantations.
C. Removal of trees which are dead, dying or diseased or trees or
specimen trees which have suffered severe damage or any tree or
specimen tree whose angle or growth make them a hazard to structures
or human life.
D. Pruning or removal of any tree or specimen tree growing on or over a
public right-of-way or public property by an appropriate authority or
authorized utility company for maintenance of utility wires or pipe
lines.
E. Homestead lots.
F. Those projects which, prior to the effective date hereof, have received
preliminary major subdivision approval, final major subdivision
approval or site plan approval; provided, however, that an amendment
to a major subdivision approval, site plan approval or preliminary major
subdivision approval which is made after the effective date of this
article and which modification or amendment impacts upon existing
trees shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Applications for
extension of preliminary major subdivision approval where further tree
removal is required shall be conditioned upon compliance with this
section where the application for extension has not been granted prior
to the effective date of this article.
A. Prior to the cutting down or removal of any tree which is subject to this
article, a permit shall be obtained from the administrative officer
entitled a "tree removal permit." The application for a tree removal
permit shall include a completed application on a form prescribed by
the administrative officer, including, as a minimum:
(1) Name, address and phone number of property owner.
(2) Name, address and phone number of applicant, if different from
owner.
(3) Consent, in writing, of owner if applicant is different than owner.
(4) Description of the location of the premises by street address and
tax lot and block number.
(5) An inventory of trees, based upon an averaged wooded lot, showing
all calculations and supporting factual data.
(6) An inventory of all specimen trees by size and species.
(7) A grid overlay to the same scale as a site plan or subdivision map, if
any, or if none, another formal map or survey showing the location
§ 205-40.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.5
198:513
§ 205-40.6. Replacement tree plan.
of one-tenth-acre representative plots for determination of the
averaged wooded lot.
(8) A site plan to the same scale as the grid overlay described in the
preceding subsection, showing the entire tract of land, delineating
the areas of disturbance, the location of all specimen trees in the
area of disturbance, an identification of each specimen tree by size
and species and identification of specimen trees to be cut down or
removed by location, size and species.
(9) A calculation of the trees and specimen trees to be removed.
(10) A calculation of the total replacement trees required in accordance
with this article.
(11) Where a monetary contribution is proposed in lieu of replacement
trees, a calculation of the monetary contribution, together with an
explanation demonstrating good cause for concluding that the
requisite number of replacement trees cannot reasonably be placed
on site.
(12) A spec replacement tree plan as defined herein below.
(13) A request for waiver of the requirements of this article, together
with a detailed explanation of the reason for waiver request and the
inability to reasonably comply.
(14) The required fees and escrows in accordance with this article.
A. Where the application is in conjunction with a minor subdivision
application to create a homestead lot or lots, removal of trees up to 50%
of the number of trees on the proposed homestead lot(s) may be
removed without replacement trees required by this section. Removal
of specimen trees shall only be permitted where the location of a tree
forces the placement of a structure outside the permitted building
setbacks; where a tree whose location, angle or growth makes them a
hazard to a structure or human life; where the location or growth of a
tree inhibits the enjoyment of an outdoor pool, patio, or deck or such
proposed uses for which a building permit has issued; or removal of
specimen trees which are otherwise exempt. The removal of trees in
excess of 50% or the removal of specimen trees which are not exempt
requires a replacement plan based upon the standards set forth in Table
B-1 and Table B-2. For minor subdivision applicants, a statement of the
number and species of trees constituting the replacement plan,
together with a certification indicating that same will be planted, shall
be sufficient; provided, however, that no certificate of occupancy shall
issue for use of any structure built upon said lots created by said minor
subdivision until such time as evidence verifying the planting of the
replacement trees has been completed. Neither a performance nor a
maintenance bond shall be required in the case of a minor subdivision.
§ 205-40.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.6
198:514
B. Where the application for a tree removal permit is in conjunction with
an application for major subdivision or site plan approval or any minor
subdivision other than a subdivision to create homestead lots as set
forth in Chapter 205 of the Township Code, or relates to any other
property not otherwise exempt, the replacement plan shall include the
following:
(1) A site plan showing the size, location and species of all trees
constituting replacement trees to be planted within the disturbed
area or elsewhere on site.
(2) The site plan shall identify the lot and block numbers, the street
address, if known or assigned, and a certification of compliance
with the requirements of this section.
(3) Location of streams and watercourses.
(4) Location of slopes of greater than 10% where any tree removal is
proposed.
(5) The location(s) on the tract where tree removal is to take place.
(6) The total acreage of the tract.
(7) The total number of wooded acres to be disturbed within the tract.
(8) A specific plan for replacement of removed trees pursuant to
Subsection C below.
(9) A written summary of measures taken to preserve existing trees.
(10) Evidence that the method of disposal of removed trees, toppings
and slash is consistent with law. All efforts shall be made to
preserve specimen trees, including, if necessary, relocation of
infrastructure, roadways and building. Removal of any specimen
tree shall require specific approval, and any specimen trees
approved for removal shall be listed individually on the tree
removal permit.
C. All plans for replacement of removed trees shall be based upon the
following formulas:
(1) For trees as defined herein, replacement shall be based on the
percentage of the trees removed as set forth in Table B(1) below;
(2) Specimen trees as defined herein shall be replaced in accordance
with Table B(2).
§ 205-40.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.6
198:515
Table B(1)
Replacement of Trees
Percentage of
Trees Removed
Percentage of
Trees Removed
to be Replaced With
Replacement Trees
80% to 100% 70%
60% to 79% 50%
40% to 59% 30%
20% to 39% 20%
Less than 20% 10%
Table B(2)
Replacement of Specimen Trees
Existing Specimen Trees
to be Removed
Number of Replacement
Trees
24 inches to 30 inches 5
31 inches to 36 inches 7
37 inches to 40 inches 9
41 inches or greater 10
D. In determining the DPM of specimen trees for purpose of the above
calculation, half-inch will be rounded up to the nearest whole inch and
less than half an inch will be rounded down to the nearest whole inch.
E. Any tree left standing which was designated for removal, or any tree
planted in compliance with other requirements of this article, shall be
credited against the total replacement count on a one-for-one basis;
provided, however, that trees required to be planted by the Board
within street rights-of-way as part of an approval for an application for
development shall receive no credit.
F. Wherever replacement trees are being planted pursuant to this section
and Tables B(1) and B(2), the species or type of replacement tree shall,
to the greatest degree practical, be the same as the species or type
removed from the tract.
G. In the event that the replacement of the required number of trees
cannot reasonably be achieved on site, the applicant may request or
may be required to contribute an amount equal to the cost of the
replacement tree, including installation and guaranty (twice the
current wholesale value of each unplanted tree) to a fund established
by the Township for the purpose of tree maintenance, tree preservation,
§ 205-40.6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.6
198:516
§ 205-40.7. Application submittal; referral.
All applications for tree removal permits must be made to the administrative
officer. After determining that the application is complete, the
administrative officer shall provide written notice to the applicant that
the application for tree removal permit is complete and shall refer one
copy of the completed application for tree removal permit to the Township
Environmental Committee and the Township Engineer, together with a
written request that they review the application and provide their
comments and recommendations within 35 days of the date of the letter of
transmittal. After 35 days from a referral to the Township Environmental
Committee and the Township Engineer, the administrative officer shall
approve or deny the application for tree removal permit. If denied, a
statement of reasons supporting the denial shall accompany the denial.
Due consideration shall be given by the administrative officer to the timely
receipt of comments and recommendations of the Township Environmental
Committee and the Township Engineer. Where approval is given, no permit
shall issue until the applicant provides a performance guaranty as required
in § 205-40.13. No performance guaranty may be released until full
compliance with the approval permit has been made, all required
replacement trees have been installed and an appropriate maintenance
bond has been posted in accordance with this section. Where the
application is approved, a tree removal permit shall issue as hereinabove
described.
§ 205-40.8. Waiver.
tree planting, landscaping, and including the donation of trees to be
planted within North Brunswick Township.
A. Where an applicant seeks a waiver from the strict enforcement of this
article, an application completed except for those portions for which
waiver is sought shall be submitted and referred for comment and
recommendation to the Environmental Committee and the Township
Engineer as described in § 205-40.7. After 35 days have elapsed from
date of said referral, the application, together with all supporting data,
the comments and recommendations of the Environmental Committee
and of the Township Engineer shall be forwarded to the Board if in
conjunction with an application for development for consideration of
the application for waiver. If not in conjunction with an application for
development, determination of the application of waiver shall be made
by the administrative officer. Such determination of the administrative
officer may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. When determining whether or not to grant a waiver of full technical
compliance with the requirements of this article and the requirements
for replacement trees, the administrative officer or the Board, as the
case may be, shall weigh the negative impacts of the proposed waiver
versus the benefits of compliance and shall consider the following:
§ 205-40.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.8
198:517
§ 205-40.9. Regulations pertaining to delineation of clearing limits/
limits of disturbance.
(1) Is it reasonably economically feasible for the applicant to comply
with this article based upon the character and extent of the
application for development? An applicant seeking a waiver on this
ground shall submit a certification setting forth the anticipated cost
of all construction and soft costs, including public improvements,
structures, detention basins, layout, design, engineering, legal, as
well as the anticipated sale price of the property to be sold or
market value of the property upon completion. In no event shall a
reduction in the number of replacement trees be greater than 1/2
of the original number required pursuant to this article.
(2) The minimal degree of land disturbance in comparison with the
overall size of the tract. For example, land disturbance of less than
10% of the overall size of the tract with no future plans for
development of the tract remaining undisturbed would be an
extraordinarily low percentage of land disturbance and could
justify reducing the number of replacement trees; provided,
however, that if the remaining undeveloped portion of the property
were to be developed within five years, all waived replacement
trees would be reinstated as a condition of future development.
(3) The proposed use of the property includes at least 20% low- and
moderate-income housing units.
(4) A lot in a single-family detached dwelling zone of five acres or less
upon which there is an existing single-family detached dwelling or
upon which a single-family detached dwelling will be constructed
which has the possibility of further subdivision based on the Zoning
Ordinance but upon which the applicant seeks no further
development or a subdivision. In such cases, a waiver respecting
replacement trees similar to homestead lots may be approved by
the Planning Board; provided, however, that if the property is
subdivided within five years, then the applicant must comply with
the tree replacement criteria for the category of application, i.e.,
subdivision, minor subdivision or major subdivision or site plan
application for both the existing lot, including any waved
replacement trees, and the proposed lot or lots.
C. After its determination on the application for waiver, the Board shall
forthwith provide a copy of its resolution to the administrative officer
who shall incorporate the Board's determination into the determination
on the application for tree removal permit.
A. The clearing limits/limits of disturbance shown on the replacement plan
shall be fully established prior to cutting of permitted wooded acreage
and shall be defined by snow fencing firmly secured along the dripline,
but not less than six feet from the trunk, of the remaining trees. In a like
manner, specimen trees and isolated groupings of trees which are to
§ 205-40.8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.9
198:518
§ 205-40.10. Permit approval; time for decision; no default
approvals.
§ 205-40.11. Change in replacement plan.
Any substantial change in a replacement plan shall necessitate the
submission of a revised plan to the administrative officer for review and
approval pursuant to this article.
§ 205-40.12. Permit revocation.
The administrative officer may revoke a permit where there has been a
false or misleading application or for noncompliance with an approved
replacement plan.
remain on the site shall be clearly protected by snow fencing or equally
visible and protective device installed along the dripline of the trees but
not less than six feet from the tree trunk(s).
B. The grade of the land located along the dripline shall not be raised or
lowered more than six inches unless compensated by welling or
retaining wall methods; and in no event shall the welling or retaining
wall methods be less than six feet from the trunk of the tree.
C. No soil stockpiling, storage of building materials or equipment
operation shall be permitted within the dripline or within six feet of any
remaining trees, whichever is greater.
D. Any clearing within the dripline, or within six feet of the trunk of a
remaining tree, must be done by hand or with hand-operated
equipment.
E. Where clearing and/or construction on the site results in accidental
removal or severe damage which will eventually result in death and
removal of any tree delineated in a replacement plan as remaining on
site, such removed or damaged tree shall be replaced pursuant to the
applicable replacement tree schedule in § 205-40.6C hereof using
substantially comparable species and type trees.
A. A tree removal permit shall be acted upon within a reasonable time of
the determination by the administrative officer that a completed
application has been submitted.
B. An application for development may be conditioned upon the
subsequent approval of a tree removal permit.
C. An approval by statutory default by virtue of a Board failing to act upon
application development within a prescribed statutory time period shall
not automatically grant approval of a tree removal permit and shall not
be deemed to be an approval of a request for a waiver of the application
of any portion of this article to an applicant for development.
§ 205-40.9 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-40.13
198:519
§ 205-40.13. Fees; performance guaranties; maintenance
guaranties.
§ 205-40.14. Notice of commencement of tree removal.
A. A nonrefundable application fee of $75 shall be submitted, together
with a review and inspection fee of $200, for the first acre and $100 for
each additional acre or portion thereof on which tree removal activities
are proposed.
B. An escrow fee, in an amount not less than 1% of the estimated
replacement cost or $500, whichever is greater, may be required to
cover expenses of review of the application and site inspection
subsequent to completion of the tree removal activities. Any unused
balance will be returned to the applicant after final approval.
C. A performance guaranty shall be submitted upon approval of an
application in favor of the municipality in an amount not to exceed
120% of the cost for the replacement plan on the property in an amount
estimated by the Township Engineer. This should exclude off-tract trees,
for which a contribution was made.
D. Notwithstanding any limitations set forth in Chapter 205, Land Use,
following completion of the planting of trees in accordance with the
approved replacement plan and as a condition of the release of the
performance guaranty, the permit holder shall post a maintenance
guaranty with the Township Clerk for maintenance of the replacement
trees. The maintenance guaranty, which may be a surety bond, shall not
exceed 15% of the costs of the replacement plan and shall be posted for
a period not to exceed two years after acceptance of the completed
replacement plan. Under the maintenance guaranty, an 85% survival
rate for a two-year guaranty period shall be considered satisfactory.
A. The holder of a tree removal permit shall notify the administrative
officer in writing at least seven business days in advance to when tree
removal activity will commence. No activity shall take place on
Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays without express written approval
from the administrative officer.
B. The notice shall also include advice as to the manner of disposal of the
removed trees. Where appropriate, the administrative officer shall
advise the Township Recycling Coordinator of the name of the permit
holder, the location of the removal site, the date removal is to
commence and the manner of disposal to be employed.
§ 205-40.13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-40.14
198:520
ARTICLE V
General Regulations for Residential Districts
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-41. Inharmonious construction and alteration.
Within any residential district, no buildings shall be constructed or altered
so as to be inharmonious with the residential character of adjacent
structures.
§ 205-42. Keeping of horses.
The keeping of horses for personal pleasure or use shall be permitted for
any single-family residential use, provided that:
§ 205-43. Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, campers,
trailers and boats. [Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 03-22]
The outdoor storage of any unoccupied recreational vehicle, camper or boat
or any occupied or unoccupied open or closed trailer used for commercial
or recreational purposes shall be permitted on single-family and two-family
lots in accordance with the following restrictions:
A. There shall be not more than two horses located on any residential
property.
B. There shall be an aggregate open area equal to not less than five acres
for each horse on the property.
C. Such open area shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any property
line.
D. Buildings for the quartering of horses shall not be located closer than
100 feet to any property.
A. Only one such recreational vehicle, trailer or camper and one boat no
greater than 28 feet in length shall be permitted to be stored outdoors
on any single-family or two-family lot.
B. Such recreational vehicle, camper, trailer or boat shall only be stored at
a location that is no closer to the street line than both the actual
building line of the properly whereon such recreational vehicle, camper,
trailer or boat is stored and the actual building line of the property
adjacent to such storage area.
C. Such recreational vehicle, camper, trailer or boat shall comply with all
side yard and rear yard setback requirements applicable to accessory
structures for that zone.
D. Such vehicles are specifically prohibited on the street in and across
from all residential zones regardless of whether both sides of such a
§ 205-41 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-43
198:521
§ 205-43.1. Parking and storage of commercially registered
vehicles. [Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 03-22; 11-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-32; 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
street are located in a residential zone, as well as on both sides of the
street in front of or directly across from any residential use.
E. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to permit the outdoor
storage of any unoccupied recreational vehicle, camper, small boat or
any occupied or unoccupied opened or closed trailer used for
commercial or recreational purposes in any zone for multifamily
dwellings, including but not limited to condominiums, townhouses or
garden apartments.
A. There shall be no more than one permitted commercially registered
vehicle as defined by the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.) per authorized dwelling unit of the types
identified herein parked on any lot zoned for residential purposes, as
well as on both sides of the street in front of any residential use or
directly across the street from any residential use, between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The following commercially registered vehicles
are permitted:
(1) Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less
and excluding trucks commonly identified as "box" and "walk-in"
trucks of any gross vehicle weight; and
(2) Examples of permitted vehicles include, but are not limited to,
minivans, full-size and heavy-duty pickups, utility vans,
multipurpose vehicles; and those types of vehicles shown and
consistent with permitted vehicles displayed in Exhibit A on file
with the Department of Community Development; and
(3) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and van conversions with a gross vehicle
weight rating of 14,000 pounds or less are permitted, provided that
such vehicles are to be used as utility vehicles (used for trade
purposes and as further shown in Exhibit A on file with Department
of Community Development), and further provided that such
vehicles have either an open or enclosed bed with neither racks nor
stakes.
B. The following types of commercial vehicles are prohibited from being
parked on any street in any zone between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. except when engaged in providing emergency repair services
or actively engaged in moving the residents of the premises. (See the
examples displayed in Exhibit A on file with the Department of
Community Development.)
(1) All commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of more than
10,000 pounds including but not limited to large walk-in trucks, box
§ 205-43 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-43.1
198:522
§ 205-43.2. Construction of driveways and parking spaces. [Added
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-32]
All driveways and parking spaces for residential dwelling units in any
residential zone or for any residential use which are constructed or altered
and that result in an expansion of the habitable area after December 1,
2006, shall be required to be constructed of an improved surface and shall
be located no closer than a minimum of three feet to the property line.
§ 205-44. Number of stories limited.
Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this chapter, all dwelling units
shall be above the finished grade level and the number of stories above
ground level shall be limited to 2 1/2, and no dwelling shall have an outside
stairway to the second floor above ground level.
§ 205-45. Number of principal buildings limited.
Any parcel utilized for single-family or two-family dwelling purposes shall
not contain more than one principal building.
§ 205-45.1. (Reserved)91
trucks, dump trucks, rack and stake body trucks, grain body trucks,
tractors and tractor-trailers;
(2) Wreckers, as defined in Chapter 356 of the Code of the Township of
North Brunswick, with the exception of light-duty wreckers as
defined in § 356-9B that are licensed by the Township of North
Brunswick, provided same are parked on a lot and not on the street;
(3) Buses or vans registered for more than 11 passengers, with the
exception of school buses registered for 16 or fewer passengers
that comply with applicable USDOT Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards, provided that same are parked on a lot and not on the
street;
(4) Taxicabs or other livery services whose driver is on duty or on call
and who are available to pick up passengers; and
(5) Limousines as defined in § 213-3B of the Code of the Township of
North Brunswick, of a size beyond a standard passenger vehicle
and commonly identified as "stretch limousines."
C. No commercial vehicle of any kind shall be parked on any street, lot,
avenue, highway or portion thereof that is located in a residential use in
any zone, as well as on both sides of the street in front of any residential
use or directly across the street from any residential use, that contains
any form of advertising or display beyond the requirement of N.J.S.A.
39:4-46 not permanently affixed by paint, stencil, or comparable
process onto the body of the vehicle.
§ 205-43.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-45.2
198:523
§ 205-45.2. (Reserved)92
§ 205-45.3. Restrictions on changing from sale to rental once
intention is disclosed. [Added 11-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
No application for multifamily residential development for which the
applicant has indicated that the dwelling units shall be offered for sale only
in response to § 205-110A(22) of this chapter shall be changed to market or
offer the units for rent.
91.Editor's Note: Former § 205-45.1, Single-family cluster options, was repealed 4-4-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-06.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection M(3), regarding the handicapped parking zone assigned
to 919 Lee Avenue, was repealed 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02.
§ 205-45.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-45.3
198:524
ARTICLE VI
R-1 Residential District
[Amended 11-3-1980; 11-17-1980; 5-17-1982; 4-4-1983; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-46. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in R-1 Residential Districts:
§ 205-47. Development standards.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Private swimming pools, subject to § 205-94 of this chapter.
(3) Fences, in accordance with § 205-93 of this chapter.
(4) Television antennas, not exceeding 15 feet in height from the roof
of the main structure and other restrictions as noted in Article IV of
this chapter.
(5) Private garages, yard utility buildings or storage buildings
permanently installed on a concrete base at least six inches thick or
other equally permanent installation or approved by the
Construction Official.
(6) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) (Reserved)93
A. If a single-family home is proposed to be developed adjacent to an
apartment or nonresidential use which does not include a buffer area in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, then an additional
thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the requirements
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), concerning community residence for the
developmentally disabled, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-46 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-47
198:525
§ 205-48. (Reserved)
of Article XXVI, shall be added along any required side or rear yard
which abuts said apartment or nonresidential use.
B. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
C. Nonconforming lots existing prior to June 6, 1966, where insufficient
land width and/or area is available to meet the requirements, and
where there are existing homes on either side, the minimum lot width
and/or area shall be 90% of the present zoning requirements, provided
that the proposed structure shall meet all other zoning requirements.
§ 205-47 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-48
198:526
ARTICLE VII
R-2 Residential District
[Amended 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-49. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in R-2 Residential Districts:
§ 205-50. Development standards.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as specified in § 205-46C for the R-1
Residential Zone.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) Private and parochial schools.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) (Reserved)94
A. If a single-family home is proposed to be developed adjacent to an
apartment or nonresidential use which does not include a buffer area in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, then an additional
thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the requirements
of Article XXVI, shall be added along any required side or rear yard
which abuts said apartment or nonresidential use.
B. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
C. For nonconforming lots existing prior to June 6, 1966, where
insufficient land width and/or area is available to meet the
requirements and where there are existing homes on either side, the
minimum lot width and/or area shall be 75% of the present zoning
requirements, provided that both municipal water and sanitary sewers
94.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), concerning community residence for the
developmentally disabled, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-49 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-50
198:527
are available and are to be used, and further that the proposed
structure shall meet all other zoning requirements.
§ 205-50 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-50
198:528
ARTICLE VIII
R-3 Residential District
[Amended 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-51. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in R-3 Residential Districts:
§ 205-52. Development standards.
Development standards shall be the same as specified in § 205-50 for the
R-2 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as specified in § 205-46C for the R-1
Residential Zone.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) Private and parochial schools.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses.
(5) (Reserved)95
95.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(5), concerning community residence for the
developmentally disabled, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-51 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-52
198:529

ARTICLE IX
R-4 Residential District
[Amended 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-53. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9;
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-32]
The following uses are permitted in R-4 Residential Districts:
§ 205-54. Development standards. [Amended 11-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-32]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as specified in § 205-46C for the R-1
Residential Zone.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) Private and parochial schools.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. If a single-family home is proposed to be developed adjacent to an
apartment or nonresidential use which does not include a buffer area in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, then an additional
thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the requirements
of Article XXVI, shall be added along any required side or rear yard
which abuts said apartment or nonresidential use.
B. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
§ 205-53 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-54
198:531

ARTICLE IXA
(Reserved)96
§ 205-54.1. through § 205-54.2. (Reserved)
96.Editor’s Note: Former Article IXA, R-4A Residential District, was repealed 4-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-06.
§ 205-54.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-54.1
198:533

ARTICLE X
R-5 Residential District
[Amended 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-55. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in R-5 Residential Districts:
§ 205-56. Development standards for garden apartments.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Garden apartments.
(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(3) Temporary sales and/or rental offices.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Signs, in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, in accordance with § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Television antennas not exceeding 15 feet in height from the roof of
the main structure and subject to other restrictions as noted in
Article IV of this chapter.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
C. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) (Reserved)97
A. The following project design requirements for garden apartments are in
addition to those specified in § 205-4.1, Schedule of District
Regulations:
(1) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet from state and federal
highways; 50 feet from existing and proposed Township streets;
and 35 feet from all other internal streets and roadways.
(2) Maximum density: 10 dwelling units per acre.
(3) There shall be not more than 20 contiguous dwelling units in each
building.
(4) The length of any one building shall not exceed 175 feet.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), concerning community residence for the
developmentally disabled, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-55 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-56
198:535
(5) The project shall be designed to avoid straight unbroken lines.
There shall be no more than four dwelling units in a line without a
variation in setback equal to a minimum of 10 feet in the exterior
surface or building elevation.
(6) Each building unit shall have a master television antenna.
(7) All buildings shall be of fire-resistant material and shall comply
with the provisions of the Township's Fire Prevention Code.98
(8) The design layout of garden apartment structures shall be such
that the front of one building does not face the back of another
building. When buildings are arranged front-to-back, they shall be
separated by a minimum of 100 feet.
(9) The architecture of all buildings shall be compatible with
structures on adjacent lands and in the neighborhood.
(10) All buildings shall supply, in an enclosed basement area, laundry
facilities for the use of the occupants of the building unless such
facilities are provided within each unit.
(11) All buildings shall be clearly identified by posting of building
numbers.
B. Individual apartment units shall comply with the following design
requirements:
(1) Every dwelling unit shall have two separate means of ingress and
egress from the building in which it is located.
(2) All apartment units shall include complete kitchen facilities, toilets
and bathing and washing facilities, as well as living space.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall contain at least one clothes closet, with a
minimum floor area of 40 square feet for the main bedroom and 20
square feet for each other bedroom or similar facility. Where two
bedrooms are provided in a dwelling unit, a linen closet with a
minimum floor area of 15 square feet and a storage closet with a
floor area of at least 25 square feet shall be provided within each
dwelling unit.
(4) In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 420 cubic feet
of storage area in a convenient, centrally located area in the
basement or ground floor of the dwelling structure or elsewhere
where personal belongings and effects may be stored without
constituting a fire hazard and where said belongings and effects
may be kept locked and separated from belongings of other
occupants.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention.
§ 205-56 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-56
198:536
(5) All walls separating apartment units shall be of masonry
construction not less than eight inches in thickness or the
equivalent in terms of sound transmission loss factor. Each
apartment shall be separated from adjacent apartments by
nonhabitable spaces such as bathrooms, kitchens, stairs or
mechanical areas.
(6) The floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the following:
500 feet for efficiency apartments; 600 square feet for onebedroom
units; and 700 square feet for two-bedroom units.
(7) Excluding bathrooms, closets, halls and stairways, bedrooms shall
have a minimum floor area of 100 square feet.
(8) No dwelling unit shall be located above the second floor or below
the first floor.
(9) Each dwelling unit shall contain at least one fully equipped
bathroom of at least 45 square feet, not including closet space.
C. All apartment projects must comply with the following open space and
recreation requirements:
(1) A playground area or areas shall be provided at the rate of at least
450 square feet per dwelling unit. Outdoor play equipment shall be
installed in each playground, in sufficient amount and variety to
service the occupants of the project. A swimming pool area or areas
may be installed as approved by the Planning Board and Recreation
Committee. All recreational areas which are adjacent to a public
street or internal roadway shall be separated from said roadway by
a fence at least four feet in height. In an active recreation area or
areas, an auxiliary building or buildings shall also be erected in
conjunction with said pool or pools.
(2) For the purpose of this provision, usable open space shall be
exclusive of front yard, service driveways, parking areas, loading or
storage areas, drying yards, etc., and shall be maintained
exclusively for residents of the apartment house and their guests.
(3) Active and passive recreation areas shall not be located closer than
20 feet to a road or driveway.
D. Off-street parking, driveway and roadway requirements:
(1) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each unit.
(2) Parking shall be prohibited along internal streets, in required front
yard areas and in usable open space areas.
(3) No off-street parking area shall be located within 60 feet of any
adjoining property line of a single-family use.
§ 205-56 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-56
198:537
(4) Off-street parking areas shall be physically separated from streets
and roads by curbs, constructed in accordance with Township
specifications.
(5) Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with provisions
established in this chapter and shall be graded, piped and provided
with catch basins so as to adequately drain the entire area to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(6) In any apartment project where more than 60 open parking spaces
are required, the parking area shall be divided into sections each
not exceeding 60 open parking spaces, and such sections shall be
separated by grassed or landscaped areas at least five feet in width,
except that such dividing strips may be sidewalks or walkways,
provided that the same meet specifications of the Township
Engineer.
(7) All off-street parking shall be located on the immediate apartment
house property.
(8) Streets not leading into parking areas shall be cul-de-sac in design,
with sufficient turning area and radius for emergency vehicles.
(9) All interior streets and related improvements shall be maintained
by the apartment owner.
(10) All roadways within the garden apartment area shall provide a
minimum paved roadway of 36 feet.
E. Other provisions.
(1) Where a garden apartment development abuts an area zoned for
single-family, industrial or commercial use, said development shall
provide a thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXVI, within the required side or rear yard
which abuts such use.
(2) All areas not devoted to structures, parking areas or other required
uses shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. Wherever
feasible, natural features will be preserved. Landscaped areas,
playgrounds and recreational areas shall be maintained by and at
the expense of the owner.
(3) No buildings, including garages, other accessory structures,
interior streets and driveways, parking areas or play areas may be
located in the buffer strip.
(4) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from driveways
and parking lots, and 35 feet from internal roadways.
(5) A garbage and refuse storage and collection area which is
accessible for disposal and collection shall be provided at the rear
of each building and shall be adequately screened from view on
§ 205-56 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-56
198:538
three sides. The collection and removal of garbage and refuse shall
be the responsibility of the owners.
(6) One nonilluminated project identification sign shall be permitted
on each public street on which the garden apartment development
has frontage. The project name, address and vacancy status may be
advertised. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet total
aggregate area of all sides, with a maximum height of four feet
located within the property lines. No signs shall be attached to
buildings nor shall any other signs other than pedestrian or
vehicular directional signs be visible from the premises.
(7) Topsoil shall not be removed from the site during construction, but
shall be stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to view by
occupants and the public, and such areas shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting.
(8) Interior roadways, parking areas, dwelling entranceways and
walkways shall be sufficiently illuminated to minimize hazards to
pedestrians and motor vehicles. All luminaries shall be directed
downward and properly shielded to avoid disturbing glares to
occupants, buildings and adjoining properties and public streets.
(9) Grading, paving, storm drain and catch basin construction shall be
in accordance with Township standards as required by this chapter.
(10) At least one full-time resident superintendent shall be responsible
as agent for the owner for the care, supervision and maintenance of
the project. In developments larger than 200 dwelling units, an
additional full-time maintenance person shall be provided for each
100 dwelling units or fraction thereof in the development.
(11) All utilities necessary to serve garden apartment developments
shall be installed underground in accordance with Township
standards as specified in this chapter.
(12) Other standards and conditions relating to the site plan review and
to curbing, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks,
landscaping and planting not otherwise specified herein may be
attached as conditions by the Planning Board.
(13) All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general
provisions under Article IV. Prior to issuance of a construction
permit, all uses other than a single- or two-family detached
structure shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance with
Article XXVIII.
(14)No licensed commercial vehicle with a manufacturer's rated
capacity of more than 3/4 ton shall be parked on any street
overnight in this residential zone.
(15) Electrical meters shall be installed within all buildings.
§ 205-56 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-56
198:539
(16) Nonconforming residential uses located in this zone shall be
permitted to have accessory buildings as permitted in the R-2 Zone
in accordance with the provisions of the R-2 Zone.
§ 205-56 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-56
198:540
ARTICLE XI
R-6 (PRD) Planned Residential Development District
[Amended 11-17-1980; 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-57. Purpose.
§ 205-58. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in R-6 Residential Districts:
A. The R-6 (PRD) Planned Residential District is intended to permit the
construction of planned developments having a high quality of layout
and design which will stabilize and enhance the character of the area,
promote the conservation and protection of natural features, provide a
mix of housing types and promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the entire Township.
B. The purposes of the following regulations are to:
(1) Improve the feasibility of creating attractive and usable open space
within developments.
(2) Preserve desirable natural features and tree cover.
(3) Preserve conditions under which the layout of lots, buildings,
streets and other features of land development can be achieved in
both an attractive and practical manner.
(4) Encourage forms of development which will be beneficial to the
overall Township.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family homes.
(2) Planned residential developments (PRD) consisting of a mix of
single-family dwellings and attached housing structures which are
designed with six or less units per structure.
(3) Economic residential developments (ERD) constructed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, said developments consisting of a mix
of single-family homes and garden apartments.
(4) Temporary buildings incidental to construction work, provided that
such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment of
the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as specified in § 205-46C for the R-1
Residential Zone.
§ 205-57 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-58
198:541
§ 205-59. Development standards differentiating PRD and ERD.
§ 205-60. Development standards for both PRD and ERD.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) (Reserved)99
A. Development standards for planned residential developments (PRD) are
as follows:
(1) The maximum density of a PRD shall be 3 1/2 units per gross acre.
(2) Single-family dwellings shall number not less than 50% of the total
number of dwelling units to be constructed, and attached housing
units shall not exceed 50% of the total number of dwellings to be
constructed.
(3) No attached housing structure shall consist of more than six
residential units.
(4) Lot sizes and dimensions for attached housing may be freely
disposed and arranged in conformity with the overall density
standards herein. While minimum lot size and frontage are not
specified herein, the general design shall be in conformance with
good planning practices, given the number of units per structure,
and shall be approved by the Board.
(5) Single-family dwellings which are part of a PRD shall comply with
the standards for one-family dwellings in the R-2 Residential Zone.
B. Development standards for economic residential developments (ERD)
constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter are as follows:
(1) The maximum density of an ERD shall be 3 1/2 units per gross acre.
(2) Single-family dwellings shall number not less than 25% of the total
number of dwelling units to be constructed, and garden apartments
shall not exceed 75% of the total number of dwellings to be
constructed.
(3) The standards for garden apartments in the R-5 Zone under
§ 205-56 shall apply. However, those sections concerning open
space dedication shall not be applicable. Open space and common
use areas may be considered to provide such open space if in the
opinion of the Planning Board such space may be used conveniently
by the residents of the garden apartments.
(4) Single-family dwellings which are part of an ERD shall comply with
the standards for one-family dwellings in the R-2 Residential Zone.
99.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), concerning community residence for the
developmentally disabled, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-58 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-60
198:542
A. PRD and ERD tract planning standards.
(1) A minimum of 10 acres is required for PRD or ERD development.
(2) The layout of streets shall provide for proper and safe means of
vehicular access to existing and planned public streets serving the
area. No dwelling unit shall have direct vehicular access to any
arterial road (as designated by the Township Master Plan).
(3) All habitable buildings shall be connected to and properly served by
public water and sanitary sewer systems. All areas to be developed
shall be properly drained by an approved storm drainage system.
(4) All site improvements shall be installed in accordance with an
approved plan subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter
and/or the principles of sound engineering practice.
(5) The sum total of all dwelling types shall not exceed 3 1/2 times the
total number of acres included in the tract.
(6) A PRD or ERD development may be developed in stages. Such
staging shall be delineated on the approved development plan or
included in any written agreement setting forth the terms and
conditions of approval.
(7) Any PRD or ERD shall provide for one-family dwelling lots or
reserved open space on lands contiguous to existing lots outside
the PRD or ERD if said lots are smaller than five acres or developed
for single-family residential use. The PRD or ERD plan shall provide
for an appropriate transition from preexisting uses outside the
tract to the development patterns within the PRD and ERD.
B. Standards for open space and common use areas in PRD or ERD
developments.
(1) At least 20% of the total acreage included in the tract shall be
permanently reserved for open space recreational areas (not
counting street areas). Such reservation may be made either by
dedication to the Township or by other legal instrument approved
by the Mayor and Council to assure the reservation and
maintenance in perpetuity.
(2) All lands subject to flooding by a ten-year-frequency storm and
lands having a slope greater than 20% not included within lots to
be covered or sites to be developed and areas to be utilized for
required public improvements (other than streets) shall be
included in the open space reservation.
(3) Any open space that is to be established for other than the
preservation of natural features, wooded areas, drainageways and
similar unimproved uses shall be graded, seeded or otherwise
improved by the developer as shall be set forth in the approved
§ 205-60 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-60
198:543
§ 205-61. Additional regulations.
plan or any accompanying written agreement of the terms and
conditions of approval.
A. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
B. For nonconforming lots existing prior to June 6, 1966, where
insufficient land width and/or area is available to meet the
requirements and where there are existing homes on either side, the
minimum lot width and/or area shall be 90% of the present zoning
requirements, provided that the proposed structure shall meet all other
zoning requirements.
§ 205-60 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-61
198:544
ARTICLE XII
R-7 Residential District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-62. Purpose. [Amended 9-8-1992]
§ 205-63. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in R-7 Residential District:
A. It is recognized that there exists an inadequate supply of decent, safe
rental housing for elderly persons and elderly families in the Township
of North Brunswick. The lack of properly constructed rental housing
specifically designed to meet the needs of the elderly at affordable
rentals is a serious social problem. To correct this situation, it is
necessary to provide for the erection of new dwelling units at rentals at
which the elderly can afford. These specific needs and requirements
can best be met through the sponsorship of an elderly housing project
by a nonprofit corporation.
B. Since it is a public purpose and objective to secure adequate housing
for the elderly, the following provisions are designed to facilitate the
participation of a private nonprofit corporation to develop a senior
citizen housing project.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Multistoried, senior citizen housing which is subsidized in
accordance with state or federal programs, or which is otherwise
marketed at a price which makes it affordable to lower-income
families.
(2) Municipal buildings and grounds.
(3) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking: one parking space per two dwelling units. Offstreet
parking may be located in any front, side or rear yard area,
provided that such parking is not closer than 15 feet to any
property line.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, in accordance with Article XXIII of this chapter.
§ 205-62 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-63
198:545
§ 205-64. Maximum density and special development requirement.
(3) Television antennas not exceeding 15 feet in height from the roof of
the main structure and subject to other restrictions as noted in
Article IV of this chapter.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
(5) Active and passive recreational facilities.
A. Maximum density shall be 50 dwelling units per acre.
B. The developer and nonprofit sponsor shall qualify under the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Housing Finance Agency Law, as
amended and supplemented, and the provisions of the Limited Dividend
Nonprofit Housing Corporation or Association Law, Chapter 184 of the
Laws of 1949, as amended and supplemented.100
C. To be eligible for occupancy in a senior citizen project, an individual
must be at least 60 years of age or over.
D. All properties and uses shall be subject to the general provisions under
Article IV.
100. Editor's Note: The subject matter previously contained in the New Jersey Housing Finance
Agency Law is now covered by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency Law
of 1983, N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1949, as amended, was
repealed by L. 1991, c. 431; see now N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.
§ 205-63 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-64
198:546
ARTICLE XIII
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
[Amended 8-16-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-65. Permitted uses.
Retail uses of a neighborhood convenience nature shall be permitted in C-1
Neighborhood Commercial Districts as follows:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Apparel and accessories stores.
(2) Banks.
(3) Drugstores.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments (non-drive-in) which do not
have live entertainment. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(5) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(6) Florists.
(7) General business offices.
(8) General merchandise stores.
(9) Government buildings and grounds.
(10) Grocery stores.
(11) Liquor stores.
(12) Personal services.
(13) Professional services.
(14) Retail stores.
(15) Variety stores.
(16) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 205-65 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-65
198:547
§ 205-66. Development standards.
§ 205-66.1. C-3 Restricted Neighborhood Commercial District.
[Added 2-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04]
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Repair services related to the permitted uses in this zone district.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(5) Mechanical amusement devices, as defined in this chapter,
provided that no more than four such devices shall be permitted
within any building or premises used for business purposes in this
zone.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. Minimum front yard setback: 35 feet, and 100 feet from U.S. Route 1
and U.S. Route 130.
B. Where a proposed commercial development abuts a residential zone or
a lot developed for residential uses, a buffer shall be established; an
additional thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXVI, shall be added to any required rear or
side yard which abuts said residential use.
C. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
D. Front yards may be utilized for parking, provided that no parking shall
be closer than 25 feet to the street line of U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route
130, nor closer than 10 feet to other street lines. All nonparking areas
shall be landscaped.
E. Nonconforming residential uses located in this zone shall be permitted
to have accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-2 Zone, in
accordance with the provisions of the R-2 Zone.
F. All properties and uses are subject to the performance standards as
specified in Article XXVII.
A. General. Permitted uses, required accessory uses, permitted accessory
uses, conditional uses, and development standards shall be exactly the
same as those required for the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District,
with the exception of the prohibitions established in § 205-66.1B.
§ 205-65 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-66.1
198:548
B. Prohibited uses.
(1) All establishments that include the preparation of food for either
on-site or off-site consumption are expressly prohibited.
(2) On-site consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly prohibited.
§ 205-66.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-66.1
198:549

ARTICLE XIV
C-2 General Commercial District
[Amended 11-17-1980; 8-16-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-67. Permitted uses.
Retail trade stores and service uses are permitted in C-2 General
Commercial Districts as follows:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Apparel and accessories stores.
(2) Assembly halls, bowling alleys, roller-skating and ice-skating rinks,
mechanical amusement game rooms and other similar commercial
recreational activities, provided that they are carried on within a
building. [Amended 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(3) Banks.
(4) Drugstores.
(5) Educational services, but excluding primary and secondary schools
and colleges.
(6) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(7) Florists.
(8) Furniture, home furnishings and equipment.
(9) General business offices.
(10) General merchandise.
(11) Governmental services.
(12) Grocery stores.
(13) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(14) Personal services.
(15) Professional services.
(16) Publication of newspapers and periodicals.
(17) Retail trade stores.
(18) Restaurants and eating and drinking places (non-drive-in) which do
not have live entertainment. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(19) Variety stores.
§ 205-67 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-67
198:551
(20) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(21) Shopping centers.
(22) Hotels with a minimum of 75 units or more of accommodation.
[Added 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
(23) Motor vehicle service stations. [Added 4-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-06]
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. 09-20]
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Repair services related to the permitted uses in this zone district.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(5) Mechanical amusement devices, as defined in this chapter,
provided that no more than four such devices shall be permitted
within any building or premises used for business purposes in this
zone.
(6) Charitable clothing bins, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 145.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
(2) (Reserved)101
(3) Drive-in restaurants.
(4) Hospitals, nursing homes and sanatoriums.
(5) New car sales, service and showrooms.
(6) Commercial swimming pools and swimming clubs.
101. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2), Motor vehicle service stations, was repealed
4-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06.
§ 205-67 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-67
198:552
§ 205-68. Development standards.
(7) (Reserved)102
(8) New truck sales, display service and rental.
(9) Theaters. [Added 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A. Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet from U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route
130 and 60 feet from all other streets.
B. Where a proposed commercial development abuts a residential zone or
a lot developed for residential uses, a buffer shall be established; an
additional thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXVI, shall be added to any required rear or
side yard which abuts said residential use.
C. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
D. Front yards may be utilized for parking, provided that no parking shall
be closer than 10 feet to the street line, and all nonparking areas shall
be landscaped.
E. Nonconforming residential uses located in this zone shall be permitted
to have accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-2 Zone in
accordance with the provisions of the R-2 Zone.
F. All properties and uses are subject to the performance standards as
specified in Article XXVII.
G. Loading/unloading and truck idling restrictions. Any portion of a
nonresidential use which lies within 300 feet of either a residential zone
or a lot developed for residential use which is not separated from the
residential zone or lot developed for residential use by a noise
abatement wall which has been approved by the Township in
accordance with the provisions of Paragraphs 3 through 6 of a January
23, 2003, consent order in the matter of Church & Dwight v. North
Brunswick, Middlesex Superior Court, Docket No. L-6144-01, shall
comply with the following restrictions in those portions of the rear or
side yard areas which lie within 300 feet of the residential zone or use.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the restrictions against truck idling for
more than three minutes contained in Subsection G(2) hereof shall be
fully applicable. [Added 7-6-1993; amended 5-21-2001 by Ord. No.
01-7; 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-10]
(1) Loading/unloading restrictions. Loading/unloading and the
operation of forklifts outside of the building within 300 feet of a
residential property line shall be prohibited during the hours of
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(7), Motels, was repealed 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29.
§ 205-67 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68
198:553
8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday to Friday and 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday.
(2) Truck idling restrictions. The idling of truck engines for more than
three consecutive minutes when the vehicle is not in motion shall
be prohibited except for the following:
(a) A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business
where the motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for
30 consecutive minutes;
(b) A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the
vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more hours;
(c) Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source
is utilized in whole or in part for necessary and definitively
prescribed mechanical operation other than propulsion,
passenger compartment heating or air conditioning;
(d) Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of connection,
detachment or exchange of trailers; and
(e) Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while being
used by the vehicle's operator for sleeping or resting in a
nonresidential area located a minimum of 300 feet from a
residential property line.
(3) Appropriate signs shall be posted both at the rear of the building
and on the buffer located to the rear of the parking lot. Said signs
shall indicate the following: "The idling of engines for more than
three minutes in a rear or side yard is prohibited and subject to a
fine not to exceed $1,000."
(4) Truck access restrictions applicable to warehouse/distribution
operations. Truck access to loading/unloading facilities in rear or
side yards abutting residential zones shall be restricted during the
hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday to Friday, and 8:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday by the installation of a fence with a
gate. Said gate shall remain closed during prohibited hours to keep
trucks out of rear or side yard areas. However, trucks stored at the
vehicle operator's place of business shall be permitted to be parked
overnight in side yard areas subject to truck idling restrictions of
this section.
(5) Inside operation of forklifts. The inside operation of forklifts and
inside loudspeaker system between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. Monday to Friday and 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday and
Sunday shall be prohibited unless all overhead doors within 300
feet of a residential use or residential zone remain closed.
(6) Outside loudspeakers prohibited. The installation of outside
loudspeakers shall be prohibited.
§ 205-68 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68
198:554
H. Standards for motor vehicle service stations. [Added 4-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-06]
(1) All motor vehicle service stations shall install and maintain a
working air pump for inflating tires.
(2) Any repair of vehicles shall take place in a fully enclosed building.
(3) No auto bodywork shall be permitted.
(4) If a retail/convenience building in excess of 2,000 square feet is
also located on the site, then appropriate space shall be delineated
to accommodate deliveries by a tractor trailer.
(5) A traffic study must document that all proposed means of ingress
and egress will operate at level of service E or better.
(6) If a retail/convenience building in excess of 2,000 square feet is
also located on the site, then appropriate provision shall be made
either on site or off site (subject to approval by the Township
Council if off site) to accommodate larger commercial vehicles such
as landscaping vehicles and utility body trucks, as well as for
tractor trailers, unless a plan is proffered to restrict tractor trailers
from entering the site.
(7) Any point of ingress/egress designed to restrict left-turn maneuvers
shall be designed to effectively make such maneuvers impractical.
(8) If a retail/convenience building in excess of 2,000 square feet is
also located on the site, and the site is located on Livingston
Avenue between Fleetwood and Bergen Avenue, then said site must
provide outdoor seating along the Livingston Avenue frontage to
accommodate patrons.
(9) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump islands only
if displayed in suitable racks.
(10) A ten-foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be provided between the
curb cuts and along all property lines.
(11) If a retail/convenience building in excess of 2,000 square feet is
also located on the site and the site is located on Livingston Avenue
between Fleetwood and Bergen Avenue, then brick, stone or
stamped concrete (or equivalent materials) pedestrian connections
must be provided to Livingston Avenue, and no pylon sign shall be
permitted on the Livingston Avenue frontage.
(12) Permitted signage for motor vehicle service stations include the
following:
(a) With the exception of Subsection H(11) above, one pylon
identification sign, internally illuminated, for each 300 feet of
§ 205-68 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68
198:555
frontage, not to exceed 20 feet in height and 75 square feet in
area on any one side.
(b) One portable A-frame sign approximately three feet by three
feet shall be permitted for each 300 feet of frontage.
(c) A sign pertaining to the products or services offered by the
service station may be displayed on the pylon sign, such sign
not to exceed two square feet.
(d) The use of all flags, windmills, banners and any flashing or
animated sign and the use of neon shall be prohibited, with the
exception of banners which may be utilized for the purpose of
advertising the opening of a new station for a ten-day period of
time.
§ 205-68 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68
198:556
ARTICLE XIVA
C-4 Nonrestricted Commercial District
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12103]
§ 205-68.1. Purpose.
§ 205-68.2. Applicability.
The C-4 District shall encompass the following properties:
§ 205-68.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Affordable housing is defined in this article
as it is defined in the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq., as same may be amended from time to time. Should the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act be amended to permit a municipality to meet all or
A. The purpose of this zone is to provide a new commercial district that
allows for general commercial uses as well as large retail
establishments and drive-in retail uses. However, retail centers that
include large retail establishments with individual users occupying in
excess of 50,000 square feet typically have several uninspiring design
features in common, including no-frill site plans that eschew connection
to the surrounding community and environs; plain vanilla,
standardized, rectangular single-story buildings; monolithic, smoothsurface
block facades; recognizable corporate color schemes; minimal
architectural details; massive asphalt parking lots covering several
acres; limited landscaping; few pedestrian amenities. The Township of
North Brunswick will not permit this standardized mediocrity. As a
result, the Township is enacting form-based guidelines that will require
the large retail establishments to relate better to the community and
have less negative impact upon the environment. This will be achieved
through integrating the large retail establishments into the fabric of the
development and the surrounding community.
B. The intent of the regulations incorporated herein is to bring pedestrians
and bicyclists into the site and to allow them to maneuver safely
throughout the site on a series of interconnected pedestrian pathways.
As a result of these regulations, large retail establishments will
incorporate pedestrian-scale features into the design of their buildings
and the parking lots that surround them.
A. Block 224, Lots 1 thorough 12, 12.01, 12.02 and 87; and Block 223, Lots
1, 2, and 3.01 through 3.03. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No.
10-28]
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that should § 205-68.4D(2)(a) be adjudged
invalid by the courts, this entire article shall be deemed invalid.
§ 205-68.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.3
198:557
some portion of its affordable housing obligation through the provision of
workforce housing, as this term is defined in the New Jersey Fair Housing
Act, then in this article "affordable housing" also means "workforce
housing" to the extent said housing can meet the affordable housing
obligation of the Township.
ARBOR — An open framework structure that forms a shelter, gateway
framework or bower. Its primary purpose is to be a semi-architectural place
for climbing plants to grow, while providing shaded seating, directional
form to frame a view or to create a private out-of-doors area. An arbor can
be arched or square-topped. It differs from a gazebo in that its roof area
is open to the elements, while a gazebo traditionally has a solid roof that
protects those seated beneath it from the elements.
ARCADE — A structure providing shade, cover or protection from the
elements, extending over a sidewalk or square, open to the street except for
supporting columns, piers or arches. Arcades shall have a minimum clear
height of 11 feet over a sidewalk and a minimum clear width of 10 feet
from the front of an adjacent building to the inside face of the columns
supporting the arcade. The area within an arcade shall be open to public
access. Supporting columns/piers shall be located no more than 230 inches
from the back of the curb. Where an arcade is built, the requirement for
street trees is waived for that street frontage.
ARCH — An opening in a building or wall through which pedestrians
or vehicles may pass. Building area over arches may contain walkways,
hallways or habitable space as the case may be and shall be not less than
nine feet over pedestrian ways and 15 feet over vehicular drives or streets.
Arches may also cross streets at a height of not less than 15 feet and shall
provide for vehicular and pedestrian passage in such instances.
AWNING — An ancillary lightweight structure usually of canvas,
cantilevered from a facade providing shade to the fenestration and spatial
containment to the pedestrian. Awnings, to be an effective adjunct to a shop
front, must thoroughly overlap the sidewalk and adhere to provisions found
in the comprehensive sign plan. Awnings may also be permitted to extend to
the curbline and shall be permitted to have structural supports that touch
down within the furniture zone of the street.
BALCONY/BALCONETTE — An exterior platform projecting from the front,
side or rear of a building. Balconies/balconettes must be surrounded by
balustrades (railings).
BIOSWALE — Landscape element designed to remove silt and pollution
from surface runoff water. It consists of a swaled drainage course with
gently sloped sides and filled with vegetation, compost and/or riprap. The
water's flow path, along with the wide and shallow ditch, are designed to
maximize the time water spends in the swale, which aids in the trapping of
pollutants and silt.
BLOCK — A contiguous grouping of private lots, passages, rear lanes and
alleys, surrounded by public streets.
§ 205-68.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.3
198:558
BREEZEWAY — A covered passage one or more stories in height connecting
a principal building and an accessory building.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area within a lot that can be occupied by
buildings. Buildable area sets the limits of the building footprint.
COLONNADE — A roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk,
open to the street and sidewalk except for supporting columns or piers.
COMMERCIAL MIXED USE — A building that contains dwellings and/or
office located above ground-floor commercial or retail use in a compact
setting that may or may not share infrastructure such as parking.
CORNICE — The topmost element, composed of moldings, for an
entablature, or used alone at the roofline or where walls abut ceilings.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by
the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the
exterior walls of a building, and an outer court is a court having one side
open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanently open space.
DECORATIVE PAVING — Paving that is made up of solid, precise, modular
units, stamped concrete, scored concrete, seeded concrete, colored
concrete or any combination of the above.
DORMER — A structure located within a roof providing a perpendicular
plane to the roof and generally containing a window or other ventilation
for the space below. Dormers are permitted and do not count against the
building story height restrictions, so long as they do not break the main
eave line and are individually less than 15 feet wide and collectively less
than 30% of the unit's width.
DUPLEX LOFT — A dwelling unit, with a private entrance, on an individual
lot, attached horizontally in a linear arrangement to another dwelling unit
on a separate individual lot, separated horizontally from the adjoining
dwelling unit by a wall extending vertically from the foundation of the
dwelling unit through the roof of the dwelling unit. The two adjoining units
shall be connected to each other by a ceiling and/or a floor, which ceiling
and/or floor extending from the exterior wall of one unit to the exterior wall
of the adjoining unit and which ceiling and/or floor are/is solid, continuous
and unbroken except for a common stairwell or elevator serving one or both
of the units.
DWELLING UNIT or UNIT — A residential space designed to be occupied by
a single household and which contains, at a minimum, a kitchen, bathroom
and other living space.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or
business where food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, are sold
for consumption on the premises, normally to patrons seated or standing
within an enclosed building on the premises. Eating and drinking
establishments may include commercial recreation facilities as an adjunct
to business within the same enclosed building.
§ 205-68.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.3
198:559
EAVE — The junction of a wall of a building and an overhanging roof. In
order to encourage pitched roofs, the designated maximum building height
may be measured to the eave, not to the top of the roof.
ENTABLATURE — An elaborated horizontal band along the exterior of a
building. Used primarily just beneath the roofline, sometimes used on the
facade between floors.
ESTIMATED ENERGY DEMAND — The quantity of electricity projected to
be consumed by a use, building or structure as determined by the Office of
Clean Energy estimated energy demand calculator or similar calculator or
tools used for determining load demand, including those utilized to obtain
electric service from a utility company.
FACADE — A building face or wall.
FACADE, PRIMARY — A building face or wall that faces a public street or
parking area containing more than 300 spaces.
FACADE, SECONDARY — A building face or wall that faces an interior
courtyard, parking area, service area, alley or rear of the building.
FASCIA — A projecting flat horizontal member or molding, also part of a
classical entablature.
FENESTRATION — An opening in the building wall allowing light and views
between interior and exterior spaces. Fenestration is measured as glass
area for occupied buildings and as open area for parking structures.
FRIEZE — An ornamental element, applied to the top of a horizontal
segment of a mantelpiece, with side supports serving as pilasters.
GABLE — The part of the end wall of a building between the eaves and a
pitched or gambrel roof. The gable orientation shows the vertical triangular
plane rather than the slope side of the roof.
GARAGE ENTRY — An opening in the building facade and/or street wall
where vehicles may enter the block interior for general parking and
business servicing. Garage entries shall not exceed 14 feet clear height and
24 feet clear width and shall not be sited within 200 feet of another garage
entry on the same block.
GREENWAY — An open space corridor in largely natural conditions which
may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living together.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A building or use providing for indoor
play, athletic events, competitions, practice, training and play equipment,
athletic training and related activities. Said uses may include eating and
drinking establishments.
KIOSK — An enclosed structure used for the sale of goods, services, food or
beverages. Kiosks may be located in civic plazas and squares and shall be
located a minimum of two feet from any curbline.
§ 205-68.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.3
198:560
LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Retail uses in excess of 50,000 square
feet. Large retail establishments (LRE) which may be either one story or two
stories in height, may include uses such as, but not limited to, membership
warehouse clubs, including the sale of motor fuels and the washing and
service of motor vehicles, home improvement stores, including lumber sales
and garden centers, and general retail sales of goods and services.
LEED — Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Program
sponsored by the United States Green Building Council to promote energyefficient
design of buildings and places.
LEED CERTIFICATION — A project or building that is designed to achieve
LEED certification is one that provides site or building elements that would
earn at least 40 points, according to the standards of LEED for New
Construction 2009 v.3.0, or LEED for Retail 2009 v.3.0, as the case may
be, as determined by the Township Planner, to exercise any of the density
bonuses provided under this article. Submission to the U.S. Green Building
Council is not required to exercise the density bonuses.
LINTEL — The topmost horizontal member over an opening, which helps
carry weight of the vertical structure above it.
LOFT FLAT — A building or portion thereof comprised of three or more
dwelling units which may or may not share common entrances and other
spaces.
MIXED-USE RETAIL COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building of two or
more stories comprised of mixed use retail commercial uses and/or large
retail establishments on the ground floor and other permitted uses located
predominantly on upper or nonground floors.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A building of two or more stories comprised of
dwelling units which share common facilities and which common facilities
may include, but are not limited to, halls, entrances, storage, garbage
disposal or parking.
PARAPET — A low wall encircling the perimeter of a flat building roof,
generally used to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
PEDIMENT — A crowning triangular element at the face of a roof or above
a door opening.
PERGOLA — Similar to arbors, which include an open framework structure
that forms a shelter. However, pergolas are commonly used to provide
directional form over walkways or to create a private outdoor seating or
patio area.
PERMITTED PROJECTION — Building elements that may be permitted
to extend over setback lines and street rights-of-way, including eaves not
more than 36 inches; bay windows, architectural corner elements and
other building areas, provided a minimum clearance over sidewalks and
pedestrian ways of 12 feet is maintained; canopies and marquees, provided
a minimum clearance of 12 feet is maintained over sidewalks and pedestrian
ways; entry doors not wider than 42 inches; cornices, pilasters and building
base courses not deeper than 24 inches; planters not deeper than 36 inches;
§ 205-68.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.3
198:561
stoops and entry stairs not deeper than 42 inches; balconies and balconettes
above the ground floor, not deeper than 60 inches; flag poles not located at
the ground floor, not projecting more than 10 feet; awnings, porticos, porte
cocheres, and other building elements incorporated for visual interest and
diversity.
PILASTER — A thin square column attached to a wall or to the corners of a
building, which matches the details of accompanying freestanding columns.
PLANTER — The element of the public streetscape, typically a pot or vessel,
which accommodates trees and/or other landscape plantings. Planters may
be continuous or individual.
PORCH — A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a
building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for
structural purposes.
PORTE COCHERE — A covered roof extending off the building facade which
allows a vehicle to park underneath it and passengers to access the building
without being exposed to the elements. Porte cochere may extend over
street areas at a minimum height of 14 feet.
PORTICO — An open-sided structure attached to a building, sheltering an
entrance or serving as a semienclosed space.
RAIN GARDEN — A planted depression that is designed to take as much as
possible of the excess rainwater runoff from a house or other building and
its associated landscaping.
RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATING EQUIPMENT — Equipment and
structures for the generation of renewable energy, including, but not limited
to, solar panels, wind turbines, fuel cells, geothermal heat pumps and
piping, and similar devices. Renewable energy generating equipment may
be attached to a building or freestanding, and except for freestanding wind
turbines, are exempt from height and setback requirements.
RESIDENTIAL FLAT — A building or portion thereof comprised of three or
more dwelling units which may or may not share common entrances and
other spaces.
SIGN A – FASCIA WALL SIGN — Signs consisting of individual raised letters
and logo forms that project no less than three inches and no more than 12
inches from the facade wall either attached to a panel or directly to the
building wall. Wall signs may be oriented horizontally or vertically along a
wall or pilaster. The painting of letters or logos directly on a wall surface
shall be prohibited.
SIGN B – MARQUEE CANOPY SIGN — Signs consisting of panels or letter
forms that are attached or project above a vertical surface of an
architectural marquee or canopy. They provide the main identity for tenants
where an entry canopy is part of the base building facade.
SIGN C – FEATURE SIGN — Larger format, multisided, illuminated
projecting signs. These signs may be mounted perpendicularly to the
§ 205-68.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.3
198:562
building facade and/or diagonally on a corner, providing visibility from
multiple directions.
SIGN D – PROJECTING BLADE SIGN — Projecting blade signs are mounted
perpendicular to the building facade or are suspended beneath an
architectural canopy or marquee or arcade.
SIGN E1 – AWNING SIGN — Primary identification signage that consists of
identity letters and graphics applied to the primary surface of the awning.
SIGN E2 – AWNING SIGN — Awning sign used as a secondary identification
signage; consists of identity graphics and letters on the valance of the
awning.
SIGN F – PLAQUE SIGN — Dimensional panels mounted flat against the
building facade.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is located unattached to any
building and structure. Freestanding signs may include pylon signs,
residential identification signs, and project decorative identification signs.
SIGN G – WINDOW SIGN — Tenant graphics placed directly on or behind
the glass of windows or doors. They can provide additional identity or be
graphical elements to add interest. They may also be skeletal neon signs
displaying the tenant's identity.
SIGN H – CHANGEABLE SIGN — Signs that are promotional or seasonal in
nature and fabricated such that imagery and information may be changed.
SIGN, ICON — An assemblage of alphanumeric characters, symbols or other
graphics displayed to identify the site as a whole.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – MOBILE RETAIL CART — Signs that are
affixed to a pedestrian-oriented mobile vendor or personal service
advertising the specific business, item(s) for sale or service.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – POSTING INFORMATION BOARD PLACARD
— A sign located on a designated posting information board advertising
a good or service located within the site, or an event sponsored in the
Township. Said signs may be posted for a period not to exceed 21 days.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – SHOWCASE DISPLAY WINDOW — Areas
available to the landlord, tenant and the community for three-dimensional
displays of merchandise, logos, seasonal displays, and special promotions.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – TEMPORARY SIGN — Signs intended to
be displayed for a limited time and that do not attach to the permanent
structure. Such signs are allowed in the building storefront frontage zone
and furniture zone of the sidewalk.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – UMBRELLA GRAPHICS — Restaurants and
cafes that choose to use umbrellas as shading devices are permitted to
incorporate graphics on the umbrellas. Said umbrellas must be kept in
clean, neat and workmanlike condition and may only display graphics of the
business or a product sold on the premises.
§ 205-68.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.3
198:563
SOLAR PANEL — A device or group of devices attached to a building to
provide passive generation of electricity from the sun.
SOLAR SCREEN — A device attached to a building to provide shading for
glazed areas thereof.
STOOP — A ground-floor entry platform at the front and/or street side of a
building. Stoops, where required or permitted, may be roofed but they may
not be enclosed.
SUSTAINABLE — Having the ability to accommodate and maintain
population growth and economic expansion through intelligent design.
TEXTURE — The exterior finish of a surface, ranging from smooth to coarse.
TOWNHOUSE — Three or more attached dwelling units, with each dwelling
unit sharing at least one fire-resistant common wall with another dwelling
unit. Each dwelling unit shall be between 18 feet and 36 feet wide and two
stories to four stories in height. Each dwelling unit shall have its own front
or rear access to the outside. Units may be stacked one over the other.
TRANSOM — A horizontal window above a door or window, usually
rectangular in shape.
TRELLIS — Lightweight elements used for controlling the shape or to
support climbing and other plants. In most instances, it is usually
constructed on a flat plane, in a two-dimensional way, unlike an arbor, which
is frequently a three-dimensional structure.
VERNACULAR — A regional adaptation of an architectural style or styles.
§ 205-68.4. Permitted uses and prohibited uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. The following uses and/or any combination
thereof in a single building are permitted principal uses in the C-4
Unrestricted Commercial District:
(1) All uses permitted in § 205-67 for the C-2 General Commercial
District with the exception of § 205-67A(18).
(2) Affordable housing units, other than single- and two-family units,
not to exceed those incurred by the Township as an affordable
housing obligation as a result of the development of a large retail
establishment as a conditional use in the zone.
(3) Restaurant and eating and drinking places.
(4) Businesses that have drive-in operations and are otherwise
permitted shall be permitted.
(5) Indoor recreation facilities.
(6) Day-care centers and elder-care centers.
(7) Congregate care.
§ 205-68.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.4
198:564
(8) Nursing home.
(9) Warehouses and distribution facilities. [Added 2-18-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-04]
B. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the C-4
Unrestricted Commercial District:
(1) Single- and two-family residential units.
(2) Adult book stores and adult entertainment.
(3) Pawn shops.
(4) Check-cashing establishments.
(5) Adult entertainment of any type.
(6) Theaters.
C. Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in a C-4 Unrestricted Commercial District:
(1) Uses and buildings customarily accessory and incidental to
permitted uses.
(2) Flagpoles and clock towers.
(3) Signage.
(4) Solar panels and geothermal heating and cooling equipment.
(5) Surface parking lots.
(6) Kiosks and street vending carts.
(7) Temporary buildings or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(8) Temporary construction trailers.
D. Conditional uses:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in § 205-67D with the exception of
§ 205-67D(3).
(2) Large retail establishments, subject to meeting the following
standards:
(a) The developer of a large retail establishment shall build
affordable housing units on site as necessary in order to meet
but not to exceed the affordable housing obligation incurred by
the Township, if any, as a result of the large retail
establishment.
§ 205-68.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.4
198:565
§ 205-68.5. Development and design standards.
(b) A large retail establishment shall be designed to qualify to
achieve LEED certification.
(c) Failure of a large retail establishment to make provision on site
for all affordable housing obligation incurred by the Township,
or failure of the development to be designed to qualify for
LEED certification, shall result in the large retail establishment
not meeting the criteria for a conditional use in the zone, and
shall result in the application being declared a D variance
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), thereby causing the Planning
Board to lack jurisdiction over the application.
A. All development standards in § 205-68 for the C-2 General Commercial
District shall apply.
B. If a large retail establishment is constructed as part of a shopping
center, lots and uses are not required to front on a public street for the
purposes of subdivision, provided that adequate vehicular, emergency
and pedestrian access is provided to individual lots and uses thereon.
C. Large retail establishments shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet
from the nearest existing residential use, and a minimum of 150 feet
from any proposed residential use on the site.
D. Each freestanding large retail establishment constructed pursuant to
this subsection shall utilize renewable energy, such as, but not limited
to, solar, wind, fuel cells or geothermal power to produce a minimum of
10% of its estimated energy demand.
E. The following development and design standards shall apply to all large
retail establishments and warehouse and distribution facilities:
[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size for retail establishements (commercial): 50,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum tract boundary setbacks: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum lot front setback: zero feet from the front lot line and
a minimum of 20 feet from site access roads and six feet from
any drive or parking aisle.
(e) Minimum lot side setback: zero feet.
(f) Minimum lot rear setback: zero feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 50 feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
§ 205-68.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.5
198:566
(2) Required site access. The following site access and circulation
dimensions are required in order to accommodate safe and efficient
site access and on-site circulation:
(a) All site access driveway roadway widths shall be 30 feet if they
are not designated as a truck delivery route. Truck delivery
routes shall be 40 feet in width.
(b) The minimum driveway throat length between the intersecting
roadway and the first access to off-street parking or an
intersecting driveway shall be 100 feet.
(c) Each LRE shall have a physically disabled passenger loading
zone adjacent to and within 50 feet of the main entrance, said
loading zone being a minimum of 40 feet in length and eight
feet in width, with an accessible access path not less than 60
inches wide for the length of said zone and leading to the
entrance.
(d) All projected LREs shall provide along the main facade of the
building for a bus loading/unloading area to accommodate
local bus service to the large retail establishment.
(3) Facades and exterior walls.
(a) Facades and exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce the
massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of
LREs and provide visual interest that will be compatible with
the character of future shop front retail.
(b) Ground-floor facades greater than 100 feet in length,
measured horizontally that face a public street and are within
200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor facades that face
an off-street parking area with 200 or more parking spaces,
shall incorporate wall plane projections, arcades or recesses
having a depth of at least 2% of the length of the facade and
extending at least 20% of the length of the facade in aggregate.
No uninterrupted length of any facade addressed by this
section shall exceed 100 horizontal feet.
(c) Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are within
200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor facades that face
an off-street parking area with 200 or more parking spaces,
shall provide display windows, windows, or transparent,
translucent or opaque glass treatments along no less than 40%
of their horizontal length. Required display windows, windows,
or transparent, translucent or opaque glass treatments shall
occupy no less than 40% of the area between grade level and
10 feet above grade level, inclusive of any glass entry doors.
(d) Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are within
200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor facades that face
§ 205-68.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.5
198:567
an off-street parking area with 200 or more parking spaces,
shall provide arcades, articulated entry areas, awnings or
other such features along no less than 50% of their horizontal
length.
(e) Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall
include the following elements: color change; texture change;
material module change; and expression of architectural or
structural bays through a change in plane no less than 12
inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. All
elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 50 feet
horizontally along the length of the building.
(f) Each building shall be required to display an articulated base
and roofline or cornice. The base and cornice line shall each
equal at least 5% of facade height, and in no instance shall the
base be less than four feet high and the cornice be less than
two feet high. The base and cornice may be interrupted for
required windows and doors as necessary.
(g) Permitted fascia wall signs shall consist of individual raised
letters and logo forms that project no less than six inches and
no more than 12 inches from the facade wall either attached to
a panel or directly to the building wall.
(4) Materials and colors.
(a) Colors for large retail establishments shall be in accordance
with the Schedule of Approved Colors contained herein, which
may be obtained from any manufacturer. The approved color
palettes may be cross referenced with any major paint
company color palette.
Schedule of Approved Colors
a) Weathered Oak pp) Bronze Glow
b) Bronze Green qq) Silver Gray
c) Gold Buff rr) Deep Blue
d) Brickstone ss) Chincilla Gray
e) Cherry Bark tt) Ivory
f) Slate uu) Shingle Gray
g) Spruce Shadow vv) Emporium Blue
h) Bayonne Blue ww) White fawn
i) Antique Velvet xx) Woodbine
j) Mississippi Clay yy) Creole
k) Pine Mountain zz) Colonial Sage
l) Dark Grey Heather aaa) Olive
m) Deauville Sand bbb) Red Sienna
§ 205-68.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.5
198:568
Schedule of Approved Colors
n) Henna Red ccc) Picket Fence
o) Nimbus ddd) Roccoco Yellow
p) Laurel Green eee) Dark Denim
q) Niagra Green fff) Gold ecru
r) Dark Rosewood ggg) Seacrest Green
s) Mushroom Brown hhh) Cottage Green
t) Terra Verte iii) Bay Rum
u) Olive Brown jjj)
v) Burgandy Velvet kkk)
w) Shale lll) Bullrush Beige
x) Midnight Blue Grass mmm) Green Stone
y) Old Brass nnn) Oak Buff
z) Maple nut ooo) Pale Umber
aa) Traditional navy ppp) Weathered Fence
bb) Ashlar Gray qqq) Clippership
cc) Blue Stone rrr) Argent Gray
dd) Elderberry sss) Blue
ee) Beige ttt) Scrimshaw
ff) Brownstone uuu) Moonbeam Gray
gg) Weathered Walnut vvv) Eaton Greene
hh) Old ivory www) Misty Morn
ii) Fern Green xxx) Mansion Stone
jj) Hemlock yyy) Ashen Rose
kk) Gull Grey zzz) French White
ll) Juniper Green aaaa) Flemish Blue
mm) Sand bbbb) Baltic Blue
nn) Platinum cccc) Wheat
oo) Paynes Blue Gray dddd) Pale Copper
eeee) Final Bronze
§ 205-68.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.5
198:569
(b) Exterior building materials and colors should be compatible
with materials and colors shown in the Schedule of Approved
Colors.104
(c) Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer.
(d) Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in the Schedule of
Approved Colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic
colors, black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
(e) Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors as provided in the Schedule of
Approved Colors.
(f) Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured stone,
painted or treated metal, composite materials, high-density
plastic, fiberglass-reinforced polyurethane, grid-reinforced
cement and equivalent materials, and painted or stained wood.
(g) Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
(h) Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in the Schedule of Approved Colors.105
(i) Building elevations of all sides of a large retail establishment
indicating compliance with article standards shall be
submitted as part of any preliminary site plan approval
application.
(j) Physical samples of all proposed building materials and colors
shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and
104. Editor's Note: See § 205-68.5E(4)(a).
105. Editor's Note: See § 205-68.5E(4)(a).
§ 205-68.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.5
198:570
approval as part of any preliminary site plan approval
application.
(k) All expansion joints shall be disguised with architectural
elements such as piers, recesses, projecting facade elements
or material changes.
(5) Entryways.
(a) Each large retail establishment shall have clearly defined,
visible customer entrances featuring no less than four of the
following:
[1] Canopies or porticos.
[2] Overhangs.
[3] Recesses/projections.
[4] Arcades.
[5] Raised corniced parapets over the door.
[6] Peaked roof forms.
[7] Arches.
[8] Outdoor patios.
[9] Display windows.
[10] Multiple entryways.
[11] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which
are integrated into the building structure and design.
[12] Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape
areas and/or places for sitting.
(b) The primary entryway shall be not less than 133% of the height
of the wall of the principal building. This requirement may be
reduced to not less than 120% of the height of the principal
building upon the inclusion of a unique or distinctive
architectural treatment or design element at the primary
entryway.
(c) Where additional stores will be located in the LRE, each such
store may have at least one additional exterior customer
entrance, which entrance shall conform to the above
requirements.
(d) Uses requiring door or window security gates shall be
permitted to install mesh or lattice gates on the interior of
windows and doors. Exterior or solid security gates or solid
rollup doors that do not permit the passage of light are
§ 205-68.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.5
198:571
prohibited. Loading areas that are screened from the view
of public streets and parking areas containing in excess of
200 parking spaces shall be exempt from this requirement.
Alternatively, loading areas may be recessed from the primary
building facade facing a public street or parking area
containing more than 200 parking spaces by not less than 60
feet and be exempt from said screening requirement.
(e) Merchant displays shall be limited to not more than six feet
deep along 40% of the facade length. Merchant displays shall
be removed and stored inside an enclosed building or space
each evening upon store closing.
(6) Roofs.
(a) Roof features should be used to complement the character of
the mixed-use retail and any residential development.
Variations in rooflines shall be used to add interest to, and
reduce the massive scale of, large buildings and such
variations shall be no less than three feet in height and shall
occur no less than every 100 feet. Roofs shall have no less than
two of the following features:
[1] Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment from
public view. The average height of such parapets shall not
exceed 25% of the height of the supporting wall and such
parapets shall not at any point exceed 33% of the height of
the supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature threedimensional
cornice treatment.
[2] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
the supporting walls.
[3] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the
supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or
equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of
horizontal run, and less than or equal to one foot of
vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run.
[4] Three or more roof slope planes.
[5] All facades shall provide an articulated cornice at the eave
line or parapet line a minimum of two feet in height and
projecting a minimum of one foot from the facade.
(b) Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate, tile,
metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs concealed by a
parapet may be any material.
(7) Off-street parking and loading.
(a) No more than 70% of the required off-street parking for any
large retail establishment building shall be located between
§ 205-68.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.5
198:572
§ 205-68.6. Contribution toward affordable housing.
The Township shall contribute any and all affordable housing fees required
to be paid by the developer of a large retail establishment to the developer
of the large retail establishment in order to help defer the cost of the
production of required affordable housing on site.
§ 205-68.7. Green-engineering performance standards.
The following green-engineering performance standards shall be met by the
development:
§ 205-68.8. Landscaping and lighting.
the street frontage and the particular building's front
elevation. All remaining off-street parking shall be located
outside of the area delineated by this standard.
(b) Loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets
and parking areas containing more than 200 parking spaces by
a solid masonry screen wall at least eight feet high. Required
screen walls shall be faced with an approved facade building
material compatible with the primary building facade, and
have an articulated vertical element not less than every 15 feet
along the length of said wall. Alternatively, loading areas that
are recessed by a minimum of 60 feet from the primary
building facade facing a public street or a parking area
containing in excess of 200 parking spaces shall be deemed to
comply with the screening requirement.
(8) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be screened
from view from large parking areas, the street on which the
building fronts, and from US Route 130: air compressors,
mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility
and telephone company meters or boxes, garbage cans for
individual uses, trash compactors and dumpsters and storage
tanks.
A. All large retail establishments shall be designed to achieve LEED
certification. Paperwork indicating proposed scoring for achieving
LEED certification shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development for approval with the submission of documents for
conditional use and preliminary site plan approval.
B. All parking lot lights shall be LED (light-emitting diodes). Other exterior
lighting, including interior lighting for exterior identification signs,
shall be LED or equivalent energy-saving technology available at the
time of construction, dependent upon availability of suitable
architectural lighting.
§ 205-68.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.8
198:573
A. Xeriscape landscape principles. All landscaping plans shall be designed
to incorporate water conservation materials and techniques though
application of xeriscape landscaping principles, which do not allow
artificial plants, mulched (including gravel) beds or areas without
landscape plant material, paving of areas not required for walkways,
plazas or parking lots, bare ground, weed-covered or infested surfaces.
The following landscaping principles shall apply:
(1) Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together
on the same irrigation zones.
(2) High-irrigation turf and plantings shall be limited to appropriate
high-use areas with high visibility and functional needs.
(3) Low-water-demanding plants and turf shall be used where
practicable.
B. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) All parking lot islands, connecting walkways through parking lots
and driveways through or to parking lots shall be landscaped with a
combination of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs suitable
to a parking environment.
(2) Five percent of the interior space of all parking lots shall be
landscaped or public plaza areas.
(3) An intervening island a minimum of eight feet wide shall be
provided between every 11 parking spaces along a row.
(4) An intervening island a minimum of eight feet wide shall be
provided between every three bays of parking or every 200 feet,
whichever is less.
C. Parking lot lighting.
(1) All parking areas shall be illuminated to provide a safe pedestrian
and vehicle operating environment.
(2) The mounting height of parking lot light fixtures shall not exceed
the height of the tallest building fronting on the parking area or 30
feet, whichever is less.
(3) All parking lot lighting shall be shielded and directed downward to
minimize incidence of sky glow and minimize impact on residential
uses.
(4) All parking lot lighting shall be LED or equivalent energy-saving
technology available at the time of construction.
D. Streetlighting.
(1) A comprehensive lighting plan shall be established and approved
by the Planning Board at the time of site plan approval.
§ 205-68.8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.8
198:574
§ 205-68.9. Off-street and shared parking requirements.
(2) The operation of search lights and other upward-directed and
moving lights used to promote business activity is strictly
prohibited.
A. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Parking requirement matrix: [Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No.
20-04]
Use Parking Required
Banks 5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Bed-and-breakfast inn 1 space/room
Civic 2 spaces/1,000 square feet
Fitness center 4 spaces/1,000 square feet
Hotel/extended-stay hotel 1 space/room
Indoor recreation facilities 30 spaces/field or court
Large retail establishments 4.5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Retail 4.5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Office 3.3 spaces/1,000 square feet
Residential 1.5 space/unit
Restaurant/eating and drinking
establishments
10 spaces/1,000 square feet
Warehouse and distribution
facilities
1 space/2,500 square feet
(2) Shared parking matrix. The matrix indicates the percentage of
peak parking demand required by time of day for each use.
6:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
9:00
a.m.
10:00
a.m.
11:00
a.m.
12:00
noon
% Large
retail
establishments
2% 10% 10% 35% 65% 85% 95%
% Main
Street retail
2% 10% 10% 35% 65% 85% 95%
% Hotel 95% 90% 84% 79% 74% 69% 64%
% Civic 2% 5% 15% 42% 65% 76% 51%
%
Residential
lofts
96% 83% 83% 51% 44% 40% 37%
% Office 2% 2% 68% 80% 90% 95% 90%
§ 205-68.8 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.9
198:575
6:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
9:00
a.m.
10:00
a.m.
11:00
a.m.
12:00
noon
%
Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 5% 10% 25% 64%
% Fitness
center/
indoor rec.
70% 45% 45% 70% 70% 80% 60%
% Commuter
parking
10% 50% 80% 98% 100% 100% 97%
1:00
p.m.
2:00
p.m.
3:00
p.m.
4:00
p.m.
5:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
7:00
p.m.
% Large
retail
establishments
100% 95% 95% 88% 85% 87% 90%
% Main
Street retail
100% 95% 95% 88% 85% 87% 90%
% Hotel 65% 69% 75% 75% 70% 67% 75%
% Civic 72% 75% 100% 85% 79% 46% 98%
%
Residential
lofts
34% 34% 34% 37% 45% 68% 78%
% Office 80% 80% 95% 92% 62% 33% 10%
%
Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
65% 74% 31% 50% 39% 72% 100%
% Fitness
center/
indoor rec.
70% 70% 70% 80% 90% 100% 90%
% Commuter
parking
92% 87% 77% 70% 65% 50% 33%
8:00
p.m.
9:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.
11:00
p.m.
12:00
midnight
% Large retail
establishments
85% 70% 38% 20% 0.1%
% Main Street
retail
85% 70% 38% 20% 0.1%
% Hotel 67% 67% 67% 67% 67%
§ 205-68.9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.9
198:576
§ 205-68.10. Signage.
8:00
p.m.
9:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.
11:00
p.m.
12:00
midnight
% Library 83% 45% 1% 0.1% 0.1%
% Residential
lofts
86% 91% 93% 96% 98%
% Office 5% 3% 1% 1% 0.1%
% Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
88% 67% 45% 10% 8%
% Fitness
center/indoor
rec.
80% 70% 30% 10% 1%
% Commuter
parking
20% 10% 5% 3% 2%
A. Signage shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations
and standards:
(1) Retail/restaurant tenants under 25,000 square feet leasable area:
Signage Matrix for Retail/Restaurant Tenants under 25,000
Square Feet Leaseable Area
Total maximum allowable signage per tenant less than 25,000
square feet is not to exceed 1.5 square feet per lineal foot of
tenant frontage for primary identification signage and 0.75 square
foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage for secondary identification
signage. Primary identification signage is not to exceed a total of
225 square feet. Secondary identification signage is not to exceed
100 square feet. Maximum letter/logo height is three feet unless
otherwise approved.
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–fascia wall sign 1.5 square feet per
lineal foot tenant
frontage
75 square feet
§ 205-68.9 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.10
198:577
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Type B 3 square feet per
lineal foot of
marquee or
canopy
75 square feet
Type C 1.5 square feet per
lineal foot of
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
1.5 square feet per
lineal foot of
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting blade
sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight
inches in height
20 square feet per
awning
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door sign 15% of glazing
area
10 square feet per
structural bay
Type H–changeable sign
a. Shadow boxes 6 square feet
b. Poster display
cases
60 square feet
c. Banners 1 banner per
structural building
bay
50 square feet per
banner
d. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
§ 205-68.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.10
198:578
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
e. Display stands/
easels
1 per street
frontage
8 square feet
Type J–additional signs
a. Mobile retail cart Total for each cart 16 square feet
b. Posting
information
board placard
Per sign (up to 24
square feet
maximum per PIB)
8 square feet
c. Temporary sign 1 per street
frontage per use
12 square feet
d. Construction sign 1 per tenant 40 square feet
e. Showcase display
windows
1 per
unfenestrated wall
in excess of 16
feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
f. Umbrella
graphics
1 per umbrella 1 per table
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, B, C, E1). Tenants under 25,000
square feet with frontage on one principal street shall be
permitted one of the A, B, C or E1 sign types as the primary
identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with frontage on
two principal streets or parking areas may be permitted to have a
total of any three of the A, B or E1 sign types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants may
be allowed to use a total of three of the D, E2, F, G, H sign types.
(2) Major office tenants:
Signage Matrix for Major Office Tenants
Total maximum allowable signage per office tenant greater than
7,500 square feet is not to exceed 0.75 square foot per lineal
foot of tenant frontage for primary identification signage and
0.5 square foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage for secondary
identification signage. Primary identification signage is not to
exceed a total of 150 square feet. Secondary identification signage
is not to exceed 75 square feet. Maximum letter/logo height is
three feet unless otherwise approved.
§ 205-68.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.10
198:579
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–fascia wall sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Type B–marquee/canopy
sign
1.5 square feet
per lineal foot of
marquee or
canopy
50 square feet
Type C–feature sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting blade
sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight
inches in height
20 square feet per
awning
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door sign 15% of glazing
area
10 square feet per
structural bay
Type H–changeable sign
a. Banners 1 banner per
structural
building bay
50 square feet per
banner
§ 205-68.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.10
198:580
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
b. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
Type J–additional signs
a. Temporary sign 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet
b. Construction sign 1 per tenant 40 square feet
c. Showcase display
windows
1 per
unfenestrated
wall in excess of
16 feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, B, C, E1). Tenants over 7,500
square feet with frontage on one principal street shall be
permitted one of the A, B, C or E1 sign types as the primary
identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with frontage on
two principal streets or parking areas may be permitted to have a
total of any three of the A, B, C or E1 sign types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants may
be allowed to use a total of three of the D, E2, F, G, H sign types.
(3) Minor office tenants:
Signage Matrix for Minor Office Tenants
Total maximum allowable signage per office tenant less than 7,500
square feet is not to exceed 0.75 square foot per lineal foot of
tenant frontage for primary identification signage and 0.5 square
foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage for secondary identification
signage. Primary identification signage is not to exceed a total of
50 square feet (80 square feet for tenants in corner locations or
with frontage on two primary streets or parking areas). Secondary
identification signage is not to exceed 50 square feet. Maximum
letter/logo height is 1.5 feet unless otherwise approved.
§ 205-68.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.10
198:581
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–fascia wall sign 0.25 square foot
per lineal foot
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type C–feature sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting blade
sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight
inches in height
20 square feet per
awning
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door sign 15% of glazing
area
10 square feet per
structural bay
Type H–changeable sign
a. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
Type J–additional signs
a. Temporary sign 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet
b. Construction sign 1 per tenant 24 square feet
§ 205-68.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.10
198:582
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
c. Showcase display
windows
1 per
unfenestrated
wall in excess of
16 feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, C, E1). Tenants under 7,500
square feet with frontage on one principal street shall be
permitted one of the A, C or E1 sign types as the primary
identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with frontage on
two principal streets or parking areas may be permitted to have a
total of any three of the A, C or E1 sign types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants may
be allowed to use a total of any three of the D, E2, F, G, H sign
types.
(4) Retail/hotel tenants in excess of 25,000 square feet leasable area:
Signage Matrix for Retail/Hotel Tenants in Excess of 25,000
Square Feet Leaseable Area
The total maximum allowable signage per tenant of 25,000 square
feet or greater is not to exceed the square footage in the chart
below. The maximum letter/logo height is seven feet
Tenant
Leaseable Area
Primary Identification
Signage Maximum
Allowable
Maximum
Combined
Allowable for
All Sign
Types Used
Single Sign Aggregate
25,000 square
feet to 50,000
square feet
250 square
feet
250 square
feet
300 square
feet
50,000 square
feet to 75,000
square feet
300 square
feet
400 square
feet
500 square
feet
75,000 square
feet to 99,999
square feet
350 square
feet
450 square
feet
600 square
feet
§ 205-68.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-68.10
198:583
§ 205-68.11. Application procedure.
Tenant
Leaseable Area
Primary Identification
Signage Maximum
Allowable
Maximum
Combined
Allowable for
All Sign
Types Used
100,000 square
feet to 125,000
square feet
400 square
feet
600 square
feet
800 square
feet
125,000 square
feet to 150,000
square feet
500 square
feet
750 square
feet
1,000 square
feet
150,000 square
feet or greater
600 square
feet
900 square
feet
1,200 square
feet
(5) Large retail establishments:
(a) Leasable area is gross square footage on all levels.
(b) Sign area restrictions for secondary identification signage for
retail tenants less than 25,000 square feet shall apply, except
all size limitation shall be increased by 50%.
(c) Primary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose two of the following as their primary identification
signs: Type A fascia wall sign, Type B marquee/canopy sign,
Type C feature sign, Type E1 awning sign.
(d) Secondary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose four of the following as their secondary identification
signs: Type D blade sign, Type E2 awning sign, Type F plaque
sign, Type G window/door sign, Type H changeable sign.
A. Preliminary subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this
chapter and utilize the checklist in Appendix C.106
B. Preliminary site plan approval shall be in accordance with this chapter
and utilize the checklist in Appendix A,107 except for items 10, 17, 22,
23, 26, 34 through 39, 42 through 55 and 58, which may be deferred
until final site plan approval.
C. Final subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this chapter and
utilize checklist in Appendix D.108
106. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-68.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-68.11
198:584
ARTICLE XV
G-O General Office District
[Amended 1-21-1980; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-69. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in G-O General Office Districts:
§ 205-70. Development standards.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
(2) Banks and financial offices.
(3) Medical and dental offices and clinics.
(4) Professional offices.
(5) Real estate and other general business offices.109
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Other customary uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to
the principal use and building.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. Office buildings shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 1.0. The maximum
floor area ratio of 1.0 shall be permitted only if the proposed project is
designed to accommodate all required off-street parking spaces.
B. Where a proposed office development abuts a residential zone or a lot
developed for residential uses, an additional thirty-foot buffer strip,
designed in accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI, shall be
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), Theaters, which immediately followed this
subsection, added 5-15-1995, was repealed 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10.
§ 205-69 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-70
198:585
§ 205-70.1. Area required for planned office park development.
Planned office park development may be permitted in the G-O Zone,
provided that the site to be developed shall contain a minimum of 20 acres.
§ 205-70.2. Permitted uses for planned office park development.
The following uses are permitted in a planned office park development:
added to any required rear or side yard which abuts said residential
use.
C. Front yard areas may be utilized for parking, provided that no such
parking shall be closer than 10 feet to the street line.
D. All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general provisions
under Article IV.
E. All properties and uses are subject to the performance standards as
specified in Article XXVII.
F. Nonconforming residential uses located in this zone shall be permitted
to have accessory buildings and uses permitted in the R-2 Zone in
accordance with the provisions of the R-2 Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
(2) Banks and financial offices.
(3) Medical and dental offices and clinics.
(4) Professional offices.
(5) Real estate and other general business offices.
(6) Experimental, research or testing laboratories, provided that no
operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would
create hazardous, noxious or offensive conditions beyond the
boundaries of the property involved.
(7) Administrative and general offices where no manufacturing is
performed.
(8) Federal, state, county and municipal buildings and grounds.
(9) Banks.
(10) Educational services, but excluding primary and secondary schools
and colleges.
(11) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
§ 205-70 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-70.2
198:586
§ 205-70.3. Development standards for planned office park
development.
Development standards for planned office park developments shall be as
follows:
(12) Conference and training facilities, including assembly halls and
associated housing for such conference and training facilities,
which relate to the operations and functions of the various uses
permitted in this section.
(13) Computer and data processing facilities.
(14)Office uses and regional sales facilities in combination with
warehousing and distribution operations, provided that such
warehousing and distribution operations do not exceed 20% of the
facility by area.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Private recreation uses intended to provide recreational
opportunities to individuals and employees associated with
businesses and facilities contained within the planned office park
development.
(4) Other customary uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to
the principal use and building.
A. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 350 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet from U.S. Route 1 and U.S.
Route 130, and 60 feet from all other streets.
(5) Minimum side yard setback.
(a) Either side: 40 feet.
§ 205-70.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-70.3
198:587
(b) Total of both sides: 80 feet, except that wherever a side lot line
in this zone abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential
zone, a side yard of 175 feet shall be required.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet, except that wherever a rear
lot line in this zone abuts a lot in a single-family detached
residential zone, a rear yard of 175 feet shall be required.
(7) Building height and setback.
(a) Maximum building height shall be 60 feet, except that
wherever a building is to be constructed on a lot in this zone
which abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential zone,
the following schedule shall apply:
[1] Thirty-five feet, provided that wherever a building is to be
constructed on a lot in this zone the side or rear lot line of
which abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential
zone, a building setback of 175 feet shall be provided,
which shall include a one-hundred-foot buffer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
[2] Forty feet, provided that wherever a building is to be
constructed on a lot in this zone the side or rear lot line of
which abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential
zone, a building setback of 200 feet shall be provided,
which shall include a one-hundred-foot buffer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
[3] Fifty feet, provided that wherever a building is to be
constructed on a lot in this zone the side or rear lot line of
which abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential
zone, a building setback of 250 feet shall be provided,
which shall include a one-hundred-twenty-five-foot buffer
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
[4] Sixty feet, provided that wherever a building is to be
constructed on a lot in this zone the side or rear lot line of
which abuts a lot in a single-family detached residential
zone, a building setback of 300 feet shall be provided,
which shall include a one-hundred-fifty-foot buffer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(b) Buildings to be constructed on lots which do not abut a singlefamily
detached residential zone shall be set back from the
boundary line of a single-family detached residential zone in
accordance with the minimum setback requirements of
Subsection A(7)(a).
(8) Required buffer. Required side and rear yard setbacks shall include
a thirty-foot landscaped buffer designed in accordance with Article
§ 205-70.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-70.3
198:588
XXVI when said side or rear yard abuts a residentially zoned or
developed lot.
(9) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
B. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
C. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply
in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building.
(2) Detached accessory buildings, yard utility buildings and storage
buildings are permitted in the rear yard only, but may not be
constructed or installed within any required buffer area.
(3) On through lots, no accessory buildings erected in the rear yard
shall be nearer the street line than the minimum distance specified
for a front yard setback on that part of the street which said yard
abuts.
(4) Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all
property lines, except that where the yard abuts a single-family
detached residential zone, the accessory building shall be set back
a minimum of 40 feet.
D. Other provisions.
(1) No railroad tracks or siding shall be erected within 150 feet of any
side or rear lot that abuts a residential zone or use.
(2) The installation of railroad tracks shall be subject to the North
Brunswick ordinance included as Chapter 111, Railroad Tracks, of
this Code.
(3) All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general
provisions of Article IV.
(4) No parking area or driveway shall be located within 50 feet of any
side or rear lot line that abuts a lot in a single-family detached
residential zone.
(5) No tree having a diameter of more than three inches and a height
of three feet from the ground and located within 100 feet of any
side or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone or lot utilized for
residential purposes shall be removed unless such removal is in
accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.
§ 205-70.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-70.3
198:589
(6) All properties and uses are subject to the performance standards as
specified in Article XXVII.
(7) Nonconforming residential uses located in this zone shall be
permitted to have accessory buildings and uses permitted in the
R-2 Zone in accordance with the provisions of the R-2 Zone.
§ 205-70.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-70.3
198:590
ARTICLE XVI
I-1 Industrial District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-71. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in I-1 Industrial Districts:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Light manufacturing, processing, producing or fabricating
operations which meet the performance standards for the zone,
provided that all operations and activities, except parking, are
conducted within enclosed buildings and that there is no outside
storage of material, equipment or refuse.
(2) Experimental, research or testing laboratories, provided that no
operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would
create hazardous, noxious or offensive operations beyond the
boundaries of the property involved.
(3) Administrative and general offices where no manufacturing is
performed.
(4) Federal, state, county and municipal buildings and grounds.
(5) Warehouses and distribution centers.110
(6) Billboards, subject to the provisions of Article XXV, § 205-105I.
[Added 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06111]
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(4) Billboards, subject to the provisions of Article XXV, § 205-105I.
[Added 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06112]
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), Theaters, which immediately followed this
subsection, added 5-15-1995, was repealed 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10.
111. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 7-1-2016.
§ 205-71 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-71
198:591
§ 205-72. Development standards.
Developments standards shall be as follows:
§ 205-73. Industrial park development.
Planned industrial park development may be permitted in the I-1 Zone,
provided that the site to be developed shall contain a minimum of 10 acres.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
A. Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet from U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route
130, and 60 feet from all other streets.
B. Where a proposed nonresidential development abuts a residential zone
or a lot developed for residential uses, an additional thirty-foot buffer
strip, designed in accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI,
shall be added to any required rear or side yard which abuts said
residential use.
C. Accessory buildings: same as specified in § 205-70.3C for planned office
park development in the G-O Zone.
D. Other provisions: same as specified in § 205-70.3D for planned office
park development in the G-O Zone.
E. Loading/unloading and truck idling restrictions: same as specified in
§ 205-68G for the C-2 General Commercial District. [Added 7-6-1993]
A. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size for industrial park development: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks. Minimum rear and side yard
setbacks may be reduced proportionately to the individual
reductions in lot area.
B. Other provisions. All other requirements for industrial development
shall conform to those established under the I-1 District and other
applicable requirements of this chapter.
112. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 7-1-2016.
§ 205-71 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-73
198:592
ARTICLE XVII
I-2 Industrial District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-74. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in I-2 Industrial Districts:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Light manufacturing, processing, producing or fabrication
operations which meet the performance standards for the zone,
provided that all operations and activities, except parking, are
conducted within enclosed buildings and that there is not outside
storage of material, equipment or refuse.
(2) Experimental, research or testing laboratories, provided that no
operation shall be conducted or testing operation shall be
conducted or equipment used which would create hazardous,
noxious or offensive conditions beyond the boundaries of the
property involved.
(3) Administrative and general offices where no manufacturing is
performed.
(4) Federal, state, county and municipal buildings and grounds.
(5) Warehouses and distribution centers.
(6) Sheet metal fabricating, provided that no danger to life, limb or
property is created beyond the limits of the lot and that no
objectionable noise, smoke, dust, gas, glare or effluent is emitted
the effect of which is noticeable outside the I-2 Industrial Zone.
(7) (Reserved)113
(8) Hotel and commercial uses necessary to support development of a
research park, provided that no commercial facilities shall be
located in freestanding commercial buildings. [Added 4-29-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
(9) Medical and dental clinics associated with development activities
in the research park. [Added 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(10) Computer and data processing uses. [Added 4-29-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-10]
(11) Private, for-profit training and educational facilities. [Added
4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
B. Required accessory uses.
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), Theaters, added 5-15-1995, was repealed
4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10.
§ 205-74 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-74
198:593
§ 205-75. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
§ 205-75.1. Development standards for sites with 50 or more acres.
[Added 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
§ 205-75.2. General development plans permitted; conditions
required. [Added 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10; amended 4-15-2013
by Ord. No. 13-06]
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter): none.
A. Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet from U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route
130, and 60 feet from all other streets.
B. Where a proposed nonresidential development abuts a residential zone
or a lot developed for residential uses, and additional thirty-foot buffer
strip, designed in accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI,
shall be added to any required rear or side yard which abuts said
residential use.
C. Accessory buildings: same as specified in § 205-70.3C for planned office
park development in the G-O Zone.
D. Other provisions: same as specified in § 205-70.3D for planned office
park development in the G-O Zone.
E. Loading/unloading and truck idling restrictions: same as specified in
§ 205-68G for the C-2 General Commercial District. [Added 7-6-1993]
A. The maximum building height, inclusive of rooftop penthouse
enclosures, shall be 75 feet.
B. The minimum setback requirement for buildings exceeding 50 feet in
height shall be 65 feet from the nearest nonresidential property line
and 165 feet from the nearest residential property line.
§ 205-74 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-75.2
198:594
§ 205-75.3. Contents of general development plan. [Added
4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A general development plan shall include the following maps and plans all
at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet.
A. Any development proposed to occupy 50 or more acres of land may, at
the discretion of the applicant, submit an application for general
development plan approval to the Planning Board.
B. Prior to the granting of general development plan approval, the
Planning Board shall make the following findings:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services and control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. A boundary and topographic survey.
B. A site demolition plan, if applicable, showing all buildings and parking
areas to be removed.
C. A land use plan indicating the layout of the site. Said plan shall show
general locations of buildings, parking areas and internal roadways, as
well as setbacks from property boundaries and all required buffers.
D. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access within
the development and any proposed improvements to the existing
transportation system outside the planned development.
E. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewage and waterlines, any drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
§ 205-75.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-75.3
198:595
§ 205-75.4. Fees for general development plans. [Added 4-29-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
§ 205-76. Industrial park development.
Planned industrial park development may be permitted in the I-2 Zone,
provided that the site to be developed shall contain a minimum of 20 acres.
§ 205-76.1. Transit-Oriented Mixed-Use Development Overlay.
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11114]
waste disposal and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities.
F. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
A. The fee for a general development plan shall be $25 for every 1,000
square feet of nonresidential development, plus escrow fees as required
for special consultants and special meetings.
B. The Board professional staff and clerical staff shall submit vouchers for
all necessary fees for attendance at meetings and examination,
inspection and review of the planned unit development, which fees shall
be paid in the ordinary manner. Said vouchers shall be based upon
hourly fees for necessary man hours expended.
C. In addition to the examination, inspection and review of the planned
unit development by professional staff, the Planning Board may hire
consulting engineers to study and review the development. The cost of
such services shall be paid by the applicant to the Township Treasurer
and placed in the appropriate account.
A. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size for industrial parks: two acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(4) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks. Minimum rear and side yard
setbacks may be reduced proportionately to the individual
reduction in lot area.
B. Other provisions. All other requirements for industrial developments
shall conform to those established under the I-2 District and other
applicable requirements of this chapter.
A. Purpose.
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that should § 205-76.1B be adjudged invalid by
the courts, this entire section shall be deemed invalid.
§ 205-75.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:596
(1) The Township of North Brunswick strongly supports the concepts
of smart growth and sustainability. In order to promote these
concepts, the Township has determined to provide the option for
the development of a transit-oriented mixed-use development
within the I-2 Industrial Zone District just south of Cozzens Lane/
Adams Lane. This development will have to meet the standards set
forth in § 205-76.1B of this chapter. Such development will provide
concentrated mixed-use development at residential densities and
with nonresidential floor areas that are compatible with both
commuter bus service and rail transportation. In this regard, the
Township of North Brunswick strongly supports the location of a
New Jersey Transit train station in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development and the Township of North Brunswick further strongly
supports all required transit improvement and roadway work
related to the proposed train station both within the transitoriented
mixed-use development and off site from the transitoriented
mixed-use development, which may include, but not be
limited to, the proposed New Jersey Transit rail turn back loop at
Black Horse Lane and a proposed new Route 1 to Route 130 eastwest
connector roadway proposed to be located between Adams
Lane and Black Horse Lane.
(2) Given the current state of the economy and the sagging retail
climate, the Township believes that large retail establishments are
the necessary catalyst or economic engine to bring the transitoriented
mixed-use development to fruition. As a result, these
development regulations permit large retail establishments to
represent a high proportion of the nonresidential development in
the transit-oriented mixed-use development.
(3) However, retail centers that include large retail establishments
with individual users occupying in excess of 50,000 square feet
typically have several uninspiring design features in common:
(a) No-frill site plans that eschew connection to the surrounding
community and environs.
(b) Plain vanilla, standardized, rectangular single-story buildings.
(c) Monolithic, smooth-surface block facades.
(d) Recognizable corporate color schemes.
(e) Minimal architectural details.
(f) Massive asphalt parking lots covering several acres.
(g) Limited landscaping.
(h) Few pedestrian amenities.
(4) While the Township supports smart growth, the Township of North
Brunswick's vision for this mixed-use transit-oriented development
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:597
differs significantly from this standardized mediocrity. As a result,
the Township is enacting form-based guidelines that will require
the large retail establishments to relate better to the community
and have less negative impact upon the environment. This will be
achieved through integrating the large retail establishments into
the fabric of the development and the surrounding community.
(5) The intent of the regulations incorporated herein is to bring
pedestrians and bicyclists into the site and to allow them to
maneuver safely throughout the site from store to store, to the
future train station and bus depot, and to public spaces on a series
of interconnected pedestrian pathways. As a result of these
regulations, large retail establishments will incorporate
pedestrian-scale features into the design of their buildings and the
parking lots that surround them. In effect, large retail
establishments shall become a part of the Main Street
environment, as opposed to clashing with the Main Street
environment.
B. Application of Transit-Oriented Mixed-Use Development Overlay
regulations.
(1) In addition to the principal, conditional and accessory uses
permitted in the I-2 Industrial Zone District, the owner of a tract
within the I-2 Industrial Zone District which meets the
requirements set forth below shall have the option of developing
that tract with a transit-oriented mixed-use development. Should
the owner of a tract within the I-2 Industrial Zone District elect to
develop its tract with a transit-oriented mixed-use development,
then the use, bulk and design standards of this section, § 205-76.1,
shall supersede the otherwise applicable provisions of Chapter 205.
Only tracts meeting all of the standards set forth below can be
developed with a transit-oriented mixed-use development. If a tract
does not meet each of the standards below, then the standards of
§ 205-76.1 shall not be applicable and large retail establishments,
general retail use, hotels and residential uses shall continue to be
prohibited uses in the zone. These necessary requirements are:
(a) The tract shall be located within the I-2 Industrial Zone
District.
(b) The tract shall be a minimum of 200 contiguous acres in area.
(c) The site plan or general development plan for the transitoriented
mixed-use development on the tract shall provide a
location for a bus depot with associated parking and a New
Jersey transit train station with associated parking.
(d) The plan for the development of a transit-oriented mixed-use
development on the tract shall incorporate all off-tract roadway
improvements necessary to meet the travel time delay
performance standards established by the Planning Board as
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:598
critical to exercising the option to build under the overlay
zoning standards.
[1] The Planning Board authorized a traffic study to determine
what types of off-tract traffic improvements would have to
be constructed in close proximity to the site in order for
the Planning Board to recommend the rezoning of the
property to allow for the option to build a transit-oriented
mixed-use development. The traffic study also factored in
trips to be generated from a proposed large retail
establishment of approximately 100,000 square feet in
building area on the southbound side of Route 1 directly
across from the proposed transit-oriented mixed-use
development. This study, prepared by Maser Consulting,
and referred to herein as the "Maser Study," broke the
proposed transit-oriented mixed-use development down
into two phases known as "Phase 1" and "the Final Build
Phase." The Maser Study recommended specific roadway
improvements to accommodate the Phase 1 and the Final
Build Phase development. The "Summary of
Recommended Developer Improvements for Site
Rezoning" of the Maser Study identifies the improvements
necessary to satisfy the Planning Board's requirement that
the development of a transit-oriented mixed-use
development would actually improve traffic congestion in
proximity to the site for Phase 1 development. These
improvements also account for the proposed large retail
establishment of approximately 100,000 square feet in
building area on the southbound side of Route 1 directly
across from the proposed transit-oriented mixed-use
development.
[2] The Maser Study states grade-separated interchanges may
be required at the Route 1 intersections of Finnegans
Lane, Commerce Boulevard and Cozzens/Adams Lane,
along with a possible reverse jughandle at Aaron Road.
The Maser Study shows conceptual designs of how such
grade-separated interchanges may occur to accommodate
the train station and the Final Build Phase. The final
determination of the need for these grade-separated
interchanges, and the specific design of same, would be
determined by the NJDOT in conjunction with New Jersey
Transit Corporation's commitment to locate a train station
adjacent to the site.
[3] While the ultimate approval authority for some of the offtract
improvements recommended in the Maser Study is
the State Department of Transportation and/or the County
of Middlesex, the Maser Study provides clear analysis and
recommendations relative to the type of improvements
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:599
necessary to meet the Planning Board's criteria. Realizing
that the state and/or county may require modifications to
the recommendations in the Maser Study, it is the clear
intention of the Planning Board that the developer may
only exercise the option to construct Phase 1 of the transitoriented
mixed-use development by complying with
Subsection B(1)(d)[4][a], [b] or [c] below, as part of its
application for Phase 1.
[4] The developer may only exercise the overlay district option
to construct the Final Build Phase of the transit-oriented
mixed-use development upon satisfying the
implementation of the recommended final build
improvements described in the Maser Study in conjunction
with the construction of a train station, or by adhering to
the standards of Subsection B(1)(d)[4][c] below.
[a] The developer shall build 100% of the improvements
(with the exclusion of the far-side jughandle on Route
1 northbound at Aaron Road) recommended in
Chapter VIII of the Maser Study under "Summary of
Recommended Developer Improvements for Site
Rezoning," and be responsible for 100% of the cost of
said improvements, subject to modification by the
state or county, if the development of the transitoriented
mixed-use development proceeds to
construction and the large retail establishment
proposed on the southbound side of Route 1 does not
proceed to construction; or
[b] The developer shall build 100% of the improvements
recommended in Chapter VIII of the Maser Study
under "Summary of Recommended Developer
Improvements for Site Rezoning," and be responsible
for a proportionate share of the cost, subject to
modification by the state or county, if the development
of the large retail establishment on the southbound
side of Route 1 proceeds to construction in a similar
time frame to the transit-oriented mixed-use
development. Said proportionate distribution of cost
shall be based upon external trips generated by each
development, as specifically enumerated in Table 19 of
the Maser Study; or
[c] Prior to filing an initial application with the Planning
Board, or filing any request for amendment to a
previously obtained approval, the developer may
submit an alternative traffic analysis or revised
project gross floor area, and submit revised roadway
improvement plans to the Planning Board in an
attempt to demonstrate that modifications to the
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:600
recommended roadway improvements will satisfy the
Planning Board relative to travel time delays. Said
alternate plans may result from consultation with the
NJDOT, Middlesex County, NJDEP, New Jersey Transit
or any other governmental agency, or from changes
necessitated by environmental, utility or right-of-way
constraints or for any other reason that would render
the specific Maser Study recommendations unfeasible
or impractical to implement or for any other reason.
Should the Planning Board determine by resolution
that it will accept alternative improvement plans, said
alternative improvement plans shall be detailed within
the resolution, and said resolution shall supplement
or supersede the off-tract improvement standards
incorporated in the Maser Study. Failure to provide
for the off-tract improvements standards incorporated
in the Maser Study through Subsection B(2)(d)[1] or
[2] above or this Subsection B(2)(d)[3], or as amended
and approved by the Planning Board herein, shall
result in the application for a transit-oriented mixeduse
development being classified as a nonpermitted
use, thereby causing the Planning Board to lack
jurisdiction over the application.
(e) The transit-oriented mixed-use development shall be designed
so that a minimum of 10% of all energy projected to be
consumed on the tract, as determined by the estimated energy
demand, is generated from renewable sources inclusive of, but
not limited to, geothermal, wind, fuel cell, solar or any other
renewable technology.
(f) No more than 370,000 square feet of the retail floor area of the
transit-oriented mixed-use development shall be located in
freestanding, one-story retail buildings. The number of
freestanding large retail establishments shall be limited to two
buildings. All other large retail establishments shall either
include two stories of usable retail space, or shall be developed
as mixed-use buildings or mixed-use retail commercial
buildings with residential units and/or other permitted uses
located above the large retail establishment.
(g) Twelve and two-tenths percent of the housing units in the
transit-oriented mixed-use development shall be affordable
housing units. If all of the 1,875 residential units in the transitoriented
mixed-use development are approved and constructed
as part of the transit-oriented mixed-use development, then
229 or 12.2% of these residential units will be affordable
housing units. This total of 229 affordable housing units shall
satisfy any and all current and future affordable housing
obligations of any kind for the entire full build out of the
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:601
transit-oriented mixed-use development, provided that the
transit-oriented mixed-use development does not contain more
than 1,875 residential units. Under no circumstances will more
than 229 residential units of the 1,875 total residential units
in the transit-oriented mixed-use development be affordable
housing units. The 229 affordable housing units are part of
and included in amount of the 1,875 total residential units
allowable in the transit-oriented mixed-use development.
Because the transit-oriented mixed-use development will
provide such affordable housing units, no development fees,
fees-in-lieu of affordable housing, or any other monetary
obligation for affordable housing purposes shall be due as a
result of the construction of any component of the transitoriented
mixed-use development. [Amended 4-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-03]
[1] All of the 229 affordable housing units will be rental units,
and will be dispersed throughout the buildings in the
transit-oriented mixed-use development which contain
rental units. All of the 229 affordable housing units will be
family units.
[2] All of the 229 affordable housing units shall be subject to
thirty-year deed restrictions in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5.
[3] If all 1,875 residential units in the transit-oriented mixeduse
development are constructed: [Amended 7-25-2016
by Ord. No. 16-12]
[a] One hundred fourteen, approximately 50%, of the
affordable housing units in the transit-oriented mixeduse
development will be moderate-income units.
[b] Ninety-two, approximately 40%, of the affordable
housing units in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development will be Tier 1 low-income units.
[c] Eighteen, approximately 8%, of the affordable housing
units in the transit-oriented mixed-use development
will be Tier 2 low-income units.
[d] Five, approximately 2%, of the affordable housing
units in the transit-oriented mixed-use development
will be very-low-income units.
[4] The timing of the construction of the affordable housing
units in the transit-oriented mixed-use development will be
as follows: [Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
[a] In accordance with the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan adopted by the Planning Board on June 23,
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:602
2016, 400 residential units may be constructed prior
to commencement of construction on a platform for a
train station. Before the Township Construction Code
Official issues the certificate of occupancy for the
349th market rate unit in the transit-oriented mixeduse
development, the Township Construction Code
Official shall have issued certificates of occupancy for:
17 moderate-income units, 29 Tier 1 low-income units
and five very-low-income units.
[b] Before the Township Construction Code Official issues
the certificate of occupancy for the 823rd market rate
unit in the transit-oriented mixed-use development,
the Township Construction Code Official shall have
issued certificates of occupancy for: 45 moderateincome
units, 36 Tier 1 low-income units, four Tier 2
low-income units and five very-low-income units.
[c] Before the Township Construction Code Official issues
the certificate of occupancy for the 1,152nd market
rate unit in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development, the Township Construction Code Official
shall have issued certificates of occupancy for: 58
moderate-income units, 46 Tier 1 low-income units, six
Tier 2 low-income units and five very-low-income
units.
[d] Before the Township Construction Code Official issues
the certificate of occupancy for the 1,317th market
rate unit in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development, the Township Construction Code Official
shall have issued certificates of occupancy for: 93
moderate-income units, 74 Tier 1 low-income units, 14
Tier 2 low-income units and five very-low-income
units.
[e] Before the Township Construction Code Official issues
the certificate of occupancy for the 1,481st market
rate unit in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development, the Township Construction Code Official
shall have issued certificates of occupancy for: 114
moderate-income units, 92 Tier 1 low-income units, 18
Tier 2 low-income units and five very-low-income
units.
[5] The maximum rent for affordable housing units within the
transit-oriented mixed-use development shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income for the affordable housing region in which
the transit-oriented mixed-use development is located. The
average rent for affordable housing units in the transit-
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:603
oriented mixed-use development shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income
for the affordable housing region in which the transitoriented
mixed-use development is located. The developer
of the transit-oriented mixed-use development and/or the
Township sponsors of affordable housing units shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
affordable housing units.
C. Definitions. Terms used in § 205-76.1 of this chapter which are not
defined below have the definitions given to them in § 205-7 of this
chapter, and, if not defined therein, the definitions given them in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Affordable housing is defined in this
section as it is defined in the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq., as same may be amended from time to time. Should
the New Jersey Fair Housing Act be amended to permit a municipality
to meet all or some portion of its affordable housing obligation through
the provision of workforce housing, as this term is defined in the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, then in this section "affordable housing" also
means "workforce housing" to the extent said housing can meet the
affordable housing obligation of the Township generated by the transitoriented
mixed-use development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS — Moderate-income units, Tier 1 lowincome
units and Tier 2 low-income units.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-03; amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
ALLEE — A regularly spaced and aligned row of trees planted along a
street or pedestrian path.
ALLEY — The vehicle passageway within a block that provides access
to the rear of buildings, vehicle parking, utility meters, recycling and
garbage bins.
ARBOR — An open framework structure that forms a shelter, gateway
framework or bower. Its primary purpose is to be a semi-architectural
place for climbing plants to grow, while providing shaded seating,
directional form to frame a view or to create a private out-of-doors area.
An arbor can be arched or square-topped. It differs from a gazebo in
that its roof area is open to the elements, while a gazebo traditionally
has a solid roof that protects those seated beneath it from the elements.
ARCADE — A structure providing shade, cover or protection from the
elements, extending over a sidewalk or square, open to the street
except for supporting columns, piers or arches. Arcades shall have a
minimum clear height of 11 feet over a sidewalk and a minimum clear
width of 10 feet from the front of an adjacent building to the inside face
of the columns supporting the arcade. The area within an arcade shall
be open to public access. Supporting columns/piers shall be located no
more than 230 inches from the back of the curb. Where an arcade is
built, the requirement for street trees is waived for that street frontage.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:604
ARCH — An opening in a building or wall through which pedestrians
or vehicles may pass. Building area over arches may contain walkways,
hallways or habitable space as the case may be and shall be not less
than nine feet over pedestrian ways and 15 feet over vehicular drives
or streets. Arches may also cross streets at a height of not less than
15 feet and shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian passage in such
instances.
ARTIST WORKSHOP — Shops of special trade including the
manufacturing, compounding, assembly, processing, packaging or
similar treatment of such products as baked goods, candy, ceramics,
pottery, china, weaving and other textile arts, painting, cooperage,
woodworking, and other artistic endeavors and similar trades. Retail
sales of products made on the premises are encouraged.
AWNING — An ancillary lightweight structure usually of canvas,
cantilevered from a facade providing shade to the fenestration and
spatial containment to the pedestrian. Awnings, to be an effective
adjunct to a shop front, must thoroughly overlap the sidewalk and
adhere to provisions found in the comprehensive sign plan. Awnings
may also be permitted to extend to the curbline and shall be permitted
to have structural supports that touch down within the furniture zone
of the street.
BALCONY/BALCONETTE — An exterior platform projecting from the
front, side or rear of a building. Balconies/balconettes must be
surrounded by balustrades (railings).
BIOSWALE — Landscape element designed to remove silt and pollution
from surface runoff water. It consists of a swaled drainage course with
gently sloped sides and filled with vegetation, compost and/or riprap.
The water's flow path, along with the wide and shallow ditch, are
designed to maximize the time water spends in the swale, which aids in
the trapping of pollutants and silt.
BLOCK — A contiguous grouping of private lots, passages, rear lanes
and alleys, surrounded by public streets.
BREEZEWAY — A covered passage one or more stories in height
connecting a principal building and an accessory building.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area within a lot that can be occupied by
buildings. Buildable area sets the limits of the building footprint.
BUILDING ENVELOPE STANDARDS — Standards incorporated herein
that establish the basic parameters governing building construction.
These include the envelope for building placement and certain
required/permitted building elements, such as balconies and street
walls.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The height of a building or portion of a building
shall be measured from the average established grade at the street lot
line or sidewalk, or from the average natural ground level, if no street
grade had been established, to the eave line of mansard roofs, hip roofs
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:605
and gable roofs and to the top of the parapet for flat roofs. In measuring
the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded
or exempted in the case of freestanding structures below: chimneys,
cooling towers, dormers, elevator bulkheads, HVAC equipment and
associated screening or parapet wall, penthouses, personal wireless
device/cellular antennas, flagpoles, renewable-energy-generating
equipment attached to a building, tanks, water towers, radio and
television towers, ornamental cupolas, domes, or spires.
BUS DEPOT — A freestanding structure, located on a bus transit route,
which is designed to accommodate embarking and disembarking bus
passengers.
BUS RAPID TRANSIT (BRT) — A mode of public transportation that
combines the quality of rail transit and the flexibility of buses. It can
operate on exclusive transitways, high-occupancy-vehicle (HOV) lanes,
expressways or ordinary streets. A BRT system combines intelligent
transportation systems technology, priority for transit, rapid and
convenient fare collection and integration with land use policy in order
to substantially upgrade bus system performance.
CIVIC — The term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to
arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal
parking.
CIVIC BUILDING — A building designed specifically for a civic function.
CIVIC GREEN OR PLAZA OR SQUARE — Public spaces located within
the transit-oriented mixed-use development and its neighborhoods. A
plaza or square may contain a civic building or commercial space or
kiosk located within a primarily unpaved, formally configured, small
public lawn or park. Portions of a civic square may be linear in shape.
Situated at prominent locations and often dedicated to important
events and/or citizens, plazas and squares may contain, but not be
limited to, water features, amphitheater, farmers' markets, retail
kiosks, table games, fireplaces, large-scale chess/checker and board
game paving areas, and in some instances play equipment, courts and
other amenities, but may not include ball fields.
CIVIC SPACE — An outdoor area dedicated for public use. Civic space
types are defined by the combination of certain physical constraints,
including the relationship between their intended use, their size, their
landscaping and the building(s) defining the space.
COLONNADE — A roof or building structure, extending over the
sidewalk, open to the street and sidewalk except for supporting
columns or piers.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF A TRAIN STATION — The
installation and inspection of a footing and foundation for train station
platforms or a train station building as shown on the regulating plan.
COMMERCIAL MIXED USE — A building that contains dwellings and/
or office located above ground-floor commercial or retail use in a
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:606
compact setting that may or may not share infrastructure such as
parking.
COMMITMENT FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A TRAIN STATION
— A binding written undertaking by New Jersey Transit Corporation
to, either by itself or as part of an agreement with others, which
may include, by way of example, the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, North Brunswick Township, Middlesex County, other
governmental entities or the developer of the transit-oriented mixeduse
development, construct or finance a train station as shown on the
regulating plan.
COMMUNITY GARDEN — A parcel of land used for the growing of
vegetables, flowers, etc., used for human consumption or enjoyment
but not for commercial sales. The garden area may include but not
be limited to a greenhouse, an accessory storage building, benches, a
watering system and fencing.
COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OF A TRAIN STATION — The
receipt of a certificate of occupancy for the train station platforms
or a train station building as shown on the regulating plan, or the
commencement of revenue passenger rail service by the New Jersey
Transit Corporation.
CORNICE — The topmost element, composed of moldings, for an
entablature, or used alone at the roofline or where walls abut ceilings.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides
by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded
by the exterior walls of a building, and an outer court is a court having
one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanently open space.
DECORATIVE PAVING — Paving that is made up of solid, precise,
modular units, stamped concrete, scored concrete, seeded concrete,
colored concrete or any combination of the above.
DOG PARK — An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/
or containment of dogs and similar animals.
DORMER — A structure located within a roof providing a perpendicular
plane to the roof and generally containing a window or other ventilation
for the space below. Dormers are permitted and do not count against
the building story-height restrictions, so long as they do not break
the main eave line and are individually less than 15 feet wide and
collectively less than 30% of the unit's width.
DUPLEX LOFT — A dwelling unit, with a private entrance, on an
individual lot, attached horizontally in a linear arrangement to another
dwelling unit on a separate individual lot, separated horizontally from
the adjoining dwelling unit by a wall extending vertically from the
foundation of the dwelling unit through the roof of the dwelling unit.
The two adjoining units shall be connected to each other by a ceiling
and/or a floor, which ceiling and/or floor extends from the exterior wall
of one unit to the exterior wall of the adjoining unit and which ceiling
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:607
and/or floor are/is solid, continuous and unbroken except for a common
stairwell or elevator serving one or both of the units.
DWELLING UNIT or UNIT — A residential space designed to be
occupied by a single household and which contains, at a minimum, a
kitchen, bathroom and other living space.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or
business where food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages,
are sold for consumption on the premises, normally to patrons seated
or standing within an enclosed building on the premises. Eating and
drinking establishments may include commercial recreation facilities as
an adjunct to business within the same enclosed building.
EAVE — The junction of a wall of a building and an overhanging roof.
In order to encourage pitched roofs, the designated maximum building
height may be measured to the eave, not to the top of the roof.
ENTABLATURE — An elaborated horizontal band along the exterior of
a building. Used primarily just beneath the roofline, sometimes used on
the facade between floors.
ESTIMATED ENERGY DEMAND — The quantity of electricity projected
to be consumed by a use, building or structure as determined by the
Office of Clean Energy estimated energy demand calculator or similar
calculator or tools used for determining load demand, including those
utilized to obtain electric service from a utility company.
EXTENDED-STAY HOTEL — Any building containing six or more rooms,
which are rented or hired out to transient guests for periods greater
than 30 days and not more than 180 days.
FACADE — A building face or wall.
FACADE, PRIMARY — A building face or wall that faces a public street
or parking area containing more than 750 spaces.
FACADE, SECONDARY — A building face or wall that faces an interior
courtyard, parking area, service area, alley or rear of the building.
FAMILY UNITS — Affordable housing units which are not limited to
occupancy by a household, one of whose members must be 55 years of
age or older or one or all of whose members must be an individual with
special needs.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
FASCIA — A projecting flat horizontal member or molding, also part of
a classical entablature.
FENESTRATION — An opening in the building wall allowing light and
views between interior and exterior spaces. Fenestration is measured
as glass area for occupied buildings and as open area for parking
structures.
FINAL BUILD PHASE — Any portion of the transit-oriented mixeduse
development to be constructed after Phase 1. The Final Build
Phase shall consist of up to 175,000 square feet of mixed-use retail
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:608
commercial uses, up to 195,000 square feet of office buildings and
uses, up to an additional 200 hotel rooms, and up to an additional
1,575 dwelling units. The uses and quantities of floor area and units
herein are in addition to the uses and quantities of floor area and
units provided in Phase 1. The Final Build Phase can be constructed in
any number of smaller phases, provided that the improvements in said
smaller phases comply with the requirements of this section.
FREESTANDING OFFICE — A single building devoted entirely to office
use.
FREESTANDING PAD SITE — A freestanding building containing one
or more permitted commercial or office uses.
FRIEZE — An ornamental element, applied to the top of a horizontal
segment of a mantelpiece, with side supports serving as pilasters.
FRONT YARD FENCE — A wood picket, wrought iron or masonry
fence permitted along the street frontage of all private lots and along
common lot lines from the street right-of-way line to the front setback
line.
GABLE — The part of the end wall of a building between the eaves
and a pitched or gambrel roof. The gable orientation shows the vertical
triangular plane rather than the slope side of the roof.
GARAGE ENTRY — An opening in the building facade and/or street wall
where vehicles may enter the block interior for general parking and
business servicing. Garage entries shall not exceed 14 feet clear height
and 24 feet clear width and shall not be sited within 200 feet of another
garage entry on the same block.
GARDEN CENTER — An establishment for retail sales of live plant
material, fertilizers, pesticides, landscape materials, plant containers,
seasonal sales of flowers, produce and holiday items including
Christmas trees, both live and artificial, lawn ornaments, garden
furniture and similar material.
GREENWAY — An open space corridor in largely natural conditions
which may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
HOTEL — A building containing six or more rooms, which are rented or
hired out to transient guests for periods of less than 30 days. A hotel
can be part of a building containing any combination of retail, office
and/or residential uses.
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living together.
HUB HEIGHT — The height of a wind turbine as measured from
finished grade at the base of the tower to the top of the supporting
tower or turbine. The rotor is not considered as part of the hub height
for the purposes of determining permitted height for wind turbines for
the generation of required renewable energy.
INDIVIDUAL WITH SPECIAL NEEDS — An individual who has a mental
illness, a physical disability, a developmental disability or AIDS/HIV.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:609
"Individual with special needs" also includes individuals who are
victims of domestic violence, are youths aging out of foster care, are
homeless or are ex-criminal offenders.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
14-03]
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A building or use providing for
indoor play, athletic events, competitions, practice, training and play
equipment, athletic training and related activities. Said uses may
include eating and drinking establishments.
KIOSK — An enclosed structure used for the sale of goods, services,
food or beverages. Kiosks may be located in civic plazas and squares
and shall be located a minimum of two feet from any curbline.
LANDSCAPE BUFFER — A combination of physical space and vertical
elements such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which
is to separate and screen incompatible land uses from each other.
LANDSCAPED OPEN AREA or LANDSCAPED AREA — Any combination
of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or
trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand,
mulch, walls, fences or decorative paving materials).
LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Retail uses in excess of 50,000
square feet. Large retail establishments (LRE), which may be either one
story or two stories in height, may include uses such as, but not limited
to, membership warehouse clubs, including the sale of motor fuels and
the washing and service of motor vehicles, home improvement stores,
including lumber sales and garden centers, and general retail sales of
goods and services.
LEED — Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Program
sponsored by the United States Green Building Council to promote
energy efficient design of buildings and places.
LEED CERTIFICATION — A project or building that is designed to
achieve LEED certification is one that provides site or building
elements that would earn at least 40 points, according to the standards
of LEED for New Construction 2009 v.3.0, or LEED for Retail 2009
v.3.0, as the case may be, as determined by the Township Planner,
to exercise any of the density bonuses provided under this section.
Submission to the U.S. Green Building Council is not required to
exercise the density bonuses.
LIGHT RAIL — A mode of public transportation that moves passengers
in intermediate-size groups on short trains or in single light rail cars
over a variety of rights-of-way: grade separated, reserved or shared
with street traffic. The light rail cars are typically manually operated,
articulated for urban use and have a low-level floor. Passenger boarding
is at a low-level platform, using prepaid fare media.
LINTEL — The topmost horizontal member over an opening, which
helps carry weight of the vertical structure above it.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:610
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A dwelling unit that contains a limited commercial
component which must be located on the ground level of the unit.
LIVING AREA — That portion of the dwelling unit utilized for living
purposes within the exterior walls of the structure and does not include
porches, breezeways, garages, carports, bay windows and decks.
LOFT FLAT — A building or portion thereof comprised of three or more
dwelling units which may or may not share common entrances and
other spaces.
MAIN STREET — A street on which is the predominant location for
mixed-use retail commercial buildings extending from the entrance of
the transit-oriented mixed-use development to the location of the train
station as provided on the regulating plan.
MARKET RATE UNIT — Dwelling units other than affordable housing
units.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
MASSING — The three-dimensional bulk of a structure: height, width
and depth.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building of two or more stories comprised
of two or more permitted uses. Residential uses in mixed-use buildings
may not front on Main Street on the ground floor. Mixed-use buildings
shall comply with the bulk and design standards for mixed-use retail
commercial buildings set forth in § 205-76.1K of this chapter.
MIXED-USE RETAIL COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building of two
or more stories comprised of mixed-use retail commercial uses and/
or large retail establishments on the ground floor and other permitted
uses located predominantly on upper or nonground floors. Residential
uses may not front on Main Street on the ground floor. Two-story large
retail establishments shall comply with the bulk and design standards
for mixed-use retail commercial buildings set forth in § 205-76.1K of
this chapter.
MIXED-USE RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES — Permitted nonresidential
uses of less than 50,000 square feet located in a building of two or more
stories with other permitted uses located on upper floors of the same
building.
MODERATE-INCOME UNITS — Dwelling units affordable to
households earning in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
income for the affordable housing region in which the transit-oriented
mixed-use development is located.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
14-03]
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A building of two or more stories
comprised of dwelling units which share common facilities and which
common facilities may include, but are not limited to, halls, entrances,
storage, garbage disposal or parking.
NATIONAL GREEN BUILDING STANDARD — A standard developed
by the International Code Committee (ICC) and sanctioned by the
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:611
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) to promote energy
efficient design of buildings and places.
PARAPET — A low wall encircling the perimeter of a flat building roof,
generally used to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
PARK — Any public or private land available for recreational,
educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
PARK AND RIDE — A parking lot designed for drivers to leave their
cars and use mass transit facilities beginning, terminating, or stopping
within immediate walking distance of the park and ride facility.
PASSENGER RAIL — A mode of public transportation that moves
passengers in large-size groups on long trains over a dedicated, gradeseparated
or reserved right-of-way. The passenger rail car is typically
manually operated, unarticulated for high speed suburban use and has
a high-level floor. Passenger boarding is at a high-level platform, using
prepaid fare media, or with fares paid on the train. Also known as
"commuter rail."
PEDIMENT — A crowning triangular element at the face of a roof or
above a door opening.
PERGOLA — Similar to arbors, which include an open framework
structure that forms a shelter. However, pergolas are commonly used to
provide directional form over walkways or to create a private outdoor
seating or patio area.
PERMITTED COMMERCIAL USES — Those uses listed in Subsection
D(1) of this section that are nonresidential in nature.
PERMITTED PROJECTION — Building elements that may be permitted
to extend over setback lines and street rights-of-way, including eaves
not more than 36 inches; bay windows, architectural corner elements
and other building areas, provided a minimum clearance over sidewalks
and pedestrian ways of 12 feet is maintained; canopies and marquees,
provided a minimum clearance of 12 feet is maintained over sidewalks
and pedestrian ways; entry doors not wider than 42 inches; cornices,
pilasters and building base courses not deeper than 24 inches; planters
not deeper than 36 inches; stoops and entry stairs not deeper than 42
inches; balconies and balconettes above the ground floor, not deeper
than 60 inches; flagpoles not located at the ground floor, not projecting
more than 10 feet; awnings, porticos, porte cocheres, and other
building elements incorporated for visual interest and diversity.
PHASE 1 — That portion of the transit-oriented mixed-use development
to be constructed first which shall consist of up to 370,000 square feet
of freestanding one-story large retail establishments, up to 275,000
square feet of large retail establishments and mixed-use retail
commercial uses in multistory or mixed-use buildings, up to 50,000
square feet of freestanding retail, restaurants or kiosks, a hotel of up to
175 rooms and up to 300 residential units. Phase 1 can be constructed
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:612
in any number of small phases, provided that the improvements in said
smaller phases comply with the requirements of this section.
PILASTER — A thin square column attached to a wall or to the corners
of a building, which matches the details of accompanying freestanding
columns.
PLANTER — The element of the public streetscape, typically a pot or
vessel, which accommodates trees and/or other landscape plantings.
Planters may be continuous or individual.
PORCH — A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a
building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for
structural purposes.
PORTE COCHERE — A covered roof extending off the building facade
which allows a vehicle to park underneath it and passengers to access
the building without being exposed to the elements. Porte cochere may
extend over street areas at a minimum height of 14 feet.
PORTICO — An open-sided structure attached to a building, sheltering
an entrance or serving as a semienclosed space.
POSTING INFORMATION BOARD — An element of the streetscape,
typically arranged in a multisided manner, for the purpose of posting
temporary information on a short-term basis, informational and
directional maps and advertising.
PRIVACY FENCE — Fences and hedges along alleys and common lot
lines (behind the front wall of the building). Privacy fences may be
as high as eight feet measured from ground level. A wire privacy
fence (with wooden framework) shall have a hardy species of hedge or
climbing vine planted along it.
PUBLIC SPACE — Property (streets, alleys, civic greens and parks)
owned by the State of New Jersey or an instrumentality thereof,
Middlesex County, North Brunswick Township or another agency of
government and open to the general public.
RAIN GARDEN — A planted depression that is designed to take as
much as possible of the excess rainwater runoff from a house or other
building and its associated landscaping.
REAR ALLEY — A vehicular street or driveway located to the rear of lots
providing access to service areas and parking, and containing utility
easements. Alleys should be paved from building face to building face,
with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with curbs at the
edges.
REGULATING PLAN — The "master plan" for the transit-oriented
mixed-use development, which, at the election of the developer or
developers of the transit-oriented mixed-use development, can be
either a general development plan or a preliminary site plan, and which
plan shall show the building placement standards for each lot and the
arrangement of the public space in relation to private space.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:613
RENEWABLE-ENERGY-GENERATING EQUIPMENT — Equipment and
structures for the generation of renewable energy, including, but not
limited to, solar panels, wind turbines, fuel cells, geothermal heat
pumps and piping, and similar devices. Renewable energy generating
equipment may be attached to a building or freestanding, and except
for freestanding wind turbines, are exempt from height and setback
requirements.
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL) — A line which is parallel to or
coincident with each lot line of a lot. The building or buildings on a lot
must be built to the required building line. The RBL is a requirement,
not a permissive minimum such as a setback line.
RESIDENTIAL FLAT — A building or portion thereof comprised of three
or more dwelling units which may or may not share common entrances
and other spaces.
SIGN A – FASCIA WALL SIGN — Signs consisting of individual raised
letters and logo forms that project no less than three inches and no
more than 12 inches from the facade wall either attached to a panel
or directly to the building wall. Wall signs may be oriented horizontally
or vertically along a wall or pilaster. The painting of letters or logos
directly on a wall surface shall be prohibited.
SIGN B – MARQUEE CANOPY SIGN — Signs consisting of panels or
letter forms that are attached or project above a vertical surface of an
architectural marquee or canopy. They provide the main identity for
tenants where an entry canopy is part of the base building facade.
SIGN C – FEATURE SIGN — Larger format, multisided, illuminated
projecting signs. These signs may be mounted perpendicularly to the
building facade and/or diagonally on a corner, providing visibility from
multiple directions.
SIGN D – PROJECTING BLADE SIGN — Projecting blade signs are
mounted perpendicular to the building facade or are suspended
beneath an architectural canopy or marquee or arcade.
SIGN E1 – AWNING SIGN — Primary identification signage that
consists of identity letters and graphics applied to the primary surface
of the awning.
SIGN E2 – AWNING SIGN — Awning sign used as a secondary
identification signage; consists of identity graphics and letters on the
valance of the awning.
SIGN F – PLAQUE SIGN — Dimensional panels mounted flat against the
building facade.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is located unattached to any
building and structure. Freestanding signs may include pylon signs,
residential identification signs, and project decorative identification
signs.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:614
SIGN G – WINDOW SIGN — Tenant graphics placed directly on or
behind the glass of windows or doors. They can provide additional
identity or be graphical elements to add interest. They may also be
skeletal neon signs displaying the tenant's identity.
SIGN H – CHANGEABLE SIGN — Signs that are promotional or
seasonal in nature and fabricated such that imagery and information
may be changed.
SIGN, ICON — An assemblage of alphanumeric characters, symbols
or other graphics displayed to identify the mixed-use transit-oriented
development as a whole.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – MOBILE RETAIL CART — Signs that
are affixed to a pedestrian-oriented mobile vendor or personal service
advertising the specific business, item(s) for sale or service.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – POSTING INFORMATION BOARD
PLACARD — A sign located on a designated posting information board
advertising a good or service located within the transit-oriented mixeduse
development, or an event sponsored in the Township. Said signs
may be posted for a period not to exceed 21 days.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – SHOWCASE DISPLAY WINDOW —
Areas available to the landlord, tenant and the community for threedimensional
displays of merchandise, logos, seasonal displays, and
special promotions.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – TEMPORARY SIGN — Signs intended to
be displayed for a limited time and that do not attach to the permanent
structure. Such signs are allowed in the building storefront frontage
zone and furniture zone of the sidewalk.
SIGN J – ADDITIONAL SIGN – UMBRELLA GRAPHICS — Restaurants
and cafes that choose to use umbrellas as shading devices are
permitted to incorporate graphics on the umbrellas. Said umbrellas
must be kept in clean, neat and workmanlike condition and may only
display graphics of the business or a product sold on the premises.
SITE ACCESS ROAD — A roadway providing access from Route 1 or the
Finnegans Lane Connector.
SOLAR PANEL — A device or group of devices attached to a building to
provide passive generation of electricity from the sun.
SOLAR SCREEN — A device attached to a building to provide shading
for glazed areas thereof.
STATION CIRCLE — A civic green, plaza, square or circle located at
the terminus of Main Street providing frontage for the train station
and identified on the regulating plan. This area is expected to have
civic prominence and, as such, additional height shall be permitted for
buildings fronting on the green, plaza, square or circle in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:615
STREETSCAPE — The design element that establishes the major part
of the public realm. The streetscape is composed of streets (travel lanes
for vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths
for pedestrians) as well as the visible private street frontages (building
facades and elevations, porches, yards, fences, awnings, etc.), and the
amenities of the public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches,
streetlights, etc.).
STREETSCREEN — A freestanding wall or hedge built along the street
frontage line, or no further than the front setback of adjacent buildings,
often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street.
Streetscreens are typically between three feet and eight feet in height
and, if not hedges, are constructed of a material matching the adjacent
building facade, brick or other complementary permitted material. The
streetscreen may be a hedge or fence. Streetscreens may have
openings no larger than are necessary to allow automobile and
pedestrian access. In addition, 30% of the area in square feet of all
streetscreens over four feet high shall be articulated or contain slits,
lattices or similar design features to avoid a "blank wall" appearance.
STREET, STREET FRONTAGE, STREET LOT LINE, AND STREET
RIGHT-OF-WAY —
STREET TREE — A deciduous canopy shade tree large enough to form
a canopy with sufficient clear trunk to allow traffic to pass under
unimpeded.
STREET TREE ALIGNMENT LINE — A generally straight line that
street trees are to be planted along. This alignment is parallel with the
street and is generally four feet from the back of the curb.
STOOP — A ground-floor entry platform at the front and/or street side
of a building. Stoops, where required or permitted, may be roofed but
they may not be enclosed.
SUSTAINABLE — Having the ability to accommodate and maintain
population growth and economic expansion through intelligent design.
STREET — A right-of-way shown on a filed plat in accordance with
an approved subdivision – but not alleys.
(1)
STREET FRONTAGE — The longest street lot line, measured in
linear feet, of a lot adjoining a street.
(2)
STREET LOT LINE — Any lot boundary line which boundary line
abuts a street right-of-way.
(3)
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — All portions of public space, the record
title of which is held by the State of New Jersey or an
instrumentality thereof, Middlesex County, North Brunswick
Township or another agency of government, or privately owned and
shown on a filed plat in accordance with an approved subdivision.
(4)
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:616
TEXTURE — The exterior finish of a surface, ranging from smooth to
coarse.
TIER 1 LOW-INCOME UNITS — Dwelling units affordable to
households earning 50% or less of the median income for the affordable
housing region in which the transit-oriented mixed-use development is
located.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
TIER 2 LOW-INCOME UNITS — Dwelling units affordable to
households earning 35% or less of median income for the affordable
housing region in which the transit-oriented mixed-use development is
located.[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
TOWNHOUSE — Three or more attached dwelling units, with each
dwelling unit sharing at least one fire-resistant common wall with
another dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall be between 18 feet wide
and 36 feet wide and two stories to four stories in height. Each dwelling
unit shall have its own front or rear access to the outside. Units may be
stacked one over the other.
TRACT — One or more lots meeting the requirements set forth
§ 205-76.1B(1)(a) through (d) which is proposed to be developed or is
developed as a transit-oriented mixed-use development.
TRAIN STATION — A facility to provide access to one or more of the
following: passenger rail or light rail. A train station includes, but is
not limited to, waiting areas, platforms, ticket facilities, parking lots
and structures, shelters, loading areas and other amenities. Nothing
in this definition shall preclude a train station from including facilities
for regional bus, bus rapid transit, local bus, taxi or other passenger
services. Transit supportive infrastructure, including, but not limited to,
rail turnback loops, access and connecting roads and railroad tracks,
shall also be considered part of a train station.
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) —
Incorporates design principles that produce compact, mixed-use,
pedestrian-scaled communities. The following conventions are
generally employed in the design of traditional neighborhoods:
The neighborhood is limited in area to that which can be
traversed in a ten-to-fifteen-minute walk.
(a)
Residences, shops, services, workplaces, and civic buildings
are located in close proximity.
(b)
A well-defined and detailed system of interconnected streets
serves the needs of the pedestrian and the car equally,
providing multiple routes to all parts of the neighborhood.
(c)
Physically defined open spaces in the form of plazas, squares,
and parks, in addition to finely detailed public streets, provide
places for formal and informal social activity and recreation.
(d)
(1)
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:617
TRANSIT-ORIENTED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A development
of a tract within the I-2 Industrial Zone District which complies with the
requirements of this § 205-76.1.
TRANSOM — A horizontal window above a door or window, usually
rectangular in shape.
TRELLIS — Lightweight elements used for controlling the shape or
to support climbing and other plants. In most instances, it is usually
constructed on a flat plane, in a two-dimensional way, unlike an arbor,
which is frequently a three-dimensional structure.
VERNACULAR — A regional adaptation of an architectural style or
styles.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNITS — Dwelling units affordable to households
earning 30% or less of median income for the affordable housing region
in which the transit-oriented mixed-use development is located.[Added
7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
Private buildings form a clear edge, delineating the private
from the public realm.
(e)
Civic buildings reinforce the identity of the neighborhood,
providing places of assembly for social, cultural, and religious
activities.
(f)
TODs pursue certain objectives through their design:
Independence of movement for the elderly and young by
bringing many activities of daily living within walking distance.
(a)
Reduced traffic congestion and road construction costs by
reducing number and length of car trips.
(b)
Use or preparation for future use of alternative forms of
transportation by organizing appropriate building densities.
(c)
Improved security of public spaces organized to stimulate
informal surveillance by residents and business operators.
(d)
Enhanced sense of community and improved security through
provision of a range of housing types and workplaces in
proximity to one another.
(e)
Accessible places for public assembly and civic engagement by
identification of suitable sites for civic buildings.
(f)
(2)
D. Permitted principal uses and prohibited uses.
(1) Permitted principal uses. The following uses and/or any
combination thereof in a single building are permitted principal
uses in a transit-oriented mixed-use development:
(a) General business and retail uses.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:618
(b) Garden centers adjunct to or associated with a permitted large
retail establishment.
(c) Personal services establishments.
(d) Business service establishments.
(e) Artist workshops.
(f) Fitness centers.
(g) Eating and drinking establishments.
(h) Dry-cleaning establishments that do not include on-site
processing.
(i) Large retail establishments.
(j) Automotive storefront indoor showrooms.
(k) Studios that do not require antennas.
(l) Hotels.
(m) Extended-stay hotels.
(n) Bed-and-breakfast inns.
(o) Mixed-use retail commercial buildings and mixed-use
buildings.
(p) Banks and other financial institutions.
(q) Kiosks and street vending carts.
(r) Professional and general business office uses.
(s) Medical offices.
(t) Townhouses.
(u) Duplex lofts.
(v) Loft flats, residential flats and multifamily buildings.
(w) Live/work units.
(x) Community residences for the developmentally and/or
physically disabled.
(y) Civic uses including civic buildings, civic greens, civic plazas,
civic squares, civic spaces, parks and dog parks.
(z) Indoor recreation facilities.
(aa) Day-care centers and elder-care centers.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:619
(bb) Congregate care.
(cc) Nursing home.
(dd) Public spaces.
(ee) Parks.
(ff) Community gardens.
(gg) Train stations.
(hh) Bus depots.
(ii) Park and rides, parking structures, and parking lots.
(jj) Renewable energy generating equipment, including, but not
limited to, windmills, wind turbines, solar panels, solar
collecting equipment, fuel cells, geothermal equipment and
other equipment and technology as may be developed.
(kk)Wireless telecommunications towers and antenna located
entirely within an existing or proposed building or on the roof
or side of an existing or proposed building, or attached to an
existing structure.
(2) Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in a transitoriented
mixed-use development:
(a) Automotive sales, with the exception of a storefront indoor
showroom.
(b) Automotive washing, except as part of a large retail
establishment.
(c) Mini-storage.
(d) Outdoor equipment repair services, except as part of a large
retail establishment conducted within a fully enclosed
building.
(e) Outdoor equipment sales, except as part of a large retail
establishment conducted within a fully enclosed building.
(f) Recycling center.
(g) Fleet vehicle storage or storage of school buses, ambulances,
taxis, etc.
(h) Outdoor storage of commercial trucks, tractor trailers,
recreational vehicles, campers and boats, retail merchandise,
outdoor equipment, building materials, except for garden
centers within an area enclosed by a decorative fence or wall
consistent with the architectural treatment for the principal
building.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:620
(i) On-site processing of dry cleaning.
(j) Single-family detached homes.
(k) Detached duplexes or two-family homes.
(l) Any business with drive-in service, with the exception of a bank
or pharmacy drive-in.
(m) Adult book stores and adult entertainment.
(n) Pawn shops.
(o) Check-cashing establishments.
(p) Adult entertainment of any type.
(q) Theatres.
E. Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in a transit-oriented mixed-use development:
(1) Uses and buildings customarily accessory and incidental to
permitted uses.
(2) Flagpoles and clock towers.
(3) Home occupations and home professional offices, limited to the
first floor of a residential building.
(4) Parking structures.
(5) Signage.
(6) Solar panels and geothermal heating and cooling equipment.
(7) Storage for the tenants and owners of units and businesses in the
transit-oriented mixed-use development.
(8) Surface parking lots.
(9) Kiosks and street vending carts.
(10) Temporary buildings or yards for construction materials or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
immediate area.
(11) Temporary construction trailers.
(12) Temporary offices or model homes both incidental and necessary
for the sale or rental of real property in the immediate area.
(13) Utility facilities, including telephone, water, sewer, electricity and
gas.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:621
(14)Walls and fences, including, but not limited to, front yard and
privacy fences.
(15)Windmills and wind turbines.
F. Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted conditional uses in a
transit-oriented mixed-use development, provided that they meet the
applicable requirements of this chapter:
(1) Private schools, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet or located within a mixeduse
building.
(b) Minimum building height: 40 feet.
(c) Parking requirement shall be one space for each staff member,
plus one parking space for each 20 pupils. Parking may be
provided on site or with an off-site parking agreement.
(2) Public and commercial parking garages, provided the following
conditions are met:
(a) Minimum lot size: 25,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum height: 75 feet.
(c) Exterior facades facing public streets or residential uses within
300 feet shall be faced with brick, natural or cultured stone
veneer, or colored stucco or colored concrete of at least three
contrasting colors in a pattern that divides the facade into
areas no greater than 50 feet in length or 25 feet in height.
G. Commercial floor area and residential density "as-of-right." The
developer of a transit-oriented mixed-use development can build the
following uses of the following sizes set forth in this subsection as of
right by satisfying the traffic performance standards of this
§ 205-76.1B(1)(d), regardless of efforts to meet incentive bonuses
established in Subsection H below. Uses permitted under this
Subsection G may be constructed in Phase 1 or the Final Build Phases
of the transit-oriented mixed-use development, with the exception of
Subsection G(5), Office buildings, which shall be constructed only in the
Final Build Phases.
(1) One freestanding one-story large retail establishment: up to
170,000 square feet.
(2) Multistory large retail establishments or large retail
establishments in mixed-use retail commercial buildings: up to
120,000 square feet.
(3) Mixed-use retail commercial uses in mixed-use retail commercial
buildings and mixed-use buildings and other permitted uses not
enumerated in this subsection: up to 195,000 square feet, said
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:622
amount being reduced by the quantity of floor area constructed
under Subsection G(2) above. (By way of example, if 100,000
square feet of multistory large retail establishments are
constructed pursuant to Subsection G(2), 95,000 square feet of
mixed-use retail commercial uses can be constructed pursuant to
this subsection.)
(4) Freestanding pad sites: 20,000 square feet.
(5) Office buildings and uses: 120,000 square feet.
(6) Dwelling units: 400 dwelling units constructed in mixed-use,
mixed-use retail commercial and multifamily buildings. In mixeduse
retail commercial buildings, said residential units shall be
predominantly constructed on levels other than the ground floor.
No dwelling units may be located on the ground floor in a mixeduse,
mixed-use retail commercial or multifamily building where
said units would be fronting on Main Street or a parking area
containing more than 200 parking spaces. [Amended 7-25-2016
by Ord. No. 16-12]
(7) Hotel uses: 175 hotel rooms and associated support facilities.
(8) Civic uses: 50,000 square feet.
H. Commercial floor area and residential density bonuses. The following
square footage bonuses shall be permitted upon complying with the
requirements enumerated herein and satisfying the traffic performance
standards of this § 205-76.1B(1)(d):
(1) In Phase 1, one additional freestanding one-story large retail
establishment of up to 200,000 square feet, for a total of 370,000
square feet of freestanding one-story large retail establishments,
shall be permitted upon meeting each of the following:
(a) Each freestanding one-story large retail establishment
constructed pursuant to this subsection shall utilize renewable
energy such as but not limited to solar, wind or geothermal
power to produce a minimum of 10% of its estimated energy
demand.
(b) A public plaza, green or square or other public gathering space
shall be featured in the central area of the parking field in
order to provide a gathering place and break up the largest
parking field required by said freestanding buildings
constructed pursuant to this section.
(c) Each freestanding one-story large retail establishment
constructed pursuant to this subsection shall be designed to
achieve LEED certification.
(d) The construction permit for the one additional freestanding
one-story large retail establishment of up to 200,000 square
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:623
feet constructed pursuant to this subsection shall not be issued
until a footing and foundation has been installed and inspected
for a mixed-use retail building or buildings of at least 15,000
square feet total ground-floor floor area fronting on Main
Street.
(2) In Phase 1, an additional 80,000 square feet, for a total of 200,000
square feet, of large retail establishments in multistory buildings.
mixed-use buildings or mixed-use retail commercial buildings with
large retail establishments on the ground floor shall be permitted
upon meeting the following:
(a) Multistory large retail establishments constructed pursuant to
this subsection shall include either two stories of retail use, or
at least two additional floors of dwelling units or other
permitted uses on top of the retail use to result in a minimum
of three stories.
(b) Each mixed-use retail commercial and mixed-use building
constructed pursuant to this subsection containing a large
retail establishment, or two-story large retail establishment
constructed pursuant to this subsection shall be designed to
achieve LEED certification.
(c) The construction permit for the additional large retail
establishment of up to 80,000 square feet in a multistory or
mixed-use building constructed pursuant to this subsection
shall not be issued until a footing and foundation has been
installed and inspected for a mixed-use retail commercial
building or buildings of at least 15,000 square feet total
ground-floor floor area fronting on Main Street. If a
freestanding one-story large retail establishment of up to
200,000 square feet has been constructed in accordance with
Subsection H(1) above, satisfying the requirements of
Subsection H(1)(d) above, it is clearly intended that the
satisfaction of the requirement of this Subsection H(2)(c)
requires the installation and inspection of a footing and
foundation for a second mixed-use retail commercial building
or buildings of at least 15,000 square feet total ground-floor
floor area fronting on Main Street.
(3) In Phase 1 and the Final Build Phase, an additional 255,000 square
feet for a total floor area not to exceed 450,000 square feet of
mixed-use retail commercial uses and other permitted uses not
otherwise enumerated in Subsection G, said amount being reduced
by the quantity of floor area constructed under Subsections G(2)
and H(2) above, shall be permitted upon meeting the following:
(a) In Phase 1, an additional 80,000 square feet of mixed-use retail
commercial uses may be constructed, said amount being
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:624
reduced by the quantity of floor area constructed under
Subsection H(2) above.
(b) In the Final Build Phase, an additional 100,000 square feet of
mixed-use retail commercial uses and other permitted uses not
otherwise enumerated in Subsection G may be constructed
when a commitment for the construction of a train station is
provided by New Jersey Transit to locate a train station in a
location identified on the regulating plan.
(c) In the Final Build Phase, an additional 75,000 square feet of
mixed-use retail commercial uses and other permitted uses not
otherwise enumerated in Subsection G may be constructed,
provided:
[1] Commencement of construction of a train station has
begun of a passenger train station in a location identified
on the regulating plan;
[2] Each mixed-use retail commercial building and other
permitted uses not otherwise enumerated in Subsection G
constructed pursuant to this subsection is designed to
achieve LEED certification.
(4) In Phase 1, an additional 30,000 square feet, for a total of 50,000
square feet of freestanding pads, shall be permitted upon meeting
the following:
(a) Each freestanding pad constructed pursuant to this subsection
is designed to achieve LEED certification.
(b) Freestanding pads constructed pursuant to this subsection
shall provide articulated facades on sides of the building.
(5) In the Final Build Phase, an additional 75,000 square feet, for a
total of 195,000 square feet of office buildings, shall be permitted
upon meeting the following:
(a) Each office building constructed pursuant to this subsection
shall be designed to achieve LEED certification.
(b) Each office building over 60,000 square feet in area
constructed pursuant to this subsection shall provide at least
two parking spaces with connections to power electric cars.
(6) In the Final Build Phase, an additional 200 hotel rooms, for a total
of 375 hotel rooms, shall be permitted upon meeting the following:
(a) The additional 200 hotel rooms are located in a hotel
containing a minimum of 100 rooms.
(b) Each hotel building constructed pursuant to this subsection
shall be designed to achieve LEED certification.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:625
(c) Each hotel over 100 rooms constructed pursuant to this
subsection shall provide at least two parking spaces with
connections to power electric cars.
(7) In the Final Build Phase, additional dwelling units, for a total of
1,875 dwelling units, shall be permitted upon meeting the
following:
(a) An additional 475 dwelling units for a total of 875 dwelling
units, constructed pursuant to this subsection, shall be
permitted once commencement of construction of a train
station in a location identified on the regulating plan has been
achieved. [Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
(b) An additional 625 dwelling units for a total of 1,500 dwelling
units constructed pursuant to this subsection shall be
permitted once completion of construction of a train station in
a location identified on the regulating plan has been achieved.
(c) An additional 375 dwelling units, up to a total of 1,875 dwelling
units, shall be permitted to be constructed upon the following:
[1] Completion of construction of a train station in a location
identified on the regulating plan has been achieved.
[2] Any dwelling units in excess of 1,500 dwelling units
constructed pursuant to this subsection shall be designed
to achieve LEED certification.
[3] Any parking lot(s) in excess of 24 parking spaces, for all
additional dwelling units in excess of 1,500 dwelling units,
up to a total of 1,875 dwelling units, constructed pursuant
to this subsection shall provide at least two parking spaces
with connections to power electric cars per parking lot.
I. Freestanding one-story large retail establishments (FLRE). The
following standards apply to all freestanding one-story large retail
establishments, regardless of whether the establishment is located on
an individual lot or on a lot with other freestanding one-story large
retail establishments and/or other residential and nonresidential uses:
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size for large retail establishments (commercial): 50,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet from the front lot line and a
minimum of 20 feet from site access roads and six feet from
any drive or parking aisle.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:626
(f) Building height: 50 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Parking: in accordance with the shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(i) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix of § 205-76.1X.
(2) General. The intent of the standards delineated in this subsection is
to achieve the following broad goals:
(a) To create attractive buildings in an appealing and functional
setting;
(b) To assure that freestanding large retail establishments (FLRE)
respect commercial and residential neighborhoods that will
surround them by incorporating appropriate buffers and
lighting;
(c) To make sure that freestanding large retail establishments
utilize a variety of architectural features;
(d) To establish a safe and coherent pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicular network immediately surrounding each freestanding
large retail establishment building and between freestanding
large retail establishments and other uses on the site;
(e) To provide for energy conservation and efficiency from
operations of freestanding large retail establishments;
(f) To minimize adverse environmental impacts;
(g) To assure that freestanding large retail establishments
function as anchors for the remainder of the proposed transitoriented
mixed-use development;
(h) To minimize the impact of delivery truck traffic;
(i) To assure that there is maximum connectivity between
freestanding large retail establishments and all other uses in
the transit-oriented mixed-use development, including
adequate easements.
(3) Required site access. The following site access and circulation
dimensions are required in order to accommodate safe and efficient
site access and on-site circulation:
(a) All site access driveway roadway widths shall be 30 feet if they
are not designated as a truck delivery route. Truck delivery
routes shall be 40 feet in width.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:627
(b) The minimum driveway throat length between the intersecting
roadway and the first access to off-street parking or an
intersecting driveway shall be 100 feet.
(c) Each large retail establishment shall have a physically disabled
passenger loading zone adjacent to and within 50 feet of the
main entrance, said loading zone being a minimum of 40 feet in
length and eight feet in width, with an accessible access path
not less than 60 inches wide for the length of said zone and
leading to the entrance.
(d) All projected large retail establishments shall provide along
the main facade of the building for a bus loading/unloading
area to accommodate local bus service to the large retail
establishment.
(e) Any permitted motor fuels sales facility or use in conjunction
with a permitted large retail establishment shall be located a
minimum of 1,000 feet from US Route 1 and 500 feet from
Main Street.
(4) Building design standards.
(a) Facades and exterior walls.
[1] Facades and exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce
the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal
appearances of large retail establishments and provide
visual interest that will be compatible with the character
of future shop front retail and residential development
planned for the transit-oriented mixed-use development.
[2] Ground-floor facades greater than 100 feet in length,
measured horizontally, that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall incorporate wall plane
projections, arcades or recesses having a depth of at least
2% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20%
of the length of the facade in aggregate. No uninterrupted
length of any facade addressed by this section shall exceed
100 horizontal feet.
[3] Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall provide display windows,
windows, or transparent, translucent or opaque glass
treatments, along no less than 40% of their horizontal
length. Required display windows, windows, or
transparent, translucent or opaque glass treatments shall
occupy no less than 40% of the area between grade level
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:628
and 10 feet above grade level, inclusive of any glass entry
doors.
[4] Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall provide arcades, articulated
entry areas, awnings or other such features along no less
than 50% of their horizontal length.
[5] Building facades must include a repeating pattern that
shall include the following elements:
[a] Color change;
[b] Texture change;
[c] Material module change; and
[d] Expression of architectural or structural bays through
a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such
as an offset, reveal or projecting rib.
[e] All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than
50 feet horizontally along the length of the building.
[6] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base and cornice line
shall each equal at least 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall the base be less than four feet high and the
cornice be less than two feet high. The base and cornice
may be interrupted for required windows and doors as the
case may be.
[7] The corner of a building of a one-story freestanding large
retail establishment formed by the intersection of two
facades that face Main Street and US Route 1 shall provide
additional height of not less than 120% of the height of the
primary intersecting walls. The additional height shall
extend not less than 30 feet along each intersecting wall.
[8] Permitted fascia wall signs shall consist of individual
raised letters and logo forms that project no less than six
inches and no more than 12 inches from the facade wall
either attached to a panel or directly to the building wall.
(b) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:629
[2] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer.
[3] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[4] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[5] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials, highdensity
plastic, fiberglass-reinforced polyurethane, gridreinforced
cement and equivalent materials, and painted
or stained wood.
[6] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[7] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[8] Building elevations of all sides of a large retail
establishment indicating compliance with Section
standards shall be submitted as part of any preliminary
site plan approval application.
[9] Physical samples of all proposed building materials and
colors shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review
and approval as part of preliminary site plan approval
application.
[10] All expansion joints shall be disguised with architectural
elements such as piers, recesses, projecting facade
elements or material changes.
(c) Entryways.
[1] Entryway design elements and variations should give
orientation to the building while clearly identifying
entryways on one-story freestanding large retail
establishments.
[2] Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined,
visible customer entrances featuring no less than four of
the following:
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:630
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised corniced parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked roof forms;
[g] Arches;
[h] Outdoor patios;
[i] Display windows;
[j] Multiple entryways;
[k] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design;
[l] Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscape areas and/or places for sitting.
[3] The primary entryway for a one-story freestanding large
retail establishment shall be not less than 133% of the
height of the wall of the principal building. This
requirement may be reduced to not less than 120% of the
height of the principal building upon the inclusion of a
unique or distinctive architectural treatment or design
element at the primary entryway.
[4] Where additional stores will be located in the large retail
establishment, each such store may have at least one
additional exterior customer entrance, which entrance
shall conform to the above requirements.
[5] Uses requiring door or window security gates shall be
permitted to install mesh or lattice gates on the interior of
windows and doors. Exterior or solid security gates or
solid rollup doors that do not permit the passage of light
are prohibited. Loading areas that are screened from the
view of public streets and parking areas containing in
excess of 200 parking spaces shall be exempt from this
requirement. Alternatively, loading areas may be recessed
from the primary building facade facing a public street or
parking area containing more than 200 parking spaces by
not less than 60 feet and be exempt from said screening
requirement.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:631
[6] Merchant displays shall be limited to not more than six
feet deep along 40% of the facade length. Merchant
displays shall be removed and stored inside an enclosed
building or space each evening upon store closing.
(d) Roofs.
[1] Roof features should be used to complement the character
of the mixed-use retail and residential development
planned for the transit-oriented mixed-use development.
Variations in rooflines shall be used to add interest to, and
reduce the massive scale of, large buildings and such
variations shall be no less than three feet in height and
shall occur no less than every 100 feet. Roofs shall have no
less than two of the following features:
[a] Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment
from public view. The average height of such parapets
shall not exceed 25% of the height of the supporting
wall, and such parapets shall not at any point exceed
33% of the height of the supporting wall. Such
parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice
treatment.
[b] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet
past the supporting walls.
[c] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
the supporting walls, with an average slope greater
than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every
three feet of horizontal run, and less than or equal to
one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal
run.
[d] Three or more roof slope planes.
[e] All facades shall provide an articulated cornice at the
eave line or parapet line a minimum of two feet in
height and projecting a minimum of one foot from the
facade.
[2] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs
concealed by a parapet may be any material.
(5) Off-street parking and loading.
(a) No more than 70% of the required off-street parking for any
freestanding one-story large retail establishment building shall
be located between the street frontage and the particular
building's front elevation. All remaining off-street parking shall
be located outside of the area delineated by this standard.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:632
(b) Loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets
and parking areas containing more than 200 parking spaces by
a solid masonry screen wall at least eight feet high. Required
screen walls shall be faced with an approved facade building
material compatible with the primary building facade, and
have an articulated vertical element not less than every 15 feet
along the length of said wall. Alternatively, loading areas that
are recessed by a minimum of 60 feet from the primary
building facade facing a public street or a parking area
containing in excess of 200 parking spaces shall be deemed to
comply with the screening requirement.
(6) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts and from US Route 1:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Trash compactors and dumpsters.
(h) Storage tanks.
(i) Roof-mounted equipment and safety rails shall be placed away
from the RBL frontage and be screened from view from Main
Street, parking areas containing in excess of 200 parking
spaces and US Route 1.
J. Commencement of Main Street, development phasing, wind turbines
and setbacks from tract boundary lines.
(1) Any preliminary site plan submitted for Phase 1 shall include a
minimum of two mixed-use retail commercial buildings containing
a minimum ground-floor floor area of 15,000 square feet in each
mixed-use retail commercial building fronting on Main Street as
indicated on the regulating plan. The requirement may be met in
any number of mixed-use retail commercial buildings provided a
total of 30,000 square feet of ground-floor floor area is shown
fronting on Main Street.
(2) Wind turbines shall not exceed a height of 150 feet measured from
finished grade level to hub height.
(3) The following setbacks shall be observed for all tract boundaries:
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:633
(a) US Route 1: 75 feet from the existing right-of-way line.
(b) Side property lines: 40 feet.
(c) Railroad property line: zero feet.
K. Multistory large retail establishments and mixed-use retail commercial
buildings.
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 1,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet from the front lot line, a
minimum of 20 from site access roads and six feet from any
drive aisle.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet, except for Station Circle where the
permitted height shall be 125 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: No less than 16 feet and no more than
24 feet from the face of curb on the adjoining street or
sidewalk.
(i) Parking: in accordance with the shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(j) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) General design criteria. Multistory large retail establishments and
mixed-use retail commercial buildings are designed to foster active
street life.
(a) Their ground-floor fronts have large windows to encourage a
connection between the commercial activity within and the
public life of street and sidewalk. Since upper-story uses may
be office or residences, those windows are appropriately
smaller.
(b) These guidelines favor steeply pitched gable and hip roofs,
overhanging eaves and balconies, simple building walls of
stucco, stone or brick and muted exterior colors with rich trim
and detail colors.
(c) Building materials shall include primarily brick, stucco, native
stone, synthetic and composite siding, and precast masonry on
building walls fronting on public streets.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:634
(d) Roofs should have consistent pitches and generous overhangs
in order to provide visual coherence. Roofs should also
demonstrate common-sense recognition of the climate by
utilizing appropriate pitch, drainage and materials.
(e) Appropriate lighting is desirable for nighttime visibility, crime
deterrence and decoration. Lighting on site shall create light
necessary for convenience and safety without causing light
pollution or glare.
(f) At the front of the building, exterior lights shall be mounted
between eight feet and 20 feet above grade.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Facade and exterior walls.
[1] The building shall be between two stories and six stories in
height, except for Station Circle where they may be in
accordance with Subsection K(1)(f). The gross floor area of
any finished floor located above 75 feet in height above
finished grade shall be no greater than 20,000 square feet.
[2] At least 80% of the ground floor shall have at least 12 feet
clear height.
[3] Within 75 feet of a building corner, the building shall be
built to the RBL or have an articulated corner detail
treatment. In all other areas, buildings shall be built to not
less than 75% of the RBL.
[4] The ground floor shall have not less than 60% fenestration
measured between two feet and 10 feet above the fronting
sidewalk.
[5] Uses requiring door or window security gates shall be
permitted to install mesh or lattice gates on the interior of
windows and doors. Exterior or solid gates are prohibited.
[6] Upper-story facades facing a public street, Main Street or
a parking area in excess of 600 parking spaces shall have
between 30% and 80% fenestration measured for each
story between three feet and nine feet above the finished
floor.
[7] No less than 50% of the upper-story dwelling units
fronting on a street shall have balconies and/or
balconettes.
[8] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base and cornice line
shall each equal at least 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall be less than two feet.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:635
[9] Awnings and overhangs are encouraged and may project
over the sidewalk at a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(b) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials on a primary
facade shall be quality materials, including, but not limited
to, brick, sandstone, native stone veneer, cultured stone
and stone veneer, stucco, composite siding, and tinted/
textured concrete masonry units.
[3] Building materials on the secondary facade may be those
permitted on the primary facade and painted, concrete
masonry units, and vinyl siding.
[4] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[5] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[6] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials,
precast materials, high-density plastic, fiberglassreinforced
polyurethane, grid-reinforced cement and
equivalent materials and painted or stained wood.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
(c) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each mixed-use retail building shall have a clearly defined,
visible customer, visitor and/or resident entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:636
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
(d) Roofs.
[1] Roof features should be used to complement the character
of the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on the
transit-oriented mixed-use development. Variations in
rooflines shall be used to add visual interest to, and reduce
the scale of, large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than
two of the following features:
[a] Parapets concealing flat roofs;
[b] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet
past supporting walls;
[c] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
supporting walls;
[d] Three or more roof planes.
[e] An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line
a minimum of two feet in height and projecting a
minimum of one foot from the facade.
[2] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs,
concealed by a parapet, may be any material.
(4) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:637
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment and safety rails shall be placed away
from the RBL frontage and be screened from view from the
street.
(5) Parking and loading.
(a) Parking is prohibited within the front setback between the
front of the building and the front property line. For all Main
Street properties, all required off-street parking shall be
located between the rear property line and an imaginary line
extended from the rear of the building to the side property
lines.
(b) Loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets
and parking areas containing more than 200 parking spaces by
a solid masonry screen wall at least eight feet high. Required
screen walls shall be faced with an approved facade building
material compatible with the primary building facade, and
have an articulated vertical element not less than every 15 feet
along the length of said wall.
L. Freestanding retail and restaurant pads.
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet from front lot lines, except
for site access roads where minimum setback shall be 20 feet
and site drive aisles where minimum setback shall be six feet.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: n/a.
(i) Parking: in accordance with the shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(j) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) Other provisions.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:638
(a) Building orientation.
[1] Buildings may be oriented to the street or site access roads
with primary pedestrian access points directly accessing
the street facade.
[2] Buildings may be located to break up the appearance of
large parking fields and to screen parking areas from the
viewshed of US Route 1.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Facade and exterior walls.
[1] The building shall be between one story and two stories in
height.
[2] At least 80% of the ground floor shall have at least 12 feet
clear height.
[3] The ground floor shall have not less than 60% fenestration
measured between two feet and 10 feet above the fronting
sidewalk, and not less than 30% fenestration on at least
two additional sides.
[4] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base course and cornice
line shall each equal 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall be less than two feet.
[5] Awnings and overhangs are encouraged and may project
over the sidewalk at a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(b) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer,
stucco, composite siding, and tinted/textured concrete
masonry units.
[3] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[4] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:639
[5] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials,
precast materials, high-density plastic, fiberglassreinforced
polyurethane, grid-reinforced cement and
equivalent materials, and painted or stained wood.
[6] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs,
concealed by a parapet, may be any material.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
(c) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each freestanding retail or restaurant building shall have
a clearly defined, visible customer, visitor and/or resident
entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
(d) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the
character of the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on
the transit-oriented mixed-use development. Variations in
rooflines shall be used to add visual interest to, and reduce the
scale of, large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two of
the following features;
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:640
[1] Parapets concealing flat roofs;
[2] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
supporting walls;
[3] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
supporting walls;
[4] Three or more roof planes;
[5] An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line a
minimum of two feet in height and projecting a minimum
of one foot from the facade.
(4) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment shall be placed away from the RBL
frontage and be screened from view from the street and from
US Route 1.
(5) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, screening, bay windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture may reflect the difference between public vs.
private doors and entries.
(c) The use of prominent corner elements and features is
encouraged.
(d) Service areas and loading zones shall be screened from view of
US Route 1, Main Street and customer parking areas.
M. Office buildings. Freestanding office buildings are permitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:641
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet, except for Station Circle where
minimum may be 20 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet, except for site access roads
where minimum setback shall be 20 feet and site drive aisles
where the minimum setback shall be six feet.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet, except for any office building located
within 350 feet of the Northeast Corridor, where permitted
height may be equal to 125 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: n/a.
(i) Parking: in accordance with shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(j) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) Other provisions.
(a) Permitted commercial uses may be located within the groundor
street-level floor area.
(b) Building orientation.
[1] Buildings may be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street
facade.
[2] At least 50% of a buildings front facade must be built to
the minimum setback line, except for building's fronting
on site access roads, where the build-to line may be
established between the front setback line and a distance
equal to half the height of the building.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Facade and exterior walls.
[1] The building shall be between three stories and 12 stories
in height. The gross floor area of any finished floor located
above 75 feet in height above finished grade shall be no
greater than 20,000 square feet.
[2] At least 80% of the ground floor shall have at least 12 feet
clear height.
[3] The ground floor shall have not less than 60% fenestration
measured between two feet and 10 feet above the fronting
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:642
sidewalk, and not less than 30% fenestration on at least
two additional sides.
[4] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base course and cornice
line shall each equal 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall be less than two feet.
[5] Awnings and overhangs are encouraged and may project
over the sidewalk at a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(b) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer,
stucco, glass, composite siding, and tinted/textured
concrete masonry units.
[3] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[4] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[5] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials,
precast materials, high-density plastic, fiberglassreinforced
polyurethane, grid-reinforced cement and
equivalent materials, and painted or stained wood.
[6] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs,
concealed by a parapet, may be any material.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:643
(c) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each freestanding office building shall have a clearly
defined, visible customer, visitor and/or resident
entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
(d) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the
character of the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on
the transit-oriented mixed-use development. Variations in
rooflines shall be used to add visual interest to, and reduce the
scale of, large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two of
the following features:
[1] Parapets concealing flat roofs;
[2] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
supporting walls;
[3] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
supporting walls;
[4] Three or more roof planes;
[5] An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line a
minimum of two feet in height and projecting a minimum
of one foot from the facade.
(4) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:644
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment shall be placed away from the RBL
frontage and be screened from view from the street and from
US Route 1.
(5) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, screening, bay windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture may reflect the difference between public vs.
private doors and entries.
(c) The use of prominent corner elements and features is
encouraged.
(d) Service areas and loading zones shall be screened from view of
US Route 1, Main Street and customer parking areas.
N. Hotels and extended-stay hotels.
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet, except for Station Circle where
minimum may be 20 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet, except for site access roads
where minimum setback shall be 20 feet and site drive aisles
where the minimum setback shall be six feet.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet, except for Station Circle, where
permitted height may be 125 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: n/a.
(i) Parking: in accordance with the shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:645
(j) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) Other provisions.
(a) Permitted commercial uses may be located within first floor or
ground floor area.
(b) Building orientation.
[1] Buildings may be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street
facade.
[2] At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to
the minimum setback line, except for buildings fronting on
site access roads, where the build-to line may be
established between the front setback line and a distance
equal to half the height of the building.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Facade and exterior walls.
[1] The building shall be between three stories and six stories
in height, except for Station Circle, where permitted
height may be equal to that permitted in Subsection
N(1)(f). The gross floor area of any finished floor located
above 75 feet in height above finished grade shall be no
greater than 20,000 square feet.
[2] The ground floor shall have not less than 60% fenestration
measured between two feet and 10 feet above the fronting
sidewalk, and not less than 30% fenestration on at least
two additional sides.
[3] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base course and cornice
line shall each equal 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall be less than two feet. Further delineation of
the facade through changing bands of color or different
materials or lighting is also encouraged.
[4] Awnings and overhangs are encouraged and may project
over the sidewalk at a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(b) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:646
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer,
stucco, composite siding, and tinted/textured concrete
masonry units.
[3] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[4] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[5] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials,
precast materials, high-density plastic, fiberglassreinforced
polyurethane, grid-reinforced cement and
equivalent materials, and painted or stained wood.
[6] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs,
concealed by a parapet, may be any material.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
(c) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each hotel or extended-stay hotel building shall have a
clearly defined, visible customer, visitor and/or resident
entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:647
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
(d) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the
character of the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on
the transit-oriented mixed-use development. Variations in
rooflines shall be used to add visual interest to, and reduce the
scale of, large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two of
the following features;
[1] Parapets concealing flat roofs;
[2] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
supporting walls;
[3] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
supporting walls;
[4] Three or more roof planes;
[5] An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line a
minimum of two feet in height and projecting a minimum
of one foot from the facade.
(4) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment shall be placed away from the RBL
frontage and be screened from view from the street and from
US Route 1.
(5) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, balconies, balconettes, bay
windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:648
(b) Architecture may reflect the difference between public vs.
private doors and entries.
(c) Balconies and balconettes encouraged.
(d) Use of accent lighting such as neon, LED, uplighting and other
creative techniques are permitted and encouraged to
distinguish large facade areas.
O. Residential flats, loft flats, townhouses, multifamily buildings, duplex
lofts, live/work units.
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 1,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 18 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet, except for site access roads
where minimum setback shall be 20 feet and site drive aisles
where the minimum setback shall be six feet.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet, except for Station Circle, where the
permitted height shall be 125 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: Not less than 10 feet and not more than
16 feet from the face of curb of the adjoining street or parking
area.
(i) Parking: in accordance with shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(j) Signage: in accordance with signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) General provisions.
(a) Permitted commercial uses up to 2,000 square feet gross
leasable area shall be permitted on the first or ground floors of
residential buildings permitted in the section provided said use
has an outside entrance accessible from a public sidewalk.
(b) The building shall be a minimum of three stories in height.
(c) The gross floor area of any finished floor located above 75 feet
in height above finished grade shall be no greater than 20,000
square feet.
(d) Any parking structure within the block shall not exceed the
eave height of any residential building within 75 feet.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:649
(e) Fenestration shall be between 30% and 70% for all RBL
building facades measured between three feet and nine feet
above the finished floor.
(f) Blank lengths of wall greater than 30 linear feet shall be
prohibited.
(g) Off-street surface parking or garage parking shall be at least
20 feet from any RBL on a street. Garage or surface parking is
permitted within six feet of any alley.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Materials and colors.
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials on the primary
facade shall be quality materials, including, but not limited
to, brick, sandstone, native stone veneer, cultured stone
and stone veneer, stucco, composite siding, and tinted/
textured concrete masonry units.
[3] Building materials on the secondary facade may be those
permitted on the primary facade and painted, concrete
masonry units, and vinyl siding.
[4] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[5] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[6] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials, highdensity
plastic, fiberglass-reinforced polyurethane, gridreinforced
cement and equivalent materials, and painted
or stained wood.
[7] Roof materials may be architectural asphalt shingles,
metal panels, metal, tile, slate and solar shingles or tiles.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:650
(b) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each residential building shall have a clearly defined,
visible visitor and/or resident entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
(c) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the
character of the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on
the transit-oriented mixed-use development. Variations in
rooflines shall be used to add visual interest to, and reduce the
scale of, large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two of
the following features;
[1] Parapets concealing flat roofs;
[2] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
supporting walls;
[3] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
supporting walls;
[4] Three or more roof planes;
[5] An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line a
minimum of two feet in height and projecting a minimum
of one foot from the facade.
(4) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:651
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment shall be placed away from the RBL
frontage and be screened from view from the street.
(5) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, screening, bay windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture may reflect the difference between public vs.
private doors and entries.
(c) The use of prominent corner elements and features is
encouraged.
P. Indoor recreation facilities. Indoor recreation facilities are permitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: zero feet, except for site access roads
where minimum setback shall be 20 feet and site drive aisles
where the minimum setback shall be six feet.
(d) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
(e) Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
(f) Building height: 75 feet.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(h) Required building line: n/a.
(i) Parking: in accordance with shared parking matrix,
§ 205-76.1W.
(j) Signage: in accordance with the signage matrix, § 205-76.1X.
(2) Other provisions.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:652
(a) Permitted commercial uses may be located within the groundor
street-level floor area. Permitted residential uses may be
used as liner buildings or integrated into a mixed-use building.
(b) Building orientation.
[1] Buildings may be oriented to the street with primary
pedestrian access points directly accessing the street
facade.
[2] At least 50% of a building's front facade must be built to
the minimum setback line, except for buildings fronting on
site access roads, where the build-to line may be
established between the front setback line and a distance
equal to half the height of the building.
(3) Building design standards.
(a) Facade and exterior walls.
[1] The building shall be between one story and six stories in
height.
[2] At least 80% of the ground floor shall have at least 12 feet
clear height.
[3] The ground floor shall have not less than 40% fenestration
measured between two feet and 10 feet above the fronting
sidewalk, and not less than 20% fenestration on at least
two additional sides.
[4] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base course and cornice
line shall each equal 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall be less than two feet.
[5] Awnings and overhangs are encouraged and may project
over the sidewalk at a minimum clearance of eight feet.
(b) Materials and colors. Indoor recreation facilities shall be
constructed of the following:
[1] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors to be utilized
throughout the transit-oriented mixed-use development
shown in § 205-76.1Y(4).
[2] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer,
stucco, glass, composite siding, and tinted/textured
concrete masonry units.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:653
[3] Predominant facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors provided in § 205-76.1Y(4).
The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
[4] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in
§ 205-76.1Y(4).
[5] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials,
precast materials, high-density plastic, fiberglassreinforced
polyurethane, grid-reinforced cement and
equivalent materials, and painted or stained wood.
[6] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs,
concealed by a parapet, may be any material.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in § 205-76.1Y(4).
(c) Entryways. Entry design elements and variations shall give
orientation and identity to the building and uses within.
[1] Each indoor recreation facility shall have a clearly defined,
visible customer, visitor and/or resident entrance(s).
[2] Each building entrance shall feature no fewer than three
of the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos;
[b] Overhangs;
[c] Recesses/projections;
[d] Arcades;
[e] Raised cornice parapets over the door;
[f] Peaked or arched roof forms;
[g] Awnings;
[h] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:654
(4) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the character of
the mixed-use retail and residential buildings on the transitoriented
mixed-use development. Variations in rooflines shall be
used to add visual interest to, and reduce the scale of, large
buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two of the following
features:
(a) Parapets concealing flat roofs;
(b) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet past
supporting walls;
(c) Sloping or arched roofs that do not exceed the average height
of supporting walls;
(d) Three or more roof planes;
(e) An articulated cornice at the eave line or parapet line a
minimum of two feet in height and projecting a minimum of
one foot from the facade.
(5) Mechanical equipment. The following equipment shall be placed
away from any RBL and be screened from view from the street on
which the building fronts:
(a) Air compressors.
(b) Mechanical pumps.
(c) Exterior water heaters.
(d) Water softeners.
(e) Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
(f) Garbage cans for individual uses.
(g) Storage tanks.
(h) Roof-mounted equipment shall be placed away from the RBL
frontage and be screened from view from the street and from
US Route 1.
(6) Appurtenances (porches, stoops, screening, bay windows).
(a) Solar screens, awnings and arcades may be used to provide
user comfort, energy conservation and design unity.
(b) Architecture may reflect the difference between public vs.
private doors and entries.
(c) The use of prominent corner elements and features is
encouraged.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:655
(d) Service areas and loading zones shall be screened from view of
US Route 1, Main Street and customer parking areas.
Q. Green-engineering performance standards. The following greenengineering
performance standards shall be met by the development:
(1) All buildings constructed pursuant to applicable bonus provisions
of this section shall be designed to achieve LEED certification.
Paperwork indicating proposed scoring for achieving LEED
certification shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development for approval prior to a final site plan approval for any
building.
(2) The utilization of potable water for nonpotable (i.e., irrigation,
fountains, etc.) purposes shall be prohibited.
(3) All parking lot lights shall be LED (light-emitting diodes). Other
exterior lighting, including interior lighting for exterior
identification signs, shall be LED or equivalent energy-saving
technology available at the time of construction, dependent upon
availability of suitable architectural lighting.
(4) The use of recycled materials is encouraged, including demolition
materials from the existing facilities on the premises. Where an
existing design standard would preclude the use of a recycled
material, including demolition material, the use of the recycled
material shall take precedence and waive said design standard.
R. Requirement for street connections to adjacent developable parcels
and/or the Finnegans Lane Extension.
(1) A location shall be provided on the regulating plan for a vehicle
connection to the planned future Finnegans Lane Extension
running parallel to the site along the Northeast Corridor line.
(2) A location shall be provided on the regulating plan for a vehicle
connection to the adjacent parcel to the north of the transitoriented
mixed-use development.
S. Street network standards.
(1) Elements of street cross sections.
(a) Roadside zone. The roadside zone includes the area between
the curb face and the front property line of adjoining parcels. It
should contain four subzones, including the edge zone,
furnishings zone, throughway zone and frontage zone. These
zones provide flexibility along the length of a street for the
necessary landscaping, street furnishings, pedestrian through
movements and roadside activities.
[1] Edge zone. The edge zone provides interface between
parked vehicles and street furniture. This zone should
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:656
generally be kept clear of any objects. Parking meters may
be placed here with consideration to door swings. The
edge zone should have a minimum width of 1.5 feet and
may be widened to a minimum of four feet at transit stops
with shelters.
[2] Furnishings zone. The furnishings zone is the key buffer
component between the active pedestrian walking area
and the vehicle traveled way area. Street trees, planting
strips, street furniture, bollards, signal poles, signals,
electrical, telephone and traffic signal cabinets, signs, fire
hydrants and bicycle racks should be consolidated in this
zone to keep them from becoming obstacles to
pedestrians. The furnishings zone should have a minimum
width of seven feet.
[3] Throughway zone. The throughway zone is intended for
pedestrian travel only and should be entirely clear of
obstacles and provide a smooth walking surface. The
throughway zone shall be a minimum of six feet wide.
[4] Frontage zone. The frontage zone is the area adjacent to
the property line that may be defined by a building facade,
landscaping area, fence or screened parking area. A
minimum width of 1.5 feet should be provided for the
frontage zone. The width of the frontage zone may be
increased to accommodate a variety of activities
associated with adjacent uses, such as outdoor seating or
merchant displays. Merchant displays shall be limited to
not more than three feet deep along 40% of the facade
length or 24 linear feet, whichever is less.
(b) Traveled way. The traveled way is the street pavement area
between curbs. It includes the following key components:
[1] Vehicle travel lanes. Vehicle travel lanes shall range from
10 feet to 12 feet in width.
[2] Bicycle lanes. A minimum bicycle lane width of four feet
should be provided.
[3] Medians. Medians should be used as an additional location
for landscaping. Medians should also serve as pedestrian
refuge islands within the traveled way when needed.
[4] On-street parallel parking. Parallel parking is the on-street
parking spaces that are parallel to the driving lanes. A
seven-foot width should be provided for parallel parking.
(2) Permitted street cross sections. The standards below are minimum
standards and may be exceeded in accordance with an approved
subdivision or site plan.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:657
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:658
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:659
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:660
Permitted Commercial Sidewalk Cross Section and Plan
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:661
Permitted Residential Sidewalk Cross Section and Plan
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:662
T. Public art.
(1) Locations for public art shall be provided on the regulating plan
approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Public art shall be provided in prominent civic greens, plazas and
squares.
U. Landscaping and lighting.
(1) General. Development of the transit-oriented development shall
require the establishment of groves and belts of trees along all
public streets, in and around parking lots, and in all landscape
areas that are located within 50 feet of any building or structure in
order to establish at least a partial urban tree canopy.
(2) Xeriscape landscape principles. All landscaping plans shall be
designed to incorporate water conservation materials and
techniques though application of xeriscape landscaping principles.
Xeriscape landscaping principles do not include or allow artificial
plants, mulched (including gravel) beds or areas without landscape
plant material, paving of areas not required for walkways, plazas or
parking lots, bare ground, weed-covered or infested surfaces or any
landscaping that does not comply with the following landscaping
principles:
(a) Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped
together on the same irrigation zones;
(b) High-irrigation turf and plantings shall be limited to
appropriate high-use areas with high visibility and functional
needs;
(c) Use of low-water-demanding plants and turf where practicable.
(3) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) All parking lot islands, connecting walkways through parking
lots and driveways through or to parking lots shall be
landscaped with a combination of deciduous and evergreen
trees and shrubs suitable to a parking environment.
(b) Five percent of the interior space of all parking lots shall be
landscaped or public plaza areas.
(c) An intervening island a minimum of eight feet wide shall be
provided between every 11 parking spaces along a row.
(d) An intervening island a minimum of eight feet wide shall be
provided between every three bays of parking or every 200
feet, whichever is less.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:663
(e) The perimeter of any parking lot fronting on Main Street or US
Route 1 shall be screened by a decorative wall, fence or hedge
a minimum of three feet high.
(4) Parking lot lighting.
(a) All parking areas shall be illuminated to provide a safe
pedestrian and vehicle operating environment.
(b) The mounting height of parking lot light fixtures shall not
exceed the height of the tallest building fronting on the parking
area or 30 feet, whichever is less.
(c) All parking lot lighting shall be shielded and directed
downward to minimize incidence of sky glow and minimize
impact on residential uses.
(d) All parking lot lighting shall be LED or equivalent energysaving
technology available at the time of construction.
(5) Streetlighting.
(a) All streets and public plazas, parks and squares shall be
adequately illuminated for pedestrian safety and vehicular
operation.
(b) Main Street sidewalks, pedestrian walkways and plaza areas
shall be illuminated by pedestrian-scale fixtures no greater
than 18 feet in height, spaced not more than 90 feet on center.
(c) Streets and intersections shall be illuminated in accordance
with their function, with the mounting height of streetlighting
not to exceed 30 feet.
(d) A comprehensive lighting plan shall be established and
approved by the Planning Board at the time of general
development plan or site plan approval, as appropriate.
(e) The operation of search lights and other upward-directed and
moving lights used to promote business activity is strictly
prohibited.
V. Streetscape and site furniture.
(1) A comprehensive street furniture plan shall be established and
approved by the Planning Board at the time of general development
plan or site plan approval, as appropriate.
(2) A street furniture plan shall be compatible with the selected
lighting fixtures for the transit-oriented mixed-use development
and shall incorporate Subsection V(2)(a) through (e) below and at
least four of the remaining following elements at a minimum:
(a) Benches.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:664
(b) Bicycle racks.
(c) Bus shelters.
(d) Street name signs.
(e) Trash and recycling containers.
(f) Bollards.
(g) Information posting centers.
(h) Directional signage.
(i) Banners.
(j) Hanging baskets.
(k) Flags.
(l) Vending machine kiosks.
(m) Tables and/or chairs.
(n) Telephone booths.
(o) Table game tables.
(p) Fireplaces and pits.
(q) Fountains.
(r) Public art.
(s) Topiary and other planters and plantings.
(t) Trellises.
(u) Seasonal decorations.
(v) Other items of interest as may be determined by the developer
in accordance with the regulating plan.
(3) A comprehensive sidewalk plan shall be established and approved
by the Planning Board at the time of general development plan or
site plan approval, as appropriate.
(a) Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of six
feet wide in commercial and mixed-use areas and five feet wide
in residential areas.
(b) Sidewalks shall be primarily concrete, with 25% of the surface
area of the sidewalks and pedestrian walkways consisting of
colored concrete, scored and colored in a contrasting manner
to the primary sidewalk, or unit pavers at the discretion of the
developer.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:665
(c) Sidewalks, walkways, crosswalks, curb cuts, parking areas and
public plazas shall be accessible to those with disabilities in
accordance with applicable ADA codes and standards.
(d) Sidewalk cafes, and eating and drinking establishments are
permitted and encouraged. Said cafes may be located
anywhere on the sidewalk as long as a six-foot throughway is
maintained. Said areas may be enclosed by railings or planters
as required, may include permanent structures or seasonal
enclosures as an extension of the building in the storefront
frontage zone.
(e) Awnings may project over the sidewalk so long as an eight-foot
clear height is maintained. Awnings may extend to the curb
with supports located within the furniture zone only.
(f) Archways may extend over streets and sidewalks provided
adequate clearance is maintained for pedestrians (eight feet)
and vehicles (15 feet).
W. Off-street and shared parking requirements.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards, which recognize the mixed and multiple use of the
transit-oriented mixed-use development, the potential for transit
service, trip reduction, internal trip capture and increased
opportunities for walking and bicycling to reduce off-site traffic
impacts and the need for excessive on-site parking.
(2) Parking requirement matrix.
Use Parking Required
Banks 5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Bed-and-breakfast inn 1 space/room
Civic 2 spaces/1,000 square feet
Fitness center 4 spaces/1,000 square feet
Hotel/extended-stay hotel 1 space/room
Indoor recreation facilities 30 spaces/field or court
Large retail establishments 4.5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Mixed-use retail commercial 4.5 spaces/1,000 square feet
Office 3.3 spaces/1,000 square feet
Residential* 1.5 spaces/unit
Restaurant/eating and drinking
establishments
10 spaces/1,000 square feet
* The residential parking requirement shall revert to 1.0 space per
unit with the commencement of operation of scheduled rail transit
service.
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:666
(3) Shared parking matrix. The matrix indicates the percentage of
peak parking demand required by time of day for each use
permitted in the transit-oriented mixed-use development.
6:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
9:00
a.m.
10:00
a.m.
11:00
a.m.
12:00
noon
% Large
retail
establishments
2% 10% 10% 35% 65% 85% 95%
% Main
Street
retail
2% 10% 10% 35% 65% 85% 95%
% Hotel 95% 90% 84% 79% 74% 69% 64%
% Civic 2% 5% 15% 42% 65% 76% 51%
%
Residential
lofts
96% 83% 83% 51% 44% 40% 37%
% Office 2% 2% 68% 80% 90% 95% 90%
%
Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 5% 10% 25% 64%
% Fitness
center/
indoor rec.
70% 45% 45% 70% 70% 80% 60%
%
Commuter
parking
10% 50% 80% 98% 100% 100% 97%
1:00
p.m.
2:00
p.m.
3:00
p.m.
4:00
p.m.
5:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
7:00
p.m.
% Large
retail
establishments
100% 95% 95% 88% 85% 87% 90%
% Main
Street
retail
100% 95% 95% 88% 85% 87% 90%
% Hotel 65% 69% 75% 75% 70% 67% 75%
% Civic 72% 75% 100% 85% 79% 46% 98%
%
Residential
lofts
34% 34% 34% 37% 45% 68% 78%
% Office 80% 80% 95% 92% 62% 33% 10%
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:667
1:00
p.m.
2:00
p.m.
3:00
p.m.
4:00
p.m.
5:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
7:00
p.m.
%
Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
65% 74% 31% 50% 39% 72% 100%
% Fitness
center/
indoor rec.
70% 70% 70% 80% 90% 100% 90%
%
Commuter
parking
92% 87% 77% 70% 65% 50% 33%
8:00
p.m.
9:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.
11:00
p.m.
12:00
midnight
% Large retail
establishments
85% 70% 38% 20% 0.1%
% Main Street
retail
85% 70% 38% 20% 0.1%
% Hotel 67% 67% 67% 67% 67%
% Civic 83% 45% 1% 0.1% 0.1%
% Residential
lofts
86% 91% 93% 96% 98%
% Office 5% 3% 1% 1% 0.1%
% Restaurant/
eating and
drinking
establishment
88% 67% 45% 10% 8%
% Fitness
center/indoor
rec.
80% 70% 30% 10% 1%
% Commuter
parking
20% 10% 5% 3% 2%
X. Signage regulations.
(1) Signage shall be permitted in accordance with the following
regulations and standards:
(a) Signage matrix for retail/restaurant tenants under 25,000
square feet leaseable area:
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:668
Signage Matrix for Retail/Restaurant Tenants under
25,000 Square Feet Leaseable Area
Total maximum allowable signage per tenant less than 25,000
square feet is not to exceed 1.5 square feet per lineal foot
of tenant frontage for primary identification signage and 0.75
square foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage for secondary
identification signage. Primary identification signage is not to
exceed a total of 225 square feet. Secondary identification
signage is not to exceed 100 square feet. Maximum letter/logo
height is three feet unless otherwise approved.
Sign
Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–fascia wall
sign
1.5 square feet per
lineal foot tenant
frontage
75 square feet
Type B 3 square feet per
lineal foot of
marquee or
canopy
75 square feet
Type C 1.5 square feet per
lineal foot of
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
1.5 square feet per
lineal foot of
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting
blade sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight feet
in height
20 square feet per
awning
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:669
Sign
Type–Description
Formula for
Determining Sign
Area/Quantity
Maximum
Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door
sign
15% of glazing
area
10 square feet per
structural bay
Type H–changeable
sign
a. Shadow boxes 6 square feet
b. Poster display
cases
60 square feet
c. Banners 1 banner per
structural building
bay
50 square feet per
banner
d. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
e. Display
stands/easels
1 per street
frontage
8 square feet
Type J–additional
signs
a. Mobile retail
cart
Total for each cart 16 square feet
b. Posting
information
board placard
Per sign (up to 24
square feet
maximum per PIB)
8 square feet
c. Temporary
sign
1 per street
frontage per use
12 square feet
d. Construction
sign
1 per tenant 40 square feet
e. Showcase
display
windows
1 per
unfenestrated wall
in excess of 16
feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
f. Umbrella
graphics
1 per umbrella 1 per table
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:670
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, B, C, E1). Tenants under
25,000 square feet with frontage on one principal street shall
be permitted one of the A, B, C or E1 sign types as the
primary identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with
frontage on two principal streets or parking areas may be
permitted to have a total of any three of the A, B or E1 sign
types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants
may be allowed to use a total of three of the D, E2, F, G, H sign
types.
(b) Signage matrix for major office tenants:
Signage Matrix for Major Office Tenants
Total maximum allowable signage per office tenant greater
than 7,500 square feet is not to exceed 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of tenant frontage for primary identification
signage and 0.5 square foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage
for secondary identification signage. Primary identification
signage is not to exceed a total of 150 square feet. Secondary
identification signage is not to exceed 75 square feet.
Maximum letter/logo height is three feet unless otherwise
approved.
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining
Sign Area/
Quantity
Max. Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–Fascia wall sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot
tenant frontage
75 square feet
Type B–marquee/canopy
sign
1.5 square feet
per lineal foot of
marquee or
canopy
50 square feet
Type C–feature sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:671
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determining
Sign Area/
Quantity
Max. Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting blade
sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight
inches in height
20 square feet
per awning
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door
sign
15% of glazing
area
10 square feet
per structural
bay
Type H–changeable sign
a. Banners 1 banner per
structural
building bay
50 square feet
per banner
b. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
Type J–additional signs
a. Temporary sign 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet
b. Construction
sign
1 per tenant 40 square feet
c. Showcase
display windows
1 per
unfenestrated
wall in excess of
16 feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:672
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, B, C, El). Tenants over 7,500
square feet with frontage on one principal street shall be
permitted one of the A, B, C or El sign types as the primary
identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with
frontage on two principal streets or parking areas may be
permitted to have a total of any three of the A, B, C or El sign
types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants
may be allowed to use a total of three of the D, E2, F, G, H sign
types.
Tenants having railroad frontage shall be permitted additional
signage facing the railroad in accordance with their primary
identification signage requirement.
(c) Signage matrix for minor office tenants:
Signage Matrix for Minor Office Tenants
Total maximum allowable signage per office tenant less than
7,500 square feet is not to exceed 0.75 square foot per lineal
foot of tenant frontage for primary identification signage and
0.5 square foot per lineal foot of tenant frontage for secondary
identification signage. Primary identification signage is not to
exceed a total of 50 square feet (80 square feet for tenants
in corner locations or with frontage on two primary streets
or parking areas). Secondary identification signage is not to
exceed 50 square feet. Maximum letter/logo height is 1.5 feet
unless otherwise approved.
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determing Sign
Area/Quantity
Max. Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Primary
Identification
Signage
Type A–fascia wall sign 0.25 square foot
per lineal foot
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type C–feature sign 0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
Type E1–awning sign
primary ID
0.75 square foot
per lineal foot of
tenant frontage
50 square feet
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:673
Sign Type–Description
Formula for
Determing Sign
Area/Quantity
Max. Allowable
Individual Sign
Area
Secondary
Identification
Signage
Type D–projecting blade
sign
1 blade sign per
tenant frontage
10 square feet
Type E2–awning sign
secondary ID
Up to 25% of the
surface area of
each awning to
which graphics
will be applied.
Lettering on
valance shall not
exceed eight
inches in height
20 square feet
per awning
Type F–plaque and
medallion sign
1 per main entry 4 square feet per
tenant
Type G–window/door
sign
15% of glazing
area
10 square feet
per structural
bay
Type H–changeable sign
a. Flags 1 corporate flag
per business
premises
24 square feet
Type J–additional signs
a. Temporary sign 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet
b. Construction
sign
1 per tenant 24 square feet
c. Showcase
display windows
1 per
unfenestrated
wall in excess of
16 feet in length
fronting on a
sidewalk or
pedestrian way
96 square feet
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:674
Allowable sign types quantities:
Primary identification signage (A, C, E1). Tenants under 7,500
square feet with frontage on one principal street shall be
permitted one of the A, C or E1 sign types as the primary
identification sign. Tenants in corner locations or with
frontage on two principal streets or parking areas may be
permitted to have a total of any three of the A, C or E1 sign
types.
Secondary identification signage (D, E2, F, G, H). All tenants
may be allowed to use a total of any three of the D, E2, F, G,
H sign types.
(d) Sign matrix for retail/hotel tenants in excess of 25,000 square
feet leasable area:
Signage Matrix for Retail/Hotel Tenants in Excess of
25,000 Square Feet Leaseable Area
The total maximum allowable signage per tenant of 25,000
square feet or greater is not to exceed the square footage in
the chart below. The maximum letter/logo height is seven feet
Tenant
Leaseable Area
Primary Identification
Signage Max Allowable
Max
Combined
Allowable
for All Sign
Types Used
Single Sign Aggregate
25,000 square
feet to 50,000
square feet
250 square
feet
250 square
feet
300 square
feet
50,000 square
feet to 75,000
square feet
300 square
feet
400 square
feet
500 square
feet
75,000 square
feet to 99,999
square feet
350 square
feet
450 square
feet
600 square
feet
100,000 square
feet to 125,000
square feet
400 square
feet
600 square
feet
800 square
feet
125,000 square
feet to 150,000
square feet
500 square
feet
750 square
feet
1,000 square
feet
150,000 square
feet or greater
600 square
feet
900 square
feet
1,200 square
feet
(2) Large retail establishment and hotel signage.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:675
(a) Leasable area is gross square footage on all levels.
(b) Sign area restrictions for secondary identification signage for
retail tenants less than 25,000 square feet shall apply, except
all size limitation shall be increased by 50%.
(c) Tenants in corner locations or with frontage on two principal
streets or parking areas shall be permitted to have up to three
primary identification signs with an additional 200 square feet
above the maximum allowable area per the chart above.
(d) Tenants in locations with frontage on US Route 1, Main Street
and a parking area in excess of 300 parking spaces shall be
permitted to have up to four primary identification signs with
an additional 400 square feet above the maximum allowable
area per the chart above.
(e) Tenants in locations with frontage on the railroad shall be
permitted additional signage facing the railroad in accordance
with their primary identification signage.
(f) Primary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose two of the following as their primary identification
signs: Type A fascia wall signs; Type B marquee/canopy sign;
Type C feature sign; Type E1 awning sign.
(g) Secondary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose four of the following as their secondary identification
signs: Type D blade sign; Type E2 awning sign; Type F plaque
sign; Type G window/door sign; Type H changeable sign.
(3) Freestanding signage.
(a) A transit-oriented mixed-use development may have two
freestanding pylon signs not to exceed 50 feet in height and
750 square feet in area, located in accordance with the
regulating plan.
(b) The three existing on-site billboard-style signs may be retained
at the same size and location and be reused for on-site
advertising and information for the identification of the transitoriented
mixed-use development as a whole. Said signs may
also be upgraded to include changeable message technology
not to exceed 25% of the existing sign area for each respective
sign in accordance with an overall sign plan approved by the
Planning Board.
(c) Directional, informational, residential identification and
regulatory signage is permitted in accordance with a
comprehensive sign plan approved by the Planning Board.
(d) A transit-oriented mixed-use development may also have
freestanding decorative signage such as banners, pennants
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:676
and entrance arches that may be located along streets and site
access roads in accordance with a comprehensive sign plan
and the regulating plan approved by the Planning Board.
(e) A transit-oriented mixed-use development may also have icon
signage including, but not limited to, large graphics and letters
that identify the transit-oriented mixed-use development as a
whole. The size and placement of said signage shall be in
accordance with the regulating plan approved by the Planning
Board.
Y. General provisions.
(1) The requirements of the Transit-Oriented Mixed-Use Development
Overlay render the transit-oriented mixed-use development eligible
for the general development plan provisions of this section and the
Municipal Land Use Law.115
(2) The nature of the transit-oriented mixed-use development is such
that lots and uses are not required to front on a public street for the
purposes of subdivision, provided that adequate vehicular,
emergency and pedestrian access is provided to individual lots and
uses thereon.
(3) The intent of the Planning Board and Township Council is to
encourage innovation and creativity in creating a unique and
special place for the Township of North Brunswick. Accordingly, the
standards provided herein, with the exception of use, density and
standards in § 205-76.1B that trigger the application of the overlay
option, shall be considered bulk standards. It is anticipated that the
Planning Board will grant a bulk variance for said standards upon a
finding that the strict application of a particular standard in
question is impracticable because of the peculiar condition relating
to the issue before it. The Planning Board may also find the
granting of a variance from the standard would result in a better
plan and advance the purpose of the Master Plan and Land Use
Ordinance to create a vibrant transit-oriented mixed-use
development for the community.
(4) Approved colors/palettes.
(a) The approved colors for use in the transit-oriented mixed-use
development shall be in accordance with the following, which
may be obtained from any manufacturer:
a. Weathered Oak oo. Paynes Blue Gray
b. Bronze Green pp. Bronze Glow
c. Gold Buff qq. Silver Gray
d. Brickstone rr. Deep Blue
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:677
e. Cherry Bark ss. Chincilla Gray
f. Slate tt. Ivory
g. Spruce Shadow uu. Shingle Gray
h. Bayonne Blue vv. Emporium Blue
i. Antique Velvet ww. White fawn
j. Mississippi Clay xx. Woodbine
k. Pine Mountain yy. Creole
l. Dark Grey Heather zz. Colonial Sage
m. Deauville Sand aaa. Olive
n. Henna Red bbb. Red Sienna
o. Nimbus ccc. Picket Fence
p. Laurel Green ddd. Roccoco Yellow
q. Niagra Green eee. Dark Denim
r. Dark Rosewood fff. Gold ecru
s. Mushroom Brown ggg. Seacrest Green
t. Terra Verte hhh. Cottage Green
u. Olive Brown iii. Bay Rum
v. Burgandy Velvet jjj. Bullrush Beige
w. Shale kkk. Green Stone
x. Midnight Blue Grass lll. Oak Buff
y. Old Brass mmm. Pale Umber
z. Maple nut nnn. Weathered Fence
aa. Traditional navy ooo. Clippership
bb. Ashlar Gray ppp. Argent Gray
cc. Blue Stone qqq. Blue
dd. Elderberry rrr. Scrimshaw
ee. Beige sss. Moonbeam Gray
ff. Brownstone ttt. Eaton Greene
gg. Weathered Walnut uuu. Misty Morn
hh. Old ivory vvv. Mansion Stone
ii. Fern Green www. Ashen Rose
jj. Hemlock xxx. French White
kk. Gull Grey yyy. Flemish Blue
ll. Juniper Green zzz. Baltic Blue
mm. Sand aaaa. Wheat
nn. Platinum bbbb. Pale Copper
cccc. Final Bronze
§ 205-76.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-76.1
198:678
(b) The approved color palettes may be cross referenced with any
major paint company color palette. The squares above
represent the 54 body colors, and the rectangles the 27 accent
colors to be coordinated in their application. Arranged as sets,
the colors were also selected for their ability to be
interchanged to create a broader spectrum throughout the
transit-oriented mixed-use development.
(5) A thematic street naming system shall be provided and established
on the regulating plan representative of the unique nature of the
transit-oriented mixed-use development and the sustainability
goals of the project.
Z. Application procedure.
(1) General development plan approval shall be in accordance with
§ 205-75.2.
(2) Preliminary subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this
chapter and utilize the checklist in Appendix C.116
(3) Preliminary site plan approval shall be in accordance with this
chapter and utilize the checklist in Appendix A,117 except for items
10, 17, 22, 23, 26, 34 through 39, 42 through 55 and 58, which may
be deferred until final site plan approval.
(4) Final subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this chapter
and utilize checklist in Appendix D.118
(5) The required technical review escrow fees may be posted in 1/3
increments of the total potential escrow deposit. Additional
deposits shall be made within 15 days of any request for same by
the Township.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-76.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-76.1
198:679

ARTICLE XVIII
ERR Education-Recreation-Research District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-77. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in ERR Districts:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) University and college-type facilities, except dormitories or other
types of housing.
(2) Agriculture and farming.
(3) Research plants.
(4) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(5) Federal, state, county and municipal buildings and grounds,
including public schools, parks and playgrounds, but not including
workshops, warehouses, garages and storage yards.
(6) Cemeteries.
(7) Administrative and business offices specifically related to health
and medical organizations. [Added 6-1-1992]
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93.
(3) Other customary uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to
the principal use and building.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Public utilities.
(2) County penal facilities.
E. Prohibited uses.
(1) Dormitories or other types of student or faculty housing shall be
prohibited.
§ 205-77 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-78
198:681
§ 205-78. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
A. Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet from state and federal highways,
and 100 feet from all other streets.
B. Where a proposed nonresidential or dormitory development abuts a
residential zone or a lot developed for residential uses, an additional
thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the requirements
of Article XXVI, shall be added to any required rear or side yard which
abuts said residential use.
§ 205-78 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-78
198:682
ARTICLE XVIIIA
PAC Planned Adult Community District
[Added 8-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19; amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04-33]
§ 205-78.1. Purpose.
§ 205-78.2. Minimum age requirement.
All residential dwellings in the PAC District shall be occupied by persons 55
years of age or older, with the following exceptions:
§ 205-78.3. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Adult Community Zone:
§ 205-78.4. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
A. The purpose of this zone is to provide for the construction of marketprice
housing suitable for those 55 and over. Such development shall
not be subject to maximum income or price requirements and shall
provide recreational facilities and community services for residents as
required herein.
B. All development in the PAC Zone is subject to compliance with the 55
year minimum age requirement in subsection 205-78.2, regardless of
the number of acres in the development.
A. A husband or wife under the age of 55 years who is residing with his/her
spouse who is 55 years of age or over.
B. Offspring 21 years of age or older residing with their parents, parent or
guardian where one of the parents with whom the offspring are residing
is 55 years of age or over.
C. One adult under 55 years of age may be admitted as a permanent
resident if it is established that the presence of such person is essential
to the physical care of one of the adult occupants who shall be 55 years
of age or over. If more than one adult under 55 years of age is necessary
to care for the adult occupant 55 years of age or over, approval shall be
obtained from the homeowners' association and/or condominium
association based on reasonable and specific standards and criteria to
be developed by those entities.
A. Single family.
B. Duplex units.
C. Townhouses with no more than eight units per building.
D. Flats with no more than 45 units per building.
§ 205-78.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-78.4
198:683
§ 205-78.5. Development standards.
A. Private garages.
B. Off-street parking areas.
C. Signs in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
D. Private swimming pools, subject to § 205-94 of this chapter, with the
exception of Subsections C and D.
E. Fences in accordance with § 205-93 of this chapter.
F. Yard utility buildings and storage buildings.
G. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
A. The following standards apply to all developments regardless of
acreage. Additional standards enumerated in § 205-78.5B shall apply to
developments comprised of 60 or more acres.
(1) Maximum gross density: 2.5 units per acre.
(2) Minimum percentage of units to be detached single-family
dwellings: 40%.
(3) Maximum percentage of units to be flats: 35%.
(4) Area and yard requirements for single-family and duplex uses:
Detached Dwellings Duplex Dwellings
Lot area 5,000 square feet 4,000 square feet per
unit
Lot frontage 40 feet 30 feet
Lot width 50 feet 40 feet
Lot depth 100 feet 100 feet
Side yard
One 5 feet 0 feet
Both 15 feet 10 feet
Front yard 18 feet 18 feet
Rear yard 20 feet 20 feet
Height
(maximum)
2 1/2 stories or 35 feet 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
(5) Development standards applicable to townhouses and flats.
§ 205-78.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-78.5
198:684
Townhouses Flats
Front yard 18 feet N/A
Rear yard 20 feet N/A
Lot width 25 feet N/A
Lot depth 100 feet N/A
Distance between
buildings
20 feet 50 feet
Distance from
nearest property line
20 feet, but in no
event closer than 30
feet from a single
family or duplex unit
35 feet
Distance from curb
or interior road or
parking
15 feet 15 feet
Height 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet
3 stories plus one
level of parking
under the building,
but in no event more
than 50 feet to the
peak of the roof
B. The following standards only apply to the development of a tract that is
comprised of 60 or more acres:
(1) Maximum gross density without density bonuses: 2.5 units per
acre.
(2) Maximum gross density with all density bonuses: 4.85 units per
acre.
(3) Density bonuses.
(a) A density bonus of .75 units per acre shall be provided if 15% of
the housing units are 1,500 square feet or less, exclusive of
garage space.
(b) A density bonus of 1.15 units per acre shall be provided upon
making a cash contribution toward the construction of a new
senior citizens center or other senior facility or amenity. Said
contribution shall be equal to $3,500 per unit for each
residential unit. The contribution shall be paid as each
construction permit is issued.
(c) A density bonus of .45 units per acre shall be provided if the
developer submits a marketing plan acceptable to the Planning
Board that ensures that each section or phase of the
development shall be offered for sale to North Brunswick
residents exclusively for 30 days prior to marketing to the
§ 205-78.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-78.5
198:685
general public. Failure to comply with this section shall result
in a violation of the condition of approval and shall result in the
rescinding of any construction permits issued for housing units
resulting from this density bonus.
(4) Required accessory uses.
(a) Community center.
(b) Heated community swimming pools, including both an indoor
and an outdoor pool.
(c) The following outdoor recreational facilities:
[1] Walking paths.
[2] Tennis courts.
[3] Bocci.
[4] Shuffleboard courts.
[5] A putting green.
[6] A tot lot including, but not limited to, a sandbox, swings,
slides and a seesaw.
(d) Gatehouse or guardhouse at the main entrance.
(e) Health club facilities.
(5) Open space and recreation areas.
(a) At least 20% of the tract shall be reserved for open space and/
or recreation use, of which 25% of said area shall lie outside
designated wetlands and one-hundred-year floodplains. All
areas reserved for open space shall be in common ownership,
although lands reserved for roadways, driveways and parking
lots in common ownership shall not be included in the
calculation of open space.
(b) Open space and recreation areas shall be located in
appropriate locations and arranged in such a manner so as to
further the purposes of the PAC.
(c) All open space and recreation areas shall be owned in common
by residents of the PAC and managed by a homeowners'
association or condominium association.
(d) A recreation plan delineating passive and active recreation
elements such as walking trails, picnic areas, tennis courts and
seating areas shall be provided.
(e) Each PAC shall have a community center (CC) and community
swimming pools to which the following standards shall apply:
§ 205-78.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-78.5
198:686
[1] A CC may be comprised of one or more buildings or
structures on a minimum of three contiguous acres. The
minimum building area of a CC shall be computed at the
rate of 35 square feet per approved PAC dwelling unit.
However, the minimum square footage shall be 15,000
square feet, exclusive of management/maintenance office
and facilities.
[2] A circulation plan delineating all roads and sidewalks and
walkways shall be provided.
[3] The CC may include a restaurant, snack bar and/or
cafeteria facilities, health spa, homeowners' association
management office, recreation and social activity rooms
and offices, and multipurpose room designed for social
activities, all for the exclusive use of the residents of the
PAC and their guests.
[4] The CC shall be no more than 2 1/2 stories and no more
than 50 feet in height.
[5] Both outdoor and indoor swimming pools shall be
provided. The outdoor pool shall have a minimum of six
square feet of water surface area for each dwelling unit.
The indoor pool area shall have a minimum of three square
feet of water surface area for each dwelling unit.
[6] There shall also be provided an improved sitting area,
contiguous to all sides of the outdoor pool, having an area
of 1 1/2 times the surface area of the pool.
[7] Additional parking shall be provided at the CC for a
minimum of one parking space for each 150 square feet of
building area, exclusive of management office area.
(f) One tennis court shall be provided for every 200 housing units
or part thereof.
(g) All open space and recreation areas shall be protected by legal
arrangements, satisfactory to the Board Attorney. Covenants or
other legal arrangements, including homeowners' association
or condominium association documents, shall specify
ownership of the area; method of maintenance; responsibility
for maintenance; maintenance taxes and insurance;
compulsory membership and compulsory assessment
provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and
maintain the area will not be dissolved without the consent of
the Board; and any other specifications deemed necessary by
the Board.
(h) Within the PAC, the applicant shall establish a homeowners'
association and/or condominium association, which shall own
§ 205-78.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-78.5
198:687
§ 205-78.6. Additional requirements.
and be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and
reconstruction of all buildings and lands owned by the
residents of the PAC in common with one another. Such lands
shall include at a minimum all recreational areas, open space,
and drainage facilities required by the Board for the PAC.
A. All means of access to the PAC shall be secured by a gate, with access
controlled either by a guard or electric means.
B. The main entrance to the PAC shall be staffed by a guard 24 hours a
day.
C. All recreation buildings and community facilities shall be fully
operational prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy for more than
25% of the dwelling units.
D. Any deviation from the standards set forth herein shall be deemed to be
a "c" variance, and not a "d" variance under Section 70 of the Municipal
Land Use Law.119
119. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 et seq.
§ 205-78.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-78.6
198:688
ARTICLE XIX
TMU Transitional Mixed Use District
[Added 2-4-1985120]
§ 205-79. Purpose.
This zone has been designed in order to provide for a mixture of land
use types which acknowledges the nonresidential development potential
of large vacant tracts of land with frontage on U.S. Route 1, while also
providing for transitional housing types to act as a buffer between permitted
nonresidential development and established residential developments
abutting this zone.
§ 205-79.1. Properties subject to court order.
Certain properties shall, as a result of court order, comply with the
additional standards specified in § 205-79.3D. These properties are
identified by block and lot number as follows:
Block Lot
4.05 47, 5.01, 105, 106, 107 and 119
74 25, 26, 27, 28, 31.01, 31.02, 1.01 and 1.02
§ 205-79.2. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the Transitional Mixed Use Zone:
A. Principal uses.
(1) General and professional office uses.
(2) Warehousing facilities, limited in accordance with § 205-79.3A(5).
(3) Research facilities.
(4) Retail, restaurant, supermarket and other commercial uses, limited
in accordance with § 205-79.3A, and theaters limited in accordance
with § 205-79.3D. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
(5) High technology industrial uses where it can be demonstrated that
the use is not incompatible with residential development.
(6) Single-family dwellings.
(7) All types of attached housing structures subject to compliance with
the development standards of § 205-79.3C.
120. Editor's Note: An ordinance adopted this date also superseded former Art. XIX, SPD
Special Planned District. For current provisions, see Art. XIXA, O-R Office Research
District.
§ 205-79 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.2
198:689
§ 205-79.3. Development standards.
(8) Hotel/convention facilities developed as one facility, including
convenience commercial uses and restaurants which are related to
a hotel convention facility.
(9) Public buildings and uses.121
(10) Large retail establishments not to exceed a total of 120,000 square
feet. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
B. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: any accessory use permitted in existing
residential, commercial, office and industrial zones, provided that the
use can be demonstrated to be ancillary to a principal use on the site.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Churches and places of worship.
E. Prohibited uses. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
(1) Any nonresidential use which will result in a hazardous, noxious or
offensive condition beyond the confines of the building.
(2) Indoor recreational and amusement facilities, excluding movie
theaters, subject to the limitation that movie theaters may include
no more than 850 square feet of space devoted to mechanical
amusement devices.
(3) Discotheques, dance clubs and any form of live entertainment or
show, except as may be incidental to dining.
A. Overall tract planning standards for tracts of 40 acres or more.
[Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
(1) The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential
development shall be equal to 0.25.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage may not exceed 0.85 on any
property developed for nonresidential use.
(3) Maximum amount of warehousing: 40% of the nonresidential floor
space.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(10), Indoor educational and recreational uses, added
8-1-1994, and (11), Theaters, added 5-15-1995, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10.
§ 205-79.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.3
198:690
(4) Large retail establishments shall comply with the standards
specifically enumerated for large retail establishments in
§ 205-79.4. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(5) Height restrictions. Nonresidential development shall not exceed
50 feet in height. Residential structures shall not exceed three
stories or 40 feet.
(6) Locational requirements. While the location of residential and
nonresidential development within the zone is not specifically
delineated in this section, a minimum building setback distance of
100 feet shall be provided along the entire frontage of U.S. Route 1.
The appropriateness of proposed locations and transitions between
nonresidential and residential land uses shall be in accordance with
good planning practices and shall be approved by the Board.
(7) Flexible development regulations. Lot sizes and dimensions and
other bulk requirements are not specified herein. However, said
design shall be in accordance with good planning practices and
shall be subject to Board approval.
B. Tract planning standards for tracts which are less than 40 acres. On
tracts which are less than 40 acres, no mixed use development shall be
permitted. However, these tracts may be developed in accordance with
the following:
(1) They should be 2.0 acres.
(2) Land within 500 feet of U.S. Route 1 shall only be developed for
nonresidential uses permitted in § 205-79.2A, excluding theaters,
which shall be specifically prohibited. All such nonresidential uses
shall comply with the development standards and the Schedule of
Area, Yard and Building Requirements applicable to the C-2
General Commercial District.122 [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No.
97-2; 2-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04]
(3) Land which is in excess of 500 feet from U.S. Route 1 shall only be
developed for residential uses permitted in § 205-79.2A(6), (7) and
(9). However, residential development densities for housing which
is developed on tracts of less than 40 acres shall be equal to 60% of
the net density permitted for a mixed use development in
§ 205-79.3C(2). In no event shall the density of development exceed
six units per acre. The development standards of § 205-79.3C(3)
through (13) shall apply. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
C. Residential development standards for tracts of 40 acres or more.
Development standards shall be as follows:
122. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 205-79.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.3
198:691
(1) Gross residential density: 5.5 units per acreage of the tract, with
the exception of tracts which were litigated and are governed by
court order in accordance with § 205-79.3D.
(2) Net residential density: 10 units per acre devoted to residential
use, with the exception of tracts which are litigated and are
governed by court order in accordance with § 205-79.3D.
(3) Residential housing mix. In order to assure a diversity of residential
housing types, attached housing structures with more than eight
units per structure shall not exceed 75% of the total number of
dwelling units to be constructed. With the exception of the above
limitation, no minimum or maximum percentages of alternative
housing resources are prescribed herein.
(4) Locational and buffer requirements for attached housing. No
attached housing structure is to be constructed adjacent to an
existing single-family property unless set back 75 feet from said
property. Included in this setback shall be a thirty-foot buffer strip
designed in accordance with Article XXVI of this chapter. Threestory
attached housing structures shall be set back 150 feet from
lots developed with existing single-family dwellings, this distance
to be measured from property lines. Included in said setback shall
be a fifty-foot buffer in accordance with Article XXVI of this chapter.
(5) Minimum setback distances from roadways, parking areas and
nonresidential uses. All residential structures shall comply with the
following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Fifty feet from existing or proposed Township roads.
(b) Twenty feet from private internal roads, except at
intersections, where the setback shall be 35 feet, said setback
measured from the edge of the cartway to the building.
(c) Ten feet from off-street parking areas. However, a driveway
which leads to an individual unit shall be exempt from this
setback.
(d) One hundred feet from adjacent property either developed or
zoned for nonresidential use.
(6) Lot configuration. Lot sizes and dimensions may be freely disposed
and arranged in conformity with the overall density standards
herein. However, said design shall be in accordance with good
planning practices and shall be subject to Board approval.
(7) Buffer requirements. A thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in
accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI, shall be
required between any residential and nonresidential uses, even if
said uses are separated by a public or private roadway.
§ 205-79.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.3
198:692
(8) Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet between structures
which do not exceed two stories; 30 feet between all others.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories or 40 feet.
(10) Maximum number of units per structure: 30 units for two-story
buildings, and 40 units for three-story buildings.
(11) Variation in setback. Front building elevations shall have a
minimum four-foot variation in front building line every four
horizontal units; and rear building lines shall vary four feet every
six horizontal units.
(12) Signs. Each individual residential and non residential section of a
development shall be permitted one identification sign along each
access road into the development. Such sign must generally
conform to the design of the proposed project and shall not exceed
50 square feet in area. However, if more than one development is
located off of a road, the total square footage of all signs shall not
exceed 120 square feet.
(13) Required number of off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking
shall be required as follows: 1 1/4 spaces for all efficiency and onebedroom
units; 1 3/4 spaces for all two-bedroom units; and two
spaces for all units with three or more bedrooms.
(14) Required open space. A minimum of 10% of the total residential
acreage shall consist of landscaped open space (excluding required
buffers), recreation areas and related parking facilities. However, a
minimum of 50% of this required open space shall be developed for
active recreation facilities.
D. Standards applicable to designated properties cited in § 205-79.1.
(1) Standards applicable to Lots 47, 75.01, 105, 106, 107 and 119 in
Block 4.05. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
(a) Residential acreage and number of residential units. A
maximum of 120 acres shall be developed for residential use,
and in no case shall the number or residential units to be
constructed exceed 1,108 units.
(b) Affordable housing requirements. No less than 200 of the
dwelling units approved for construction on this tract shall be
marketed at a sales price or rent which makes them affordable
to lower-income families in accordance with the regulations of
Chapter 195, Housing, Affordable, of the Township of North
Brunswick. One-third of these units (67) shall be affordable by
low-income households, and the remaining 2/3 of these units
(133) affordable by moderate-income households.
(c) A movie theater shall be permitted and shall be limited to a
maximum of 76,000 square feet, 18 screens and 4,375 seats.
§ 205-79.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.3
198:693
(d) All land lying south of Commerce Boulevard within 300 feet of
Hartland Commons shall be developed for residential use only
in accordance with § 205-79.3C, with the exception of an
access roadway or driveway to nonresidential development.
(e) No building permit shall be granted for the construction of any
residential units between Hartland Commons and Route 1 until
a certificate of occupancy has been obtained for a minimum or
50,000 square feet or nonresidential space, exclusive of the
movie theater and the retail building at the intersection of
Route 1 and Commerce Boulevard.
(f) Shared parking shall be permitted for theater, retail, office and
commercial uses, provided that the applicant demonstrates the
adequacy of the parking proposed based upon generally
recognized parking standards.
(g) Front yard parking shall be permitted.
(h) Lighted signs, and signs which extend above the vertical wall
or cornice to which they arc attached, shall be permitted,
subject to the sign not exceeding a height of 50 feet above
ground level.
(2) Standards applicable to Lots 25, 26, 27, 28, 31.01, 31.02, 1.01 and
1.02 in Block 74.
(a) Residential acreage and number of residential units. Thirtyeight
acres shall be developed for residential purposes, and in
no case shall the number of residential units exceed 380 units.
(b) Affordable housing requirement. No less than 76 of the
dwelling units approved for construction on this tract shall be
marketed at a sales price or rent which makes them affordable
to lower-income families in accordance with the regulations of
Chapter 195, Housing, Affordable, of the Township of North
Brunswick. One-third of these units [25] shall be affordable by
low-income households, and the remaining 2/3 of these units
[51] affordable by moderate-income households.
(c) Nonresidential construction. A minimum of seven acres shall
be developed for nonresidential use in accordance with
§ 205-79.3A.
(3) Standards applicable to lower-income units in both tracts.
(a) Additional controls on lower-income units. Designated lowerincome
units shall be subject to price, rental, occupancy and
resale controls as established by Chapter 195, Housing,
Affordable, of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 205-79.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.3
198:694
§ 205-79.4. Large retail establishments. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-02123]
(b) Construction phasing, location and affirmative marketing
requirements. All low- and moderate-income units are subject
to the requirements of § 205-45.2B through E.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to allow large retail establishments to
be located in the TMU Zone upon complying with specific design
standards. However, retail centers that include large retail
establishments with individual users occupying in excess of 50,000
square feet typically have several uninspiring design features in
common, including no-frill site plans that eschew connection to the
surrounding community and environs; plain vanilla, standardized,
rectangular single-story buildings; monolithic, smooth-surface
block facades; recognizable corporate color schemes; minimal
architectural details; massive asphalt parking lots covering several
acres; limited landscaping; few pedestrian amenities. The
Township of North Brunswick will not permit this standardized
mediocrity. As a result, the Township is enacting form-based
guidelines that will require the large retail establishments to relate
better to the community and have less negative impact upon the
environment. This will be achieved through integrating the large
retail establishments into the fabric of the development and the
surrounding community.
(2) The intent of the regulations incorporated herein is to bring
pedestrians and bicyclists into the site and to allow them to
maneuver safely throughout the site on a series of interconnected
pedestrian pathways. As a result of these regulations, large retail
establishments will incorporate pedestrian-scale features into the
design of their buildings and the parking lots that surround them.
B. Applicability. Large retail establishments shall be permitted uses in the
TMU District only upon satisfying the following standards:
(1) The property upon which said use is to be located shall have a
minimum frontage of 500 feet on Route 1.
(2) The developer shall make a financial contribution towards the cost
of certain traffic improvements (the "traffic improvements")
identified in a traffic study prepared by Maser Consulting, dated
January 20, 2010, and entitled "NBTOD Traffic Study for North
Brunswick Transit Village (Block 148, Lot 5.04) and BJ Wholesale
Club (Block 4.6, Lot 1.04) Township of North Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey" ("Maser Report"). Said contribution shall be
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance also indicated that if § 205-79.4B(2) and (3) were adjusted
to be invalid, the entire ordinance would be deemed invalid.
§ 205-79.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:695
made prior to the developer receiving a construction permit for the
large retail establishment. The actual amount of the contribution
shall be adjusted upward or downward based upon the actual costs
of the design, permitting and construction of the improvements.
Any additional contribution shall be made within 90 days of the
date that written documentation is provided to the developer that
the cost of the roadway improvements exceeds the estimate in the
Maser Report. Failure of the developer to provide the additional
funding within 90 days of notification shall result in the Township
withdrawing the certificate of occupancy for the large retail
establishment, requiring the large retail establishment to cease
operations until said contribution is deposited with the Township.
(3) The developer shall dedicate to the Township of North Brunswick,
prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the right-of-way
anticipated to be necessary for a three-lane reverse jughandle on
southbound Route 1 at Commerce Boulevard in accordance with
the Maser Traffic Study. Said right-of-way shall also include an
additional four feet of right-of-way outside the proposed pavement
area for roadway maintenance.
(4) The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Township
which shall address the financial contribution and right-of-way
dedication, and which shall include provisions regarding
adjustment of the area of dedication, to meet DOT design criteria,
subject to agreed-upon limitations, including a maximum area of
dedication of 1.5 acres and the loss of a maximum of 40 parking
spaces.
(5) The developer shall obtain NJDOT approval and make the
necessary signal retiming and restriping improvements to the
intersections of Aaron Road and Commerce Boulevard with Route
1, recommended on Pages 8 and 9 of the report prepared by Maser
Consulting entitled "Addendum to NBTOD Traffic Study for BJ
Wholesale Club, Block 4.46, Lot 1.04, North Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey," dated March 17, 2010 (the "Maser
Addendum"). The developer shall have no responsibility for interim
(or permanent) road widening or signal improvements if mandated
by NJDOT.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARCADE — A structure providing shade, cover or protection from the
elements, extending over a sidewalk or square, open to the street
except for supporting columns, piers or arches. Arcades shall have a
minimum clear height of 11 feet over a sidewalk and a minimum clear
width of 10 feet from the front of an adjacent building to the inside face
of the columns supporting the arcade. The area within an arcade shall
be open to public access. Supporting columns/piers shall be located no
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:696
more than 230 inches from the back of the curb. Where an arcade is
built, the requirement for street trees is waived for that street frontage.
ARCH — An opening in a building or wall through which pedestrians
or vehicles may pass. Building area over arches may contain walkways,
hallways or habitable space as the case may be and shall be not less
than nine feet over pedestrianways and 15 feet over vehicular drives
or streets. Arches may also cross streets at a height of not less than
15 feet and shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian passage in such
instances.
AWNING — An ancillary lightweight structure usually of canvas,
cantilevered from a facade providing shade to the fenestration and
spatial containment to the pedestrian. Awnings, to be an effective
adjunct to a shop front, must thoroughly overlap the sidewalk and
adhere to provisions found in the Comprehensive Sign Plan. Awnings
may also be permitted to extend to the curbline and shall be permitted
to have structural supports that touch down within the furniture zone
of the street.
BIO SWALE — Landscape element designed to remove silt and pollution
from surface runoff water. It consists of a swaled drainagecourse with
gently sloped sides and filled with vegetation, compost and/or riprap.
The water's flow path, along with the wide and shallow ditch, is
designed to maximize the time water spends in the swale, which aids in
the trapping of pollutants and silt.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area within a lot that can be occupied by
buildings. Buildable area sets the limits of the building footprint.
COLONNADE — A roof or building structure, extending over the
sidewalk, open to the street and sidewalk except for supporting
columns or piers.
CORNICE — The topmost element, composed of moldings, for an
entablature, or used alone at the roofline or where walls abut ceilings.
DECORATIVE PAVING — Paving that is made up of solid, precise,
modular units, stamped concrete, scored concrete, seeded concrete,
colored concrete or any combination of the above.
EAVE — The junction of a wall of a building and an overhanging roof.
In order to encourage pitched roofs, the designated maximum building
height may be measured to the eave, not to the top of the roof.
ENTABLATURE — An elaborated horizontal band along the exterior of
a building. Used primarily just beneath the roofline, sometimes used on
the facade between floors.
ESTIMATED ENERGY DEMAND — The quantity of electricity projected
to be consumed by a use, building or structure as determined by the
Office of Clean Energy estimated energy demand calculator or similar
calculator or tools used for determining load demand, including those
utilized to obtain electric service from a utility company.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:697
FACADE — A building face or wall.
FACADE, PRIMARY — A building face or wall that faces a public street
or parking area containing more than 300 spaces.
FACADE, SECONDARY — A building face or wall that faces an interior
courtyard, parking area, service area, alley or rear of the building.
FASCIA — A projecting flat horizontal member or molding, also part of
a classical entablature.
FENESTRATION — An opening in the building wall allowing light and
views between interior and exterior spaces. Fenestration is measured
as glass area for occupied buildings and as open area for parking
structures.
FRIEZE — An ornamental element, applied to the top of a horizontal
segment of a mantelpiece, with side supports serving as pilasters.
GABLE — The part of the end wall of a building between the eaves
and a pitched or gambrel roof. The gable orientation shows the vertical
triangular plane rather than the slope side of the roof.
KIOSK — An enclosed structure used for the sale of goods, services,
food or beverage. Kiosks may be located in civic plazas and squares and
shall be located a minimum of two feet from any curbline.
LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail uses in excess of 50,000
square feet and not to exceed a total of 120,000 square feet. Large
retail establishments LRE, which may not exceed 50 feet in height
and one story, inclusive of a mezzanine, may include uses such as,
but not limited to, membership warehouse clubs, including servicing of
motor vehicles, but not including body work, and major engine and/or
transmission repair; tire sales and installation; handling of recycled oil
and outdoor storage and distribution of propane; home improvement
stores, including lumber sales and garden centers; and general retail
sales of goods and services.
LEED — Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design program
sponsored by the United States Green Building Council to promote
energy efficient design of buildings and places.
LEED CERTIFICATION — A project or building that is designed to
achieve LEED certification is one that provides site or building
elements that would earn at least 40 points, according to the standards
of LEED for New Construction 2009 v.3.0 or LEED for Retail 2009 v.3.0
as the case may be, as determined by the Township Planner. Submission
to the U.S. Green Building Council is not required.
LINTEL — The topmost horizontal member over an opening, which
helps carry weight of the vertical structure above it.
PARAPET — A low wall encircling the perimeter of a flat building roof,
generally used to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:698
PEDIMENT — A crowning triangular element at the face of a roof or
above a door opening.
PERGOLA — Similar to arbors, which include an open framework
structure that forms a shelter. However, pergolas are commonly used to
provide directional form over walkways or to create a private outdoor
seating or patio area.
PERMITTED PROJECTION — Building elements that may be permitted
to extend over setback lines and street rights-of-way, including eaves
not more than 36 inches; bay windows, architectural corner elements
and other building areas, provided that a minimum clearance over
sidewalks and pedestrianways of 12 feet is maintained; canopies and
marquees, provided that a minimum clearance of 12 feet is maintained
over sidewalks and pedestrianways; entry doors not wider than 42
inches; cornices, pilasters and building base courses not deeper than
24 inches; planters not deeper than 36 inches; stoops and entry stairs
not deeper than 42 inches; balconies and balconettes above the ground
floor, not deeper than 60 inches; flagpoles not located at the ground
floor, not projecting more than 10 feet; awnings, porticos, porte
cocheres, and other building elements incorporated for visual interest
and diversity.
PILASTER — A thin square column attached to a wall or to the corners
of a building, which matches the details of accompanying freestanding
columns.
PLANTER — The element of the public streetscape, typically a pot or
vessel, which accommodates trees, and/or other landscape plantings.
Planters may be continuous or individual.
RAIN GARDEN — A planted depression that is designed to take as
much as possible of the excess rainwater runoff from a house or other
building and its associated landscaping.
RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATING EQUIPMENT — Equipment and
structures for the generation of renewable energy, including, but not
limited to, solar panels, wind turbines, fuel cells, geothermal heat
pumps and piping, and similar devices. Renewable energy generating
equipment may be attached to a building or freestanding and, except
for freestanding wind turbines, is exempt from height and setback
requirements.
SOLAR PANEL — A device or group of devices attached to a building to
provide passive generation of electricity from the sun.
SOLAR SCREEN — A device attached to a building to provide shading
for glazed areas thereof.
SUSTAINABLE — Having the ability to accommodate and maintain
population growth and economic expansion through intelligent design.
TEXTURE — The exterior finish of a surface, ranging from smooth to
coarse.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:699
TRANSON — A horizontal window above a door or window, usually
rectangular in shape.
TRELLIS — Lightweight elements used for controlling the shape or
to support climbing and other plants. In most instances, it is usually
constructed on a flat plane, in a two-dimensional way, unlike an arbor,
which is frequently a three-dimensional structure.
D. Development and design standards.
(1) If a large retail establishment is constructed as part of a shopping
center, lots and uses are not required to front on a public street for
the purposes of subdivision, provided that adequate vehicular,
emergency and pedestrian access is provided to individual lots and
uses thereon.
(2) Large retail establishments shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet
from the nearest property line.
(3) Each large retail establishment constructed pursuant to this
subsection shall utilize renewable energy, such as, but not limited
to, solar, wind, fuel cells or geothermal power to produce a
minimum of 10% of its estimated energy demand.
(4) Each large retail establishment constructed pursuant to this
subsection shall be designed to achieve LEED certification.
(5) The following development and design standards shall apply to all
large retail establishments:
(a) Area yard and building requirements.
[1] Minimum lot size for retail stores: 50,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum tract boundary setbacks: 40 feet to the nearest
property line.
[4] Minimum lot front setback: Zero feet from the front lot line
and a minimum of 10 feet from site access roads and four
feet from any drive or parking aisle.
[5] Minimum lot side setback: Zero feet.
[6] Minimum lot rear setback: Zero feet.
[7] Maximum building height: 50 feet.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(b) Required site access. The following site access and circulation
dimensions are required in order to accommodate safe and
efficient site access and on-site circulation:
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:700
[1] All site access driveway roadway widths shall be 30 feet.
[2] The minimum driveway throat length between an
intersecting public roadway and the first access to offstreet
parking or an intersecting driveway shall be 100
feet.
[3] Each LRE shall have a physically disabled passenger
loading zone adjacent to and within 50 feet of the main
entrance, said loading zone being a minimum of 40 feet in
length and eight feet in width, with an accessible access
path not less than 60 inches wide for the length of said
zone and leading to the entrance.
[4] All projected LREs shall provide along the main facade of
the building for a bus loading/unloading area to
accommodate local bus service to the large retail
establishment.
(c) Facades and exterior walls.
[1] Facades and exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce
the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal
appearances of LREs and provide visual interest that will
be compatible with the character of future shop front
retail.
[2] Ground-floor facades greater than 100 feet in length,
measured horizontally, that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall incorporate wall plane
projections, arcades or recesses having a depth of at least
2% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20%
of the length of the facade in aggregate. No uninterrupted
length of any facade addressed by this section shall exceed
100 horizontal feet.
[3] Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall provide display windows,
windows, or transparent, translucent or opaque glass
treatments, along no less than 40% of their horizontal
length. Required display windows, windows, or
transparent, translucent or opaque glass treatments shall
occupy no less than 40% of the area between grade level
and 10 feet above grade level, inclusive of any glass entry
doors.
[4] Ground-floor facades that face a public street and are
within 200 feet of said street, as well as ground-floor
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:701
facades that face an off-street parking area with 200 or
more parking spaces, shall provide arcades, articulated
entry areas, awnings or other such features along no less
than 50% of their horizontal length.
[5] Building facades must include a repeating pattern that
shall include the following elements: color change; texture
change; material module change; and expression of
architectural or structural bays through a change in plane
no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or
projecting rib. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no
more than 50 feet horizontally along the length of the
building.
[6] Each building shall be required to display an articulated
base and roofline or cornice. The base and cornice line
shall each equal at least 5% of facade height, and in no
instance shall the base be less than four feet high and the
cornice be less than two feet high. The base and cornice
may be interrupted for required windows and doors as
necessary.
[7] Permitted fascia wall signs shall consist of individual
raised letters and logo forms that project no less than six
inches and no more than 12 inches from the facade wall
either attached to a panel or directly to the building wall.
(d) Materials and colors.
[1] Colors for large retail establishments shall be in
accordance with the Schedule of Approved Colors
contained herein, which may be obtained from any
manufacturer. The approved color palettes may be crossreferenced
with any major paint company color palette.
Schedule of Approved Colors
[a] Weathered Oak
[b] Bronze Green
[c] Gold Buff
[d] Brickstone
[e] Cherry Bark
[f] Slate
[g] Spruce Shadow
[h] Bayonne Blue
[i] Antique Velvet
[j] Mississippi Clay
[k] Pine Mountain
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:702
Schedule of Approved Colors
[l] Dark Grey Heather
[m] Deauville Sand
[n] Henna Red
[o] Nimbus
[p] Laurel Green
[q] Niagara Green
[r] Dark Rosewood
[s] Mushroom Brown
[t] Terra Verte
[u] Olive Brown
[v] Burgandy Velvet
[w] Shale
[x] Midnight Blue Grass
[y] Old Brass
[z] Maple Nut
[aa] Traditional Navy
[bb] Ashlar Gray
[cc] Blue Stone
[dd] Elderberry
[ee] Beige
[ff] Brownstone
[gg] Weathered Walnut
[hh] Old Ivory
[ii] Fern Green
[jj] Hemlock
[kk] Gull Grey
[ll] Juniper Green
[mm] Sand
[nn] Platinum
[oo] Paynes Blue Gray
[pp] Bronze Glow
[qq] Silver Gray
[rr] Deep Blue
[ss] Chincilla Gray
[tt] Ivory
[uu] Shingle Gray
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:703
Schedule of Approved Colors
[vv] Emporium Blue
[ww] White Fawn
[xx] Woodbine
[yy] Creole
[zz] Colonial Sage
[aaa] Olive
[bbb] Red Sienna
[ccc] Picket Fence
[ddd] Roccoco Yellow
[eee] Dark Denim
[fff] Gold Ecru
[ggg] Seacrest Green
[hhh] Cottage Green
[iii] Bay Rum
[jjj] Bullrush Beige
[kkk] Green Stone
[lll] Oak Buff
[mmm] Pale Umber
[nnn] Weathered Fence
[ooo] Clippership
[ppp] Argent Gray
[qqq] Blue
[rrr] Scrimshaw
[sss] Moonbeam Gray
[ttt] Eaton Greene
[uuu] Misty Morn
[vvv] Mansion Stone
[www] Ashen Rose
[xxx] French White
[yyy] Flemish Blue
[zzz] Baltic Blue
[aaaa] Wheat
[bbbb] Pale Copper
[cccc] Final Bronze
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:704
[2] Exterior building materials and colors should be
compatible with materials and colors shown in the
Schedule of Approved Colors.
[3] Predominant exterior building materials shall be quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone,
native stone veneer, cultured stone and stone veneer.
[4] Predominant facade colors shall be low-reflectance,
subtle, neutral or earth-tone colors provided in the
Schedule of Approved Colors. The use of high-intensity
colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors shall be
prohibited.
[5] Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
colors, including primary colors as provided in the
Schedule of Approved Colors.
[6] Building trim may be brick, stone, cast stone, cultured
stone, painted or treated metal, composite materials, highdensity
plastic, fiberglass-reinforced polyurethane, gridreinforced
cement and equivalent materials, and painted
or stained wood.
[7] Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, unarticulated smooth-faced concrete or
nonarchitectural steel panels not treated with an approved
building material.
[8] Permitted signs of all types may utilize corporate or
trademarked color schemes in addition to those colors
permitted in the Schedule of Approved Colors.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:705
[9] Building elevations of all sides of a large retail
establishment indicating compliance with ordinance
standards shall be submitted as part of any preliminary
site plan approval application.
[10] Physical samples of all proposed building materials and
colors shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review
and approval as part of preliminary site plan approval
application.
[11] All expansion joints shall be disguised with architectural
elements such as piers, recesses, projecting facade
elements or material changes.
(e) Entryways.
[1] Each large retail establishment shall have clearly defined,
visible customer entrances featuring no less than four of
the following:
[a] Canopies or porticos.
[b] Overhangs.
[c] Recesses/projections.
[d] Arcades.
[e] Raised corniced parapets over the door.
[f] Peaked roof forms.
[g] Arches.
[h] Outdoor patios.
[i] Display windows.
[j] Multiple entryways.
[k] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and
design.
[l] Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscape areas and/or places for sitting.
[2] The primary entryway shall be not less than 133% of the
height of the wall of the principal building. This
requirement may be reduced to not less than 120% of the
height of the principal building upon the inclusion of a
unique or distinctive architectural treatment or design
element at the primary entryway.
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:706
[3] Where additional stores will be located in the LRE, each
such store may have at least one additional exterior
customer entrance, which entrance shall conform to the
above requirements.
[4] Uses requiring door or window security gates shall be
permitted to install mesh or lattice gates on the interior of
windows and doors. Exterior or solid security gates or
solid rollup doors that do not permit the passage of light
are prohibited. Loading areas that are screened from the
view of public streets and parking areas containing in
excess of 200 parking spaces shall be exempt from this
requirement. Alternatively, loading areas may be recessed
from the primary building facade facing a public street or
parking area containing more than 200 parking spaces by
not less than 60 feet and be exempt from said screening
requirement.
[5] Merchant displays shall be limited to not more than six
feet deep along 40% of the facade length. Merchant
displays shall be removed and stored inside an enclosed
building or space each evening upon store closing.
(f) Roofs.
[1] Roof features should be used to complement the character
of the mixed-use retail and any residential development.
Variations in rooflines shall be used to add interest to and
reduce the massive scale of large buildings and such
variations shall be no less than three feet in height and
shall occur no less than every 100 feet. Roofs shall have no
fewer than two of the following features:
[a] Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment
from public view. The average height of such parapets
shall not exceed 25% of the height of the supporting
wall, and such parapets shall not at any point exceed
33% of the height of the supporting wall. Such
parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice
treatment.
[b] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than two feet
past the supporting walls.
[c] Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
the supporting walls, with an average slope greater
than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every
three feet of horizontal run, and less than or equal to
one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal
run.
[d] Three or more roof slope planes.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:707
[e] All facades shall provide an articulated cornice at the
eave line or parapet line a minimum of two feet in
height and projecting a minimum of one foot from the
facade.
[2] Visible roof materials shall be architectural shingles, slate,
tile, metal panels, metal or solar shingles. Flat roofs
concealed by a parapet may be any material.
(g) Off-street parking and loading.
[1] Due to the presence of both a multiplex theater and a large
retail establishment in the center along with other retail
uses, the following parking requirements and shared
parking matrix shall be applied when the large retail
establishment comes in for approval:
[a] Retail use: four spaces per 1,000 square feet.
[b] Theaters: 0.2 spaces per seat.
[c] Shared parking matrix based upon ULI factors.
Retail Cinema
Time Weekday Weekend Weekday Weekend
12:00
noon
95% 80% 20% 20%
1:00 p.m. 100% 90% 45% 45%
2:00 p.m. 95% 100% 55% 55%
3:00 p.m. 90% 100% 55% 55%
4:00 p.m. 90% 95% 55% 55%
5:00 p.m. 95% 90% 60% 60%
6:00 p.m. 95% 80% 60% 60%
7:00 p.m. 95% 75% 80% 80%
8:00 p.m. 80% 65% 100% 100%
9:00 p.m. 50% 50% 100% 100%
10:00
p.m.
30% 35% 80% 100%
11:00
p.m.
10% 15% 65% 80%
12:00
midnight
0% 0% 40% 50%
[2] No more than 70% of the required off-street parking for
any large retail establishment building shall be located
between the public street frontage and the particular
building's front elevation. All remaining off-street parking
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:708
shall be located outside of the area delineated by this
standard.
[3] Loading dock structures shall be located a minimum of 300
feet from any property line abutting a residential use; shall
be enclosed; and shall be the same height as the rest of the
building and a minimum of 20 feet in height. Unenclosed
loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets
and parking areas containing more than 200 parking
spaces by a solid masonry screen wall at least eight feet
high. Required screen walls shall be faced with an
approved facade building material compatible with the
primary building facade and have an articulated vertical
element not less than every 15 feet along the length of said
wall. Alternatively, loading docks that are enclosed or
recessed by a minimum of 60 feet from the building facade
facing a public street or a parking area containing in
excess of 200 parking spaces shall be deemed to comply
with the screening requirement.
(h) Mechanical equipment.
[1] The following equipment shall be screened from view from
large parking areas, the street on which the building
fronts, and from U.S. Route 1:
[a] Air compressors.
[b] Mechanical pumps.
[c] Exterior water heaters.
[d] Water softeners.
[e] Utility and telephone company meters or boxes.
[f] Garbage cans for individual uses, trash compactors
and dumpsters.
[g] Storage tanks.
[2] Equipment that is enclosed or recessed by a minimum of
60 feet from the building facade facing a public street or a
parking area containing in excess of 200 parking spaces
shall be deemed to comply with the screening
requirement.
(i) Limitation on outdoor activities.
[1] Outdoor storage or retail operations, other than loading or
unloading, shall not be located between the rear or side of
the building and any property line abutting a residential
use, with the exception of outdoor seating for restaurants
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:709
not located in a large retail establishment, subject to site
plan approval by the Planning Board, provided that there
are no more than five tables and a total of not more than
20 seats; that there be no alcohol served in the outdoor
seating area; that there be no entertainment in the
outdoor seating area; and that the outdoor seating area
be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any property line
abutting a residential use.
E. Green engineering performance standards. The following green
engineering performance standards shall be met by the development:
(1) All large retail establishments shall be designed to achieve LEED
certification pursuant to this subsection. Paperwork indicating
proposed scoring for achieving LEED Certification shall be
submitted to the Department of Community Development for
approval with the submission of documents for preliminary site
plan approval.
(2) All new parking lot lights shall be LED (light-emitting diodes).
Other new exterior lighting, including interior lighting for exterior
identification signs, shall be LED or equivalent energy-saving
technology available at the time of construction, dependent upon
availability of suitable architectural lighting. Existing non-LED
lights may be relocated as necessary.
F. Landscaping and lighting.
(1) Xeriscape landscape principles. All landscaping plans shall be
designed to incorporate water conservation materials and
techniques though application of xeriscape landscaping principles,
which do not allow artificial plants, mulched (including gravel)
beds or areas without landscape plant material, paving of areas not
required for walkways, plazas or parking lots, bare ground, weed
covered or infested surfaces. The following landscaping principles
shall apply:
(a) Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped
together on the same irrigation zones.
(b) High-irrigation turf and plantings shall be limited to
appropriate high-use areas with high visibility and functional
needs.
(c) Low-water-demanding plants and turf shall be used where
practicable.
(2) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) All parking lot islands, connecting walkways through parking
lots and driveways through or to parking lots shall be
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:710
landscaped with a combination of deciduous and evergreen
trees and shrubs suitable to a parking environment.
(b) There shall be a landscaped area located between Route 1 and
any parking lot, pursuant to a landscaping plan to be submitted
to the Planning Board during site plan review.
(3) Parking lot lighting.
(a) All parking areas shall be illuminated to provide a safe
pedestrian and vehicle operating environment.
(b) The mounting height of parking lot light fixtures shall not
exceed the height of the tallest building fronting on the parking
area or 30 feet, whichever is less.
(c) All parking lot lighting shall be shielded and directed
downward to minimize incidence of sky glow and minimize
impact on residential uses.
(d) All parking lot lighting shall be LED or equivalent energysaving
technology available at the time of construction.
(4) Street lighting.
(5) A comprehensive lighting plan shall be established and approved
by the Planning Board at the time of site plan approval.
(6) The operation of searchlights and other upward-directed and
moving lights used to promote business activity is strictly
prohibited.
G. Signage.
(1) Signage shall be permitted in accordance with the following
regulations and standards.
(a) Square footage for retail tenants in excess of 50,000 square
feet leasable area.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.4
198:711
Signage Matrix for Retail/Hotel Tenants in Excess of
50,000 Square Feet Leaseable Area
The total maximum allowable signage per tenant of 50,000
square feet or greater is not to exceed the square footage in
the chart below. The maximum letter/logo height is seven feet
Primary Identification
Signage Maximum
Allowable
Tenant
Leaseable
Area
(square
feet)
Single Sign
(square
feet)
Aggregate
(square
feet)
Maximum
Combined
Allowable for All
Sign Types Used
(square feet)
50,000 to
75,000
300 400 500
75,000 to
99,999
350 450 600
100,000 to
125,000
400 600 800
125,000 to
150,000
500 750 1,000
150,000 or
greater
600 900 1,200
(2) Additional requirements.
(a) Leasable area is gross square footage on all levels.
(b) Sign area restrictions for secondary identification signage for
retail tenants less than 50,000 square feet shall apply, except
all size limitations shall be decreased by 50%.
(c) Primary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose two of the following as their primary identification
signs: Type A fascia wall signs, Type B marquee/canopy sign,
Type C feature sign, Type E1 awning sign, Type P pylon sign.
(d) Secondary identification signage. All tenants may be allowed to
choose four of the following as their secondary identification
signs: Type A fascia wall sign, Type D blade sign, Type E2
awning sign, Type F plaque sign, Type G window/door sign,
Type H changeable sign, Type M monument sign.
(e) Multiple pylon signs shall be permitted along Route 1 frontage
to a height of 36 feet each. Pylon signs shall have a maximum
setback of 100 feet and minimum setback of 10 feet from Route
1.
§ 205-79.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-79.4
198:712
§ 205-79.5. Exemption from impact review.
No environmental impact assessment shall be required to be submitted
prior to granting of tentative plan approval, unless the Board determines
that an environmentally sensitive area may be negatively impacted by the
proposed development. This section in no way limits the Board's ability to
require an assessment of traffic conditions and the adequacy of existing and
proposed utilities.
§ 205-79.6. Other provisions.
All other requirements for PUD developments in §§ 205-87.1 through 205-92
in Article XXA shall apply to development in the TMU Zone unless such
requirement is in conflict with the regulations governing the TMU Zone or
other stipulation of court order.
H. Application procedure.
(1) Preliminary subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this
chapter and utilize the checklist in Appendix C.
(2) Site plan approval shall be in accordance with this chapter and
utilize the checklist in Appendix A.
(3) Final subdivision approval shall be in accordance with this chapter
and utilize checklist in Appendix D.
§ 205-79.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-79.6
198:713

ARTICLE XIXA
O-R Office Research District
[Added 2-4-1985]
§ 205-80. Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to encourage large-scale coordinated
development of office research facilities in order to capitalize on the tract's
location at a grade-separated interchange on U.S. Route 1. The size and
location of the tract lends itself to development at a greater intensity of
land use than other available nonresidential areas in the Township. As such,
development standards have been established to encourage integrated
development for corporate office and research facilities.
§ 205-81. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in O-R Office Research Districts:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
(2) Banks and financial offices.
(3) Medical and dental offices and clinics.
(4) Professional offices.
(5) Experimental, research or testing laboratories, provided that no
operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would
create hazardous, noxious or offensive conditions beyond the
boundaries of the property involved.
(6) Administrative and general business offices where no
manufacturing is performed.
(7) Educational services and for-profit primary and secondary schools
and colleges. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(8) Finance and insurance offices.
(9) Hotel/convention facilities, provided that only those retail and
service uses which are ancillary to the principal use shall be
permitted.
(10) Computer and data processing facilities.124
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(11), Theaters, added 5-15-1995, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10.
§ 205-80 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-81
198:715
§ 205-81.1. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 205-93 of this chapter.
(3) Private recreation uses intended to provide recreational
opportunities to individuals and employees associated with
businesses and facilities contained within the development.
(4) Other customary uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to
the principal use and building.
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter): none.
A. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet from U.S. Route 1 and 60 feet
from all other streets.
(2) Minimum side yard setback:
(a) Either side: 40 feet.
(b) Total of both sides: 80 feet, except that wherever a side yard of
a building which is proposed to exceed 30 feet in height abuts a
lot in a single-family detached residential zone, the minimum
required side yards shall increase in accordance with
§ 205-81.1A(4).
(3) Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet, except that wherever the rear
yard of a building which is proposed to exceed 30 feet abuts a lot in
a single-family detached residential zone, the minimum required
rear yards shall increase in accordance with § 205-81.1A(4).
(4) Building height and setback. The maximum building height shall be
75 feet, provided that wherever a building which is proposed to
exceed 35 feet in height abuts a residentially zoned or developed
lot, rear yard and side yard setbacks shall increase in relation to
building height in accordance with the following:
§ 205-81 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-81.1
198:716
Building Height Exceeds
30 Feet
(feet)
Additional Setback
Required
(feet)
5 20
10 40
15 60
20 80
25 100
30 120
35 140
40 160
(5) Required buffer. Required side and rear yard setbacks shall include
a thirty-foot landscaped buffer designed in accordance with Article
XXVI when said side or rear yard abuts a residentially zoned or
developed lot.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
B. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply
in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building.
(2) Detached accessory buildings, utility buildings and storage
buildings are permitted in the rear yard only, but may not be
constructed or installed within any required buffer area.
(3) Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all
property lines, except that where the yard abuts a single-family
detached residential zone, the accessory building shall be set back
a minimum of 40 feet.
C. Other provisions.
(1) All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general
provisions of Article IV.
(2) No parking area or driveway shall be located within 50 feet of any
side or rear lot line that abuts a lot in a single-family detached
residential zone.
(3) No tree having a diameter of more than three inches and a height
of three feet from the ground and located within 100 feet of any
side or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone or lot utilized for
residential purposes shall be removed unless such removal is in
accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.
§ 205-81.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-81.1
198:717
(4) All properties and uses are subject to the performance standards as
specified in Article XXVII.
§ 205-81.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-81.1
198:718
ARTICLE XX
PUD Planned Unit Development
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-82. Purpose.
In order that the public health, safety, morals and general welfare may
be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization and of growing demand
for housing of all types and design; to provide for necessary commercial
facilities conveniently located to such housing; to provide for well-located,
clean, safe and pleasant residential, commercial and industrial development
so that the growing demands of the population may be met by greater
variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings; so that greater
opportunities for better housing and recreation, shops and industrial plants
conveniently located to each other may extend to all citizens and residents
of the Township; and in order to encourage a more efficient use of land
and of public services or private services in lieu thereof; and to reflect
changes in the technology of land development so that resulting economies
may inure to the benefit of those who need homes; to lessen the burden of
traffic on streets and highways; to conserve the value of the land; and, in
aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the type,
design and layout of residential, commercial and industrial development
and other facilities, including the foregoing, at the time of development in
a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values within
established residential areas and to ensure that the increased flexibility of
substantive regulations over land development authorized herein is subject
to such administrative standards and procedures as shall encourage the
disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay, the
following standards, procedures and requirements shall apply.
§ 205-83. Objectives.
The Township of North Brunswick wishes to take full advantage of such
modern design construction technology and planning methods as will
advance and promote the sound growth and general welfare of the
Township; strengthen and sustain its economic potentials; provide safe,
efficient and economic municipal services; and establish appropriate
patterns for the distribution of population, commerce and industry
compatible with a modern way of life, coordinated with the protection and
enhancement of natural beauty and resources; and in order to provide for a
variety of service activities, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, parking
and other open space in orderly relationship to each other and in conformity
with the development of the Township as a whole. In order to effectuate the
foregoing and to implement sound planning goals and practices to achieve
the highest potential use of land, the following criteria and procedures are
established.
§ 205-82 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-84
198:719
§ 205-84. Designation of authority.
The municipal authority designated to act under the provisions of this zone
district shall be the Planning Board of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 205-85. Minimum acreage.
§ 205-86. Permitted uses.
In a planned unit development, the following uses and customary accessory
uses may include and shall be limited to:
A. Planned unit developments containing residential and nonresidential
uses shall have an initial size of not less than 50 acres. The minimum
size may be provided in one tract or by the assemblage of several
parcels which would total not less than 50 acres and be zoned PUD.
Acreage made part of a planned unit development shall be connected by
one or more public or private roads. Land and uses situated between
noncontiguous parcels to be made part of a PUD shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be compatible with the PUD plan and be
consistent with the purposes and objectives of this Article. Streets and
roads shall not be deemed to divide acreage for this purpose.
B. Planned unit developments to be developed exclusively for a mix of
residential housing types shall have a minimum tract size of not less
than 20 contiguous acres and shall be designed in accordance with the
net residential density standards contained in § 205-87A(2). [Added
9-6-1988]
A. Single-family dwellings, duplex units, townhouses, multifamily
condominiums and garden apartments. [Amended 9-6-1988]
B. Office-professional development and shopping facilities providing retail
goods and services, provided that nonresidential uses may occupy no
more than 50% of the PUD. However, in no case shall nonresidential
uses occupy less than 10% of any planned unit development if
nonresidential uses are to be developed.
C. Public and private educational and recreational facilities to be
permitted in any district or as approved by the Planning Board.
D. Public utility and essential service facilities.
E. The following conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXIX
of this chapter, may be developed separately or be made a part of a
planned unit development:
(1) Churches and places of worship, including religious schools and
community centers.
§ 205-84 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-86.1
198:720
§ 205-86.1. Affordable housing requirements. [Added 9-6-1988]
In accordance with a court order resulting from litigation known as the
"Urban League of Greater New Brunswick et al vs. the Township of North
Brunswick," 53 dwelling units developed on Lot 114.1 in Block 148 shall be
designated for lower-income units. Twenty-seven units shall be affordable
by moderate-income households, and 26 shall be affordable by low-income
households. Said units shall be subject to price, rental and occupancy
requirements of the Affordable Housing Ordinance of the Township of North
Brunswick and the affirmative marketing requirements of § 205-45.2E.
§ 205-87. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
A. Residential density. Residential development densities of a planned unit
development shall be determined as follows:
(1) Gross residential density. The total number of dwelling units
divided by the acreage of the entire planned unit development shall
not exceed seven.
(2) Net residential density. The total number of dwelling units divided
by the acreage of the portions of the planned unit development
designated for residential uses, including but not limited to open
space, recreation, streets, driveways, parking and walkways, shall
not exceed 10.
B. Townhouse units in a planned unit development shall not exceed 60% of
the total allowable residential units.
C. Open space. A minimum of 15% of the net residential area of a planned
unit development shall be devoted to common open space. Streets,
roadways, parking and other improved areas shall not be considered
open space.
D. Commercial uses and buildings designed and intended to cater to
regular shopping and service needs may be provided by:
(1) Providing the business with appropriate space and, in particular,
sufficient depth from a street to satisfy the needs of modern local
retail development, including the need for off-street parking spaces
in areas to which a large proportion of shoppers come by
automobile, and to encourage the natural tendency of retail
development to concentrate in continuous retail frontage, to the
mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants.
(2) Protecting both business development and nearby residences
against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and
other hazards and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust
and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare
and other objectionable influences.
§ 205-86.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87
198:721
(3) Protecting both business development and nearby residences
against congestion, particularly in areas where the established
pattern is predominately residential, by providing for sufficient offstreet
parking and loading facilities.
(4) Providing sufficient space in appropriate locations for commercial
and miscellaneous services.
(5) Promoting the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accordance with a well-considered plan to promote
stability to commercial development, to strengthen the economic
base of the Township, to protect the character of development and
its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of
land and buildings and to protect the Township's tax revenues.
E. Industrial, manufacturing, laboratory, research, office or other work
establishments may be provided by:
(1) Providing sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
needs of expected future economy, with due allowance for the need
for a choice of proper sites.
(2) Providing that, as far as possible, such space will be available for
use for industry and related activities and to protect residences by
separating them from industrial activities and by prohibiting the
use of such space for new residential development.
(3) Industrial development which is free from danger of fire,
explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards
and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other
particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other
objectionable influences, permitting such development in areas
where this chapter restricts the emission of such nuisances,
without regard to the industrial products and processes involved.
(4) Protecting adjacent residential and commercial areas and
protecting the labor force in other establishments engaged in less
offensive types of manufacturing and related activities.
(5) Protecting industrial and related development against congestion,
as far as is possible and appropriate in each area, by limiting the
bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one
another and by providing space off public streets for parking and
loading facilities associated with such activities.
(6) Promoting the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accordance with a well-considered plan to promote
stability of industrial and related development, to strengthen the
economic base of the Township, to protect the character of the
development and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to
conserve the value of land and buildings and to protect the
Township's tax revenues.
§ 205-87 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87
198:722
F. Site and structure regulations.
(1) Plot and lot sizes and dimensions and structure heights and
locations thereon may be freely disposed and arranged in
conformity with the overall density standards herein and to the
conditions of comprehensive plans therefor, the general features
and design of which shall be approved by the Planning Board.
Minimum lot size or frontage and minimum percentage of lot
coverage are not specified herein, although the Planning Board
may be guided by standards elsewhere herein for comparable
conditions and by common good practice.
(2) Except as follows, other provisions of this chapter governing side
and rear yard sizes in residential areas shall not apply.
(3) Minimum setback distances of 100 feet and 50 feet shall be
provided on all existing state and county roads, respectively.
Garden apartments or townhouse units to be constructed in this
zone on lands fronting on Finnegans Lane shall provide a onehundred-
foot buffer area from the existing right-of-way line of
Finnegans Lane. Access drives, streets and permitted signs may be
located within this buffer area as approved by the Planning Board.
(4) All common open spaces between structures shall be protected
where necessary by fully recorded covenants running with the
land, conveyances or dedications.
(5) The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal ways, roads and
alleys serving garden apartments, multifamily dwellings,
townhouse clusters and commercial and industrial developments
shall be determined from sound planning and engineering
standards in conformity with the estimated needs of the full
development proposed and traffic to be generated thereby and
shall be adequate and sufficient in size, location and design to
accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and
the access of fire-fighting equipment and police vehicles and shall
be certified thereto by a competent expert or experts licensed
under the laws of the State of New Jersey. In such instances, other
provisions of this chapter shall not apply but may serve as general
guides to the Planning Board in approving the development plans.
(6) Service ways for public service facilities (vehicular) shall not be
less than 10 feet in width.
(7) Dedicated streets or highways shall be subject to other Township
ordinances and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
(8) Along all boundary lines of any Planned Unit Development District,
except where they coincide with the right-of-way lines of a federal,
state, county or Township road, public utility right-of-way or public
park, a minimum building setback of 50 feet shall be provided. The
Planning Board may require greater building setbacks and/or a
§ 205-87 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87
198:723
buffer zone along boundary lines of a planned unit development
when such is deemed necessary.
G. Utilities and services.
(1) The developer shall furnish public water and sewer facilities based
on a written agreement with the North Brunswick Public Works and
Utilities Department. The developer shall provide all necessary
storm drainage, highway access, paved service streets and parking
facilities, making reasonable provision for service to the
connections with adjoining properties in other ownerships. All such
improvements shall be installed in complete accordance with
Township standards and as required in this chapter.
(2) Electric, gas and telephone service shall be provided by the
developer in concert with the appropriate public utilities providing
such service. Said service shall be provided as part of an
underground system. When such facilities cannot be reasonably
provided due to topographic or geologic conditions of the land or
due to other extraordinary or unusual circumstances, the
landowner shall adequately demonstrate the lack of feasibility of
such an undertaking to the satisfaction of the Planning Board
before a waiver of this requirement shall be granted.
H. Ownership and maintenance of common open space.
(1) Ownership. The common open space areas required may be
accepted for dedication to the Township where a specific use, such
as public school sites, public parks and other uses, is deemed
compatible by the Planning Board. Where such areas are not so
dedicated to the Township, the landowner must provide for and
establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of
such area. Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise (except to
an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
common open space), without first offering to dedicate the same to
the Township of North Brunswick.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain the common open space shall, at any time after
establishment of the planned unit development, fail to maintain
the common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the plan, the Planning Board shall serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the residents
and owners of the planned unit development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice
shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance
be cured within 30 days thereof and shall state the date and
§ 205-87 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87
198:724
place of hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of
the notice.
(b) At such hearing the Planning Board may modify the terms of
the original notice as to the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice; or, if the modifications thereof shall not be cured within
said 30 days or any extension thereof, the Planning Board, in
order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within
the planned unit development and to prevent the common open
space from becoming a nuisance, may enter upon said common
space and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said
entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to
use the common open space except where the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the residents and
owners.
(c) Before the expiration of said year, the Planning Board shall,
upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization
theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the common
open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization, or to the residents and owners of the planned
unit development, to be held by the Planning Board, at which
hearing such organization or the residents and owners of the
planned unit development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Township shall continue for a succeeding
year.
(d) If the Planning Board shall determine that such organization is
ready and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain
said common open space at the end of said year. If the Planning
Board shall determine that such organization is not ready and
able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable
condition, the Township may, at its discretion, continue to
maintain said common open space during the next succeeding
year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in
each year thereafter.
(e) The decision of the Planning Board in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned unit
development that have a right of enjoyment of the common
open space and shall become a tax lien on said properties.
(f) The Township, at the time of entering upon said common open
space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such
lien in the office of the County Clerk upon the properties
affected by such lien within the planned unit development.
I. Special requirements.
§ 205-87 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87
198:725
(1) Every structure or group of structures and uses, including those of
an institutional, charitable or public nature, and every designed
plot area or cluster unit having services, facilities or utilities in
common private usage and in common ownership or control by its
occupants or which functions as an independent corporate
property owner or agent of management shall be located upon and
within a lot or plot of land which shall be fully dimensioned and
designated as representing the area of responsibility and extent of
such individual group ownership or management as may be
established by ownership in full or partial fee or for lease under
deed covenant, lease contract or such other conditions of usage or
occupancy legally established and recorded therefor; and a
description or plan of each lot or plat shall be filed separately or as
part of the descriptive maps of the Planned Unit Development
District with the Tax Assessor.
(2) In addition to all other standards, conditions or requirements set
forth in this chapter, all site and building plans shall be reviewed by
the Planning Board in regard to safety and convenience of traffic
access and parking, disposition and usability of open spaces,
compatibility of building types, building construction plans and
other factors relating to site design. Such site review will also
consider the site design as it fits in with the general development of
the entire planned unit development area.
§ 205-87 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87
198:726
ARTICLE XXA
PUD-II Planned Unit Development
[Added 2-4-1985]
§ 205-87.1. Purpose.
This zone has been created in order to comply with court order resulting
from settlement of litigation known as the "Urban League of Greater New
Brunswick et al. vs. the Township of North Brunswick." Permitted uses,
residential densities and various other development standards incorporated
in this section have been developed in accordance with said court order.
§ 205-87.2. Limits of zone.
This zone shall encompass the four-hundred-four-acre tract known as the
"Manor Realty Tract," designed as Block 148, Lot 111.01.
§ 205-87.3. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the PUD-II Zone.
A. Principal uses. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(1) Single-family dwellings, duplexes, two-family dwellings,
townhouses, garden apartments and other attached housing types
such as low-rise and mid-rise structures.
(2) Office/professional use.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Hotel/convention facilities developed as one facility, including
convenience commercial uses and restaurants which are related to
a hotel convention facility.
(5) Commercial uses, with the exception of theaters, which commercial
uses shall be limited to 33% of the nonresidential floor space.
[Amended 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(6) Flex space buildings consisting of a mix of warehouse and office
use.
(7) Freestanding restaurants.
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV of this
chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 205-87.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87.3
198:727
§ 205-87.4. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in existing residential, commercial,
office and industrial zones, provided that the use can be
demonstrated to be ancillary to a principal use on the site.125
D. Conditional uses (subject to the provisions of Article XXIX of this
chapter).
(1) Churches and places of worship.
E. Prohibited uses. Any nonresidential use which will result in a
hazardous, noxious or offensive condition beyond the confines of the
building.
A. Residential development.
(1) Residential acreage and number of residential units. The
approximate acreage allocated to residential use, net of roads,
parks and wetlands shall be 146 acres. With one exception, the
number of residential units shall not exceed 1,975 units, resulting
in a gross density of approximately 13.5 units per acre. The only
exception that would allow the maximum number of units to exceed
1,975 units would occur only if the property identified as Block
148.11, Lot 1, is developed as housing for residents 55 years of age
or older in accordance with the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan adopted by the Planning Board on June 23, 2016. For four
years from the time of execution of the settlement order, the
developer shall have the option to develop up to 270 age-restricted
units on up to 18 acres of land located on said property. However,
the maximum gross density of the area to be developed for agerestricted
housing shall not exceed 18 units per acre. This provision
shall expire four years from execution of the settlement agreement.
[Amended 8-1-1994; 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
(2) Residential mix and densities.
(a) Residential areas shall be designated on a general
development plan in accordance with the density
classifications of this subsection. Permitted housing types and
density ranges within these classifications are also specified
herein:
Low Density - LD
Density range: 5 to 10 dwelling units per
acre
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), Warehousing, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-1-1994.
§ 205-87.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87.4
198:728
Permitted dwelling units: Single-family detached Zerolot-
line Duplex Two-family
Townhouse Multiplex
Low-Medium Density - LMD
Density range: 10 to 20 dwelling units per
acre
Permitted dwelling units: Duplex Townhouse Multiplex
Medium Density - MD
Density range: 15 to 25 dwelling units per
acre
Permitted dwelling units: Townhouse Multiplex Lowrise
Medium-High Density -
MHD126
Density range: 20 to 35 dwelling units per
acre
Permitted dwelling units: Townhouse Multiplex Lowrise
Mid-rise
(b) While individual areas may exceed the density established
herein, the average density for each specific density
classification shall not exceed the maximum permitted.
(3) Affordable housing requirement. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(a) Three hundred forty-eight of the dwelling units approved for
construction in this zone shall be marketed at a sales price or
rent which makes them affordable to lower-income families in
accordance with the regulations of the Township of North
Brunswick Affordable Housing Ordinance,127 unless the
Township receives approval to transfer some of these units to a
receiving municipality through a regional contribution
agreement. In such case, each lower-income unit transferred
shall be replaced with a market priced unit.
(b) Ten percent of the age-restricted units identified in §
205-87.4A(1) shall be affordable units as follows: 13% shall be
very low income; 47% low income; and 40% moderate income.
[Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12]
(4) Designated lower-income units shall be subject to price, rental,
occupancy and resale controls as established by the Township of
North Brunswick Affordable Housing Ordinance.
126. Editor's Note: The former High Density - HD classification, which immediately followed
this classification, was repealed 8-1-1994.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Housing, Affordable.
§ 205-87.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87.4
198:729
(5) Construction phasing, location and affirmative marketing
requirements. All low- and moderate-income units are subject to
the requirements of § 205-45.2B through E.
(6) Minimum setback distances from roadways, parking areas, the
railroad and nonresidential uses. All residential structures shall
comply with the following minimum setback requirements:
[Amended 8-1-1994]
(a) Fifty feet from the railroad.
(b) Fifty feet from U.S. Route 130.
(c) Thirty-five feet from existing and proposed Township roads.
(d) Twenty feet from private internal roads; except at
intersections, where the setback shall be 35 feet, said setback
measured from the edge of the cartway to the building.
(e) Ten feet from off-street parking areas. However, a driveway
which leads to an individual unit shall be exempt from this
setback.
(f) Fifty feet from adjacent property either developed or zoned for
nonresidential use.
(7) Residential housing mix. No more than 33 1/3% of the total units
shall be constructed in structures exceeding three stories.
[Amended 8-1-1994]
(8) Lot configuration. Lot sizes and dimensions may be freely disposed
and arranged in conformity with the overall density standards
herein. However, said design shall be in accordance with good
planning practices and shall be subject to Board approval.
(9) Buffer requirements. A fifty-foot buffer strip, designed in
accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI, shall be
required between proposed residential uses and all existing
nonresidential uses on adjacent properties, as well as along U.S.
Route 130 and the railroad. Roads and parking access roads may
cross a setback or buffer area.
(10) Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet between structures
which exceed two stories; 20 feet between all other attached
structures. Detached single-family residential structures, except
zero-lot-line units, shall have a minimum side yard of five feet.
Zero-lot-line units shall have a minimum side yard of 10 feet on one
side.
(11) Maximum residential building height. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(a) Residential building heights shall conform to the following
schedule:
§ 205-87.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87.4
198:730
Building Type
Maximum Height
(feet)
Mid-rise 55
Low-rise 50
All other residential 40
(12) Maximum number of units per structure: 30 units for two-story
buildings; 40 units for three-story buildings excluding low-rise
buildings; 75 units for low-rise buildings; and 150 units for mid-rise
buildings.
(13) Variation in setback. Front building elevations shall have a
minimum four-foot variation in the front building line every four
horizontal units; and rear building lines shall vary four feet every
six horizontal units.
(14) Signs. Each individual residential and nonresidential section of a
development shall be permitted one identification sign along each
access road into the development. The design for said sign,
including material and construction, must be submitted to the
Planning Board for review and approval prior to final site plan
approval and shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. However, if
more than one development is located off a road, the total square
footage of all signs shall not exceed 200 square feet. [Amended
8-1-1994]
(15) Required number of off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking
shall be provided in accordance with the following: 1 1/4 spaces for
all efficiency and one-bedroom units; 1 3/4 spaces for all twobedroom
units; and two spaces for all units with three or more
bedrooms.
(16) Required open space. Recreational areas shall be constructed and/
or dedicated, and cash contributions for recreation development
shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 231,
Parkland Dedication. [Amended 8-1-1994]
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) Acreage and minimum floor space of nonresidential development.
The approximate acreage allocated to nonresidential use, net of
roads, parks and wetlands shall be 138 acres. This development
shall result in a minimum of one and 1,500,000 square feet of
nonresidential space. [Amended 8-1-1994]
(2) Maximum floor area ratio. Total nonresidential development shall
not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.3. However, individual
nonresidential areas may achieve a floor area ratio of 0.4.
[Amended 8-1-1994]
§ 205-87.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87.4
198:731
§ 205-87.5. General development plans.
(3) Location requirement. While the location of residential and
nonresidential development within the zone is not prescribed in
this section, the appropriateness of proposed locations and
transitions between nonresidential and residential land uses shall
be in accordance with good planning practices and shall be subject
to Board approval.
(4) Flexible development regulations. Lot sizes and dimensions,
building heights and other bulk requirements are not specified
herein. However, said design shall be in accordance with good
planning practices and shall be subject to Board approval.
(5) Construction phasing. Nonresidential development shall proceed in
accordance with the schedule established by court order.
(6) Maximum nonresidential building height: 100 feet.
A. General. A general development plan application consisting of details
specified in this section may be submitted for approval at the discretion
of the applicant. Approval of a general development plan, which
specifies land use types, density ranges and other pertinent site data for
the entire 404 acres, confers upon the applicant and the Township such
rights as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 for a period of 20 years, with
the following provisions:
(1) The approved general development plan shall not be changed with
regard to the maximum total dwelling units, density ranges and the
uses of the various project areas. The plan shall not be significantly
changed with regard to the general location and size of the various
parcels. Modifications shall be permitted to allow development
flexibility.
(2) The general location and specifications for the approved major
collector roads shall not be changed.
(3) Sections may be subdivided from property receiving general
development plan approval without regard to setback, side yard,
area or other applicable standards for the purpose of selling to a
builder, homeowners' association or utility.
B. Submission requirements. The following information shall be submitted
with the general development plan application. The information need
not be shown on separate sheets, but may be combined at the
applicant's discretion.
(1) Title sheet. A title sheet shall be submitted containing the following
information:
(a) Name of the project.
(b) Existing lot and block numbers of the project site.
§ 205-87.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87.5
198:732
(c) Name and address of the owner.
(d) Name and address of the applicant.
(e) Key map showing the entire tract and its relationship to the
surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(f) Date of the original submission and each subsequent revision
thereof.
(g) Total tract area.
(h) Approval signatures for:
[1] Chairman;
[2] Secretary; and
[3] Township Engineer.
(i) Name, address and telephone number of the professional(s)
preparing the submission.
(2) Land use plan. Prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch
equals 200 feet, the land use plan shall contain the overall tract and
demonstrate:
(a) The total number of dwelling units.
(b) The areas to be devoted to the specific land uses.
(c) The net density range of each residential land use area.
(d) The permitted type(s) of dwelling units proposed for each
residential land use area.
(3) Circulation plan. Prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch
equals 200 feet, the circulation plan shall show:
(a) The general location of all existing and proposed collector
streets.
(b) The general location of all proposed curb cuts onto existing
public roads.
(c) Typical road cross section.
(d) The general location of nonvehicular pathways.
(4) Utility plan. Prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals
200 feet, the utility plan shall show:
(a) The general location and extent of existing and proposed major
sanitary sewerage, stormwater and water distribution lines.
(b) The general location of pump stations, if required.
§ 205-87.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-87.5
198:733
§ 205-87.6. (Reserved)128
(c) Information which establishes the adequacy of off-site
improvements to service the development.
(5) Drainage plan. Prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch
equals 200 feet, the drainage plan shall contain:
(a) The general location of drainage areas and direction of runoff
flow.
(b) The size in acres of the drainage areas.
(c) Preliminary estimates of the volume of runoff from each
development area.
(d) The general location and size of detention and/or retention
basins.
(6) Open space plan. Prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch
equals 200 feet, the open space plan shall indicate:
(a) The general location and size of open space areas.
(b) The proposed use of open space areas as it relates to open
space, conservation or recreation purposes.
(c) Information as to the adequacy of proposed recreation
facilities to accommodate projected development population.
C. Review process.
(1) Submission. An application for general development plan approval
shall be submitted to the Board at an agenda session of the Board.
Fifteen completed copies of the plan and application shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Board, who shall distribute the copies to
the appropriate people or agencies.
(2) Public hearing. At the public hearing, the applicant shall present
factual evidence and expert opinion in the form of maps, charts,
reports, models and other tangible materials presented by
attorneys, architects, landscape architects, engineers, realtors and
planners as will clearly state for the record the nature and extent of
the proposed development.
(3) Approval time period. General development plan approval shall be
granted or denied within 95 days of submission of a complete
application.
(4) Informal review permitted. Prior to submitting a general
development plan, an applicant may confer with the Board and
submit a conceptual plan for review and discussion in order to
obtain initial opinions. No application fee shall be charged.
However, necessary escrow funds shall be deposited.
§ 205-87.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-87.7
198:734
§ 205-87.7. Exemption from impact review.
No environmental impact assessment shall be required to be submitted
prior to granting of general development plan approval or tentative plan
approval, unless the Board determines that an environmentally sensitive
area may be negatively impacted by the proposed development. This section
in no way limits the Board's ability to require an assessment of traffic
conditions and the adequacy of existing and proposed utilities.
§ 205-87.8. Other provisions.
All other requirements for PUD developments in §§ 205-87.1 and 205-92
in Article XXA shall apply to development in the PUD-II Zone unless such
requirement is in conflict with the regulations governing the PUD-II Zone or
other stipulation of court order.
§ 205-88. Planned unit development applications.
The procedures and approvals provided herein for tentative and final
approval of a planned unit development, and application for such tentative
and final approval, shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Preapplication procedures. Prior to submitting a formal application for
tentative approval of a planned unit development, an applicant may
confer with the Planning Board and submit an outline development plan
to obtain initial opinions on the acceptability of the proposal.
B. Application for tentative approval.
(1) Submission of application. Any landowner desiring to establish a
planned unit development hereunder shall first submit an
application for tentative approval to the Planning Board at a
regular meeting. Such application shall be filed by the landowner
or other entity having a cognizable interest in the land. Fifteen
completed copies of the plan and application shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Board, who shall distribute the copies as
follows:
(a) One copy to each member of the Planning Board.
(b) Two copies to the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development.
(c) One copy to the Township Engineer.
(d) One copy to the Township Public Works and Utilities
Department.
(e) One copy to the Township Industrial Committee.129
128. Editor's Note: Former § 205-87.6, Fees, was repealed 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13. See now
§ 205-89, Fees and escrow deposits.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Development Committee.
§ 205-87.7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-88
198:735
(f) One copy to the Middlesex County Planning Board.
(g) One copy to the New Jersey Division of State and Regional
Planning in the Department of Community Affairs.
(h) One copy to the Planning Board Attorney.
(i) Three copies filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board.
(2) Application for a planned unit development shall be made in
duplicate on the form provided by the Township, which shall be
considered an application for tentative approval.
(3) The fee for such application shall be $20 per dwelling unit plus $50
per acre of land designated for nonresidential uses.
(4) Such an application shall indicate:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The location of the land proposed to be developed.
(c) The nature of the applicant's interest in the land.
(d) The density of land use to be allocated to various parts of the
site.
(e) The location and size of any common open space.
(f) The firm or organization proposed to own and maintain
common open space.
(g) The use, approximate height, bulk and location of buildings or
other structures.
(h) The proposed provision for disposition of storm and sanitary
water.
(i) The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any
other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the land or
buildings, including easements for public utilities.
(j) Proposed provisions for parking.
(k) Locations and widths of streets and ways.
(l) Modifications from the existing ordinances governing streets
or ways or land use being requested.
(m) The projected schedule for development and the approximate
times when final approvals would be requested.
(n) A statement of why the public interest would be served by the
proposed development and wherein the proposed development
would meet the objectives of this chapter.
§ 205-88 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-89
198:736
§ 205-89. Public hearings; grant or denial of tentative application
approval.
A. Public hearings for tentative approval for a PUD plan shall be held and
conducted in accordance with the described procedure, conditions and
regulations as specified in the Municipal Land Use Law (1975).
B. A transcript of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the Planning
Board, the cost of which shall be paid by the applicant. Copies shall be
made available at cost to any party to the proceeding, and all exhibits
accepted in evidence shall be properly identified and the reason for the
exclusion clearly noted in the record. A report on the proposed planned
unit development by the Department of Planning and Development
shall be prepared and filed with the Planning Board not less than five
days before the public hearing and shall be available for public
inspection during reasonable hours.
C. The Planning Board may continue the hearing from time to time, and
the Planning Board may refer the matter back to the Department of
Planning and Development for a further report, a copy of which shall be
filed for record without delay.
D. Presentation of evidence.
(1) At the public hearing, the applicant shall present evidence as to the
planned unit development's:
(a) General character and substance.
(b) Objectives and purposes to be served.
(c) Adequacy and completeness of standards.
(d) Satisfactory application for standards in specific details of
design and organization of elements and plans.
(e) Environmental impact, if the Natural Resource Inventory or
Master Plan notes that the area is characterized by sensitive
environmental features.
(f) Time factors and sequential development potentials.
(g) Conformity with comprehensive plans for Township
development.
(2) To this end, factual evidence and expert opinion shall be submitted
by the developers in the form of such necessary maps, charts,
reports, models and other tangible materials presented by
attorneys, architects, engineers, realtors, professional planners
and economists as will clearly state for the record the full nature
and extent of the proposal.
§ 205-89 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-89
198:737
§ 205-90. Application for final approval.
E. The Planning Board shall decide upon the tentative PUD application in
accord with procedure, conditions and regulations as specified in the
Municipal Land Use Law (1975).
F. The grant or denial of tentative approval shall be by written resolution,
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions setting
forth in what respects the plan would or would not be in the public
interest and:
(1) In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the statement
of objectives of a planned unit development.
(2) The extent to which the plan departs from zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including
but not limited to density, bulk and use and the reasons why such
departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned unit development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
development.
(4) The physical design of the plan and the manner in which said
design does or does not make adequate provision for public
services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
unit development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
established.
(6) In the case of a plan which proposes development over a period of
years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents and owners
of the planned unit development in the integrity of the plan.
(7) That the plan is in conformity with the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law (1975) and the Master Plan of the Township of North
Brunswick.
G. Status of plan after tentative approval. Upon receipt of preliminary
approval, the developer shall possess such rights as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49d.
A. The application for final approval of all or a section of an approved
tentative PUD plan shall be made to the appropriate administrative
officer. The Planning Board shall act upon the application in accordance
§ 205-89 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-90
198:738
§ 205-91. Required improvements.
Before final approval of a planned unit development, the Planning Board
may require, in accordance with the standards of this chapter, the
installation, or the furnishing of a performance guaranty in lieu thereof,
of all or any of the following improvements it may deem to be necessary
or appropriate: street grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors' monuments, water mains, culverts,
bridges, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage facilities or structures and other improvements as the Planning
Board may require or deem necessary in the public interest.
§ 205-92. Escrow funds.
Upon receipt of a conceptual development plan, or an application for
general development plan approval, for tentative plan approval and for
final plan approval for a planned unit development in either the PUD,
PUD-II or TMU Zones, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall send a
copy of the application and a set of all maps and reports to the Board
Attorney and Board Planner. Within 10 days of receipt, the Board Attorney
and Board Planner shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board
an estimate of funds sufficient in amount to undertake technical reviews,
prepare reports, conduct site inspections and to attend meetings. Said
funds shall be required to be placed in an escrow account by the Township
Treasurer to be used as follows:
with procedures and conditions and standards as specified in the
Municipal Land Use Law (1975).
B. At the time of filing for final PUD plan approval, the applicant shall pay
to the Township of North Brunswick a fee equal to 1/2 the amount of the
tentative application fee.
A. The Board professional staff and clerical staff shall submit vouchers for
all necessary fees for attendance at meetings and examination,
inspection and review of the planned unit development, which fees shall
be paid in the ordinary manner. Said vouchers shall be based upon
hourly fees for necessary man-hours expended.
B. Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon completion
of the project or phase of the application procedure, as the case may be,
shall be returned to the applicant as soon as it is practically possible.
C. Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted, such funds as shall, in the judgment of the Planning Board,
be necessary shall be paid in the appropriate account or accounts.
D. The Planning Board shall notify the professional staff that all
appropriate examinations, inspections and reviews shall be undertaken.
§ 205-90 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92
198:739
E. The Planning Board shall take no formal action on any specific phase of
a planned unit development unless all application fees and escrow
funds have been paid.
F. In addition to the examination, inspection and review of the planned
unit development by Professional Staff, the Planning Board may hire a
consulting engineer to study and review the planned unit development.
The findings of the consulting engineer shall be made in a written
report to the Planning Board and given in testimony as part of the
public hearing. The cost of such services shall be paid by the applicant
to the Township Treasurer and placed in the appropriate account.
§ 205-92 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92
198:740
ARTICLE XXI
R-T-D Townhouse-Duplex Residential District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-92.1. Intent. [Amended 9-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-18]
The intent of the R-T-D District is to create a land use category where
residential development can be constructed according to standards that
allow residential uses to act as a buffer between single-family homes and
adjacent nonresidential uses.
§ 205-92.2. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in R-T-D Townhouse-Duplex Residential
Districts:
§ 205-92.3. Development standards for single-family and duplex
dwellings. [Amended 9-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-18]
Development standards for single-family and duplex dwellings shall be as
follows:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Duplex dwelling units (semiattached).
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Temporary buildings incidental to construction work, provided that
such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment of
the construction work.
(4) Single-family detached dwellings. [Added 9-26-1996 by Ord. No.
96-18]
B. Required accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to Article XXIV of this chapter.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as specified in § 205-46C for the R-1
Residential Zone.
D. Conditional uses (subject to Article XXIX of this chapter).
(1) Private and parochial schools.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. Area, yard and building requirements.
§ 205-92.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.3
198:741
§ 205-92.4. Development standards for townhouse use dwellings.
Development standards for townhouse dwellings shall be as follows:
(1) Plot and lot sizes and dimensions may be freely disposed and
arranged in conformity with the overall density standards herein
and to the conditions of comprehensive plans therefor, the general
features and design of which shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Minimum lot size and frontage are not specified herein for
comparable conditions and by common good practice.
(2) Maximum density: seven units per acre.
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum distance between buildings: 10 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 20% of the lot depth.
(6) Maximum building height: the lesser of 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(8) Minimum gross habitable floor area, per unit: 600 square feet.
B. Other provisions.
(1) If a single-family home is proposed to be developed adjacent to an
apartment or nonresidential use which does not include a buffer
area in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, then an
additional thirty-foot buffer strip, designed in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXVI, shall be added along any required
side or rear yard which abuts said apartment or nonresidential use.
(2) All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general
provisions under Articles IV and V.
(3) For nonconforming lots existing prior to June 6, 1966, where
insufficient land width and/or area is available to meet the
requirements and where there are existing homes on either side,
the minimum lot width and/or area shall be 2/3 of the present
zoning requirements, provided that the proposed structure shall
meet all other zoning requirements.
A. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Plot and lot sizes and dimensions may be freely disposed and
arranged in conformity with the overall density standards herein
and to the conditions of comprehensive plans therefor, the general
features and design of which shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Minimum lot size and frontage are not specified herein,
although the Planning Board may be guided by standards set
elsewhere herein for comparable conditions and by common good
practice.
§ 205-92.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.4
198:742
(2) Maximum density: seven units per acre.
(3) Minimum setback distance: 50 feet from state and county roads
and 30 feet from all other streets.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(5) Minimum width of any townhouse: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum gross habitable floor area: 700 square feet.
(7) Maximum building height: the lesser of 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
(8) Maximum number of units per structure: eight.
(9) Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
(10) Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of two means of
access.
(11) Television antenna equipment shall be built into the buildings. No
individual antenna shall be permitted to be erected on any roof.
(12) Where townhouse units have frontage on off-street parking lots and
driveways, the minimum front yard setback shall be approved by
the Planning Board at the time of site plan review.
B. Other provisions.
(1) There shall be a buffer strip 30 feet in width from any side or rear
lot line that abuts an area zoned or developed for single-family,
industrial or commercial use. The buffer strip shall conform to the
standards of Article XXVI.
(2) All properties and uses shall also be subject to the general
provisions under Articles IV and V.
(3) For nonconforming lots existing prior to June 6, 1966, where
insufficient land width and/or area is available to meet the
requirements and where there are existing homes on either side.
the minimum lot width and/or area shall be 2/3 of the present
zoning requirements, provided that both municipal water and
sanitary sewers are available and are to be used, and further
provided that the proposed structure shall meet all other zoning
requirements.
(4) The developer of a townhouse dwelling project shall donate to the
Township or other public or quasi-public body or homeowners'
association, whichever shall be designated by the Mayor and
Council, an amount of land within the project not less than 10% of
the gross area of the tract. The Planning Board shall review and
recommend to the Mayor and Council, which, in turn, shall
specifically approve the open space land for dedication, the
locations and proposed uses of land to be dedicated in accordance
§ 205-92.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.4
198:743
with the foregoing and as guided in its decisions by this section and
the following:
(a) Lands to be dedicated shall be so located as to meet the needs
of open spaces, parks, playgrounds, rights-of-way protecting
major streams or open drainage ways or buffer areas as shown
on the Master Plan or Official Map of the Township or to
provide additional neighborhood area for recreational
purposes. The Planning Board shall make certain that not only
Township requirements shall be satisfied but that the
dedicated area is so located as to meet any possible potential
need of the neighborhood included in a development proposal
being considered.
(b) The lands so dedicated shall include, wherever feasible,
natural features such as streams, brooks, wooded areas, steep
slopes and other natural features of scenic and conservation
value. The developer may be required to plant trees or make
other similar landscaping improvements in order to qualify
open land for acceptance by the Township.
(5) Dedicated areas may be deeded to Township ownership and control
for its dedicated purposes, deeded to another public or quasi-public
body or organization approved by the Mayor and Council or deeded
to property owners or associations within the bounds of the original
development for their use, control and management for a club or
recreational use and providing appropriate restrictions to assure
the effectuation of the purposes of this chapter and to provide for
the maintenance and control of the area. Every effort shall be
made, if nonTownship ownership is approved, to place development
and maintenance responsibility upon the property owners within
the bounds of the development. Upon failure to maintain an orderly
open space, the Township may and can perform such maintenance
and assess the cost to the responsible property owner or owners.
§ 205-92.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.4
198:744
ARTICLE XXII
R-M Residential District
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-92.5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms listed below shall be defined and
interpreted as follows:
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the drainage system of a mobile home lot
beginning at the inlet of the sewer riser pipe which receives the discharge
from the drain outlet of the mobile home and terminating at the sewer line
serving the mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME — A manufactured transportable year-round single-family
dwelling built on one or more chassis and containing a flush toilet, bath or
shower and kitchen sink and designed to be connected to a piped water
supply, sewerage facilities and electrical service.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land designed to accommodate a mobile
home and includes the mobile home stand and the mobile home yard.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been so designated
and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots available to the
general public for the placement thereon of mobile homes for occupancy.
Said term shall be synonymous with "trailer park."130
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
improved and authorized pursuant to this chapter for the accommodation of
one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of a mobile home lot which has been
reserved exclusively for the placement of a mobile home.
PARK MANAGEMENT — The owner or his designated agents, being
administrative officers of the mobile home park.
RECREATION BUILDING — A building used by the park residents for
recreational purposes or other general purposes common to all residents.
SEWER CONNECTION — The connector consisting of all pipes, joints,
fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the
inlet of the building sewer.
TENANT — Any person who rents or leases a mobile home lot from the park
management.
WATER CONNECTION — The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the water riser to the water inlet of the distribution
system of the mobile home.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — The pipe conveying water from a water main to
the water riser on a mobile home lot or to the water distributing system of
a building.
130. Editor's Note: See § 205-7, definition of "trailer court or park."
§ 205-92.5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.6
198:745
§ 205-92.6. General requirements.
§ 205-92.7. Design standards and improvements.
A. Compliance. The provisions of this Article comprise the minimum
standards with which all mobile home parks and the park management
shall comply, as well as with the rules and regulations and policies or
laws administered by the Township of North Brunswick or any agency
or subdivision in this state having legal jurisdiction, including Chapter
IX of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code relating to mobile home
parks.
B. Licensing. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or operate
and maintain a mobile home park in the Township of North Brunswick
unless such person, firm or corporation shall first obtain a license for
the construction, maintenance and operation thereof from the Township
of North Brunswick and pay the deposit fees as hereinafter provided.
No mobile home shall be installed, operated, maintained or occupied
within the Township except upon a duly licensed mobile home park. Any
approval of plans and applications for a license issued hereunder shall
be subject to automatic revocation in the event that the applicant to
whom said approval is granted shall fail to commence construction of
the mobile home park for which a license is applied within one year
from the date of the granting of said approval.
C. Duration of licenses. Licenses or permits to maintain and operate a
mobile home park pursuant to this section shall be issued annually and
shall expire on July 31 of each year.
D. Approval of facilities. No work on the construction or expansion of a
mobile home park shall be undertaken unless approval of the facilities
is required by this section shall have been granted by the State
Department of Health and the Township of North Brunswick.
E. Affordable housing requirements. In accordance with a court order
resulting from litigation known as the "Urban League of Greater New
Brunswick et al vs. the Township of North Brunswick," 37 dwelling units
developed on Lot 114.2 in Block 148 shall be designated for lowerincome
units. Eighteen units shall be affordable by moderate-income
households, and 19 shall be affordable by low-income households. Said
units shall be subject to price, rental and occupancy requirements of
the Affordable Housing Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick
and the affirmative marketing requirements of § 205-45.2E. [Amended
9-6-1988]
A. Organization. The mobile home park site planning and improvements
shall provide facilities appropriate to the needs of the residents for safe,
healthful and comfortable living areas. The mobile home park site,
including mobile home stands, patios, buildings and all site
improvements, shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in
relation to topography, the shape of the plot and the position of
§ 205-92.6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.7
198:746
buildings and common facilities and with full regard to the use and
public safety and appearance.
B. Location. A mobile home park shall only be permitted within the zoning
district designated on the Zoning Map of the Township of North
Brunswick.
C. Lot layout and occupancy. Each mobile home lot shall be clearly
identified by number. Each mobile home lot shall be adequate to
accommodate the mobile home occupying same. The number of mobile
homes permitted in a mobile home park shall not exceed the number of
mobile home lots. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be
construed as prohibiting the maintenance of a retail mobile home sales
agency within a mobile home park or the sale of a mobile home,
whether occupied or unoccupied, which is located on a mobile home lot
and connected to pertinent utilities. However, the retail mobile home
sales agency and any mobile homes displayed as models or stored for
any reason in the park shall be located and designed in accordance with
the same standards as other mobile homes occupied by tenants of the
park, provided, first, that there is only one retail mobile home sales
agency and a maximum of seven mobile home models displayed or
otherwise stored in the park and, second, that the retail mobile home
sales agency and mobile home models displayed or otherwise stored in
the park are located in a manner that does not create a nuisance to the
tenants of the park.
D. Mobile homes per acre. The maximum number of mobile homes
permitted per acre shall be eight.
E. Separation and setback requirements. Each mobile home shall be
located on a mobile home lot so as to comply with the following:
(1) Plot and lot sizes and dimensions may be freely disposed and
arranged in conformity with the overall density standards herein
and to the conditions of comprehensive plans therefor, the general
features and design of which shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Minimum lot size and frontage are not specified herein,
although said design shall be in accordance with good planning
practices and subject to Board approval.
(2) Mobile homes may be situated in a zero-lot-line fashion in which
two adjacent mobile homes abut each other. However, there shall
be a minimum of 15 feet between each mobile home which is not
designed in a zero-lot-line fashion.
(3) No mobile home shall be closer than 50 feet to adjoining property
lines. A thirty-foot-wide landscape buffer shall be provided within
the fifty-foot setback from adjoining property lines.
(4) There shall be a minimum setback of 20 feet from the right-of-way
line of any private street and 50 feet from the right-of-way line of all
existing state, county and public streets. A thirty-foot-wide
§ 205-92.7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.7
198:747
landscape buffer shall be provided within the fifty-foot setback
from state, county and public streets.
(5) No mobile home shall be closer than 50 feet to any structure of
building except metal or masonry storage sheds and other mobile
home units.
F. Mobile home stands. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a
mobile home stand of sufficient size to accommodate the mobile home
to be placed thereon. The stand shall be constructed of five inches of
two-thousand-five-hundred-pounds-per-square-inch portland cement
concrete at 28 days. There shall be six-by-six-inch 10/10 wire mesh
placed 2 1/2 inches from the finished surface of the concrete.
Contraction joints shall be placed at maximum intervals of 10 feet. The
concrete shall be placed upon a minimum of four inches of compacted
gravel. Where stands are to be constructed on fill, the fill shall be
allowed to settle for 1/2 year unless provisions are made for proper
compaction in a minimum of six-inch lifts. The concrete shall be cured
with a curing compound which shall be applied as soon as the concrete
has been finished and protected from damage for a period of not less
than 36 hours.
G. Patios and decks. Each mobile home space shall be provided with either
a patio or elevated wooden deck to provide outdoor living space. The
patio shall be constructed of a minimum of four-inch portland cement
concrete or other rigid type of impervious pavement as approved by the
Planning Board. If decks are constructed, they may be roofed and/or
enclosed by screening and shall be exempt from the minimum setback
requirements of this section. [Amended 10-20-1986]
H. Road layout and road width. Streets shall be provided on the site where
necessary to furnish principal trafficways for convenient access to the
mobile home stands and other important facilities on the streets. The
streets shall be retained as private streets on the property. All roads in
the mobile home park shall be designed with gentle curves so as not to
be monotonous to drivers and shall be continuous, except that closed
ends of dead-end streets shall be no more than 600 feet in length and
shall be provided with a vehicular turning space of at least 30 feet in
radius. All private roadways which lead to a public highway or public
street shall be at least 36 feet wide from curb to curb; except access to
the mobile home park from a local municipal street. All roads shall be
installed to comply with the provisions of the Township Land
Subdivision Ordinance131 and the requirements contained herein.
[Amended 2-3-1986]
I. Sidewalks. In locations where common facilities are concentrated,
including open space and recreation areas, and on one side of all
roadways in a mobile home park, common, continuous walkways of at
131. Editor's Note: See Art. XXXI, Land Subdivision Procedures, Art. XXXII, Improvements; Site
Maintenance; Assignment of Contractors, and Art. XXXIII, Subdivision Design Standards;
Miscellaneous Requirements, of this chapter.
§ 205-92.7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.7
198:748
least four feet in width and of durable concrete construction shall be
provided.
J. On-street parking shall be permitted on roadways having thirty-footwide
pavement from curb to curb. At least two car parking spaces for
each mobile home shall be provided. Parking spaces shall be provided
either in convenient bays or in other areas upon the mobile home space.
K. Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed at every intersection and
along interior streets as approved by the Planning Board. The applicant
shall have the option under this section of illuminating the mobile home
park with gas lamps in colonial style. If the option is exercised,
however, the gas lamps shall be installed at every intersection and at
intervals of 60 feet along both sides of all interior streets.
L. Additions. Additions shall conform to the following:
(1) Skirting shall be provided on all mobile homes so that no part of the
undercarriage is visible. Porches, awnings, storage sheds or other
additions shall be installed only if permitted by the park
management and the Township Zoning Ordinance and Building
Code.132
(2) Storage sheds shall be of metal or masonry construction.
(3) No storage shed, porch or other addition, excluding awnings
covering porches or patios, shall be built or installed if the area
used for such additions added to the area used for the mobile home
and patio totals more than 2/3 of the gross lot area.
M. Subfloor storage. Gasoline and similar flammable liquids shall not be
stored underneath a mobile home. Other types of storage underneath a
mobile home shall be permitted only if approved by the park
management. If approved, the following conditions shall be satisfied:
(1) The storage area shall be provided with a base of concrete or other
impervious material.
(2) Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the
underneath inspection of the mobile home.
(3) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
N. Required open space. A minimum of 10% of the total residential
acreage shall consist of landscaped open space (excluding required
buffers), recreation areas and related parking facilities. However, a
minimum of 50% of this required open space shall be developed for
active recreation facilities.
O. Landscaping and natural site protection. Landscaping to be provided in
the park shall be shown on the site plan. Wooded areas shall be
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 205-92.7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.7
198:749
§ 205-92.8. Water supply system and sanitary sewerage facilities.
The licensee shall be required to provide adequate water supply and
sanitary sewerage facilities, and all mobile homes shall be connected
thereto. Such facilities shalt conform to the potable water standards
established by the New Jersey State Department of Health and Chapter IX,
Mobile Home Parks, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code. The foregoing
utilities shall be approved by the State Department of Health and the
Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with the applicable
statutes.
§ 205-92.9. Refuse storage, collection and disposal.
§ 205-92.10. Application procedures; fees; other requirements.
Licenses for the construction and maintenance and operation of a mobile
home park in accordance with the application procedures required by this
Article shall be issued by the Mayor and Council of the Township of North
Brunswick upon proper application and after the review and approval of a
proposed mobile home park by the various Township agencies hereinafter
stated.
preserved wherever possible without causing interference with the
general plans, specifications and other requirements pertaining to the
site.
A. General. The storage and collection of refuse shall be so managed as to
prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident
hazards and air pollution.
B. Refuse containers. All refuse shall be stored in durable, fly-tight,
watertight and rodentproof containers.
C. Container location. Containers shall be located either at each mobile
home lot or at one or more centralized locations within the mobile home
park. Such area(s) shall be accessible for disposal and collection.
D. Collection and removal. The collection and removal of garbage and
refuse shall be the responsibility of the park management.
A. Application procedures.
(1) Application. Application for license to construct or operate and
maintain a mobile home park shall be made by filing an application
in duplicate and 12 copies of a site plan with the Township Planning
Board. The application and site plan shall contain information
required in Article XXVIII of this chapter. A fee equal to $100 plus
$5 per unit shall accompany the site plan application for a mobile
home park license.
(2) Referral. Upon receipt of an application for a mobile home park,
the Planning Board shall forward copies of the proposal to the
§ 205-92.7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.10
198:750
Township Engineer, the Board of Health, the Middlesex County
Planning Board and the Township Bureau of Fire Prevention for
their consideration. The Planning Board shall not act in regard
to the application until the receipt of reports from the aforesaid
agencies or individuals or unless a thirty-day period has elapsed
after the forwarding of the applications to the agencies and no
report in writing has been received. In the latter event, it shall be
deemed that such person or agency has approved the proposal.
(3) Notice. Upon passage of the thirty-day period referred to above,
the Planning Board shall establish a date for a public hearing. Once
a date for the public hearing has been established, the applicant
shall send, by certified mail, notice of the hearing, at least 10 days
prior to the date thereof, to all owners of land within 200 feet of the
area covered by the site plan, including land across a street or
streets therefrom, as the names of such owners appear on the most
recent Township tax record. The notice shall specify the time and
place of the hearing, give a brief description of the proposed mobile
home park and state that a copy of the site plan thereof has been
filed with the Planning Board and is available in the office of the
Planning Board Secretary for public inspection. The applicant shall
also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall
also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall
submit an affidavit prior to the hearing stating that he has notified
all property owners within 200 feet, including owners of property
directly across the street or streets from the property involved.
(4) Review by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
application and the site plan for its adequacy in providing for good
site design, particularly such items as ingress and egress, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, location and orientation of buildings,
landscaping and buffer planting, parking areas and other planning
considerations. The Planning Board shall consider in its review the
reports of the other persons and agencies referred to hereinabove
and particularly those pertaining to the adequacy of proposed
drainage facilities, water supply and sewer facilities, paving
requirements and any other engineering requirements.
(5) Approval of plan. The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove
the proposed site plan and application with respect to adequacy of
planning standards for the site. Its approval or reason for
disapproval shall be clearly stated in a resolution from the Planning
Board. If the application and site plan are approved by the Planning
Board, it shall be referred to the Mayor and Council for issuance of
a license, and the Mayor and Council shall offer those parties
having an interest in the application to speak at a public hearing
called for that purpose. Issuance of the license will be based upon
the standards set forth in this section and upon those
§ 205-92.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.10
198:751
considerations provided for in this section. Issuance or denial shall
be by formal action of the Mayor and Council at a public meeting
after interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
B. Fees. The license fee to operate a mobile home park in the Township of
North Brunswick shall be $3,500 per year, plus a fee of $10 per month
for each mobile home registered in the mobile home park during said
month. A "calendar month" is hereby defined as any continuous thirtyday
period of occupancy. The aforesaid fee shall be paid prior to the
issuance of the license.
(1) Time of payment. The annual license fee is due on or before August
1 of each year.
(2) Monthly reports. Every person holding a license for the operation
of a mobile home park shall pay the fee provided above, monthly, on
or before the 10th day of the next succeeding month, and, if not
paid at the end of the 10th day, the payment shall become
delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty equal to 10% of the
amount of the delinquent payment. The payment shall be
accompanied by a monthly report form signed and sworn by the
licensee or by his duly authorized agent. The monthly report shall
contain the following information:
(a) Name and address of the licensee and address of mobile home
park.
(b) Month for which the report is made.
(c) Total number of mobile homes registered at the mobile home
park in such month, with dates of arrival and departure.
(d) The number of spaces occupied by the mobile homes.
(e) Such other information as the Mayor and Council may from
time to time require. The monthly report shall be filed with the
Township Clerk, and the fees accompanying same shall be paid
to the general treasury of the Township.
C. Other requirements.
(1) Certification. The Zoning Officer of the Township shall from time to
time certify in writing, to the Clerk, the number of mobile home
spaces in the mobile home parks located in the Township. Such a
certification shall occur at least twice a year and be filed by June 1
and November 1.
(2) No violations. No license shall be issued until the Health Officer
and the Zoning Officer shall have certified that they know of no
violation of any law, regulation or ordinance applicable to mobile
homes or mobile home parks.
§ 205-92.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.10
198:752
(3) Renewal of licenses. Licenses for the renewal of mobile home park
licenses previously issued to an applicant shall be issued upon
consultation by the Township agencies required in the case of
original applications. Such license shall be issued if it shall appear
that the mobile home park conforms to this Article in all respects
and the design standards herein set forth and upon payment of the
required fees. Application for a renewal license shall be made by
the filing of four copies of written application, signed by the person
seeking a renewal license, which shall contain the following
information:
(a) The application shall set forth any change in ownership or
interest in the property by the person making the application.
(b) The application shall set forth any changes in the mobile home
park with respect to matters set forth in the prior application
and shall contain all data required with respect to an original
application concerning any such changes unless such changes
have been previously approved.
(4) Approval to operate. Mobile home parks shall not be operated by
any person until the Mayor and Council has given formal approval
therefor by issuance of an appropriate license. The license shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where it can be
easily observed. No person shall operate a mobile home park whose
license therefor is suspended.
(5) Inspection. Mobile home park buildings and premises shall be
subject to inspection by an authorized representative of the Mayor
and Council.
(6) Suspension of license or permit to operate. The license or permit of
any person to operate a mobile home park may be suspended at any
time for good cause by the Mayor and Council upon three days'
notice in writing after due hearing. The person whose license or
permit has been suspended or his representative in charge of the
mobile home park shall, at the time of such license suspension, be
informed why the license or permit to operate the mobile home
park is suspended, the reason for such action and the remedial
action to be taken before the suspension may be lifted. Application
for reinstatement of such license may be made any time thereafter
and may be granted upon satisfactory proof of remedial action.
(7) Alterations to mobile home park and facilities. Applications for
approval of plans and specifications for modification, alteration,
extension or expansion of a licensed mobile home park shall be
made in conformance with the application requirements of this
section. The fee for such application shall be 1/2 the amount of the
original filing fee.
(8) Notices to maintain facilities and roads. The holder of the license
shall cause all facilities to be maintained in good operating order
§ 205-92.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-92.10
198:753
and shall cause all roads and streets within the mobile home park
to be plowed and sanded when conditions so require. Failure to
comply with such requirements within 24 hours after notice by the
Township to the holder of the license or to the person specified
above with respect to any maintenance or repairs within the
jurisdiction of such person shall constitute a violation.
(9) Accessibility to mobile home parks. All roads and streets within a
mobile home park shall be accessible to all residents of the mobile
home park, their guests, invitees and licensees and Township
agencies of the Township of North Brunswick.
(10) Park management.
(a) Park office. In any mobile home park there shall be an office
established which may be located either in a mobile home or in
a permanent building and which shall be the office of the
person in active charge of the mobile home park. A copy of the
park license and a copy of this section shall be conspicuously
posted therein, and the park register, as hereafter referred to
in this section, shall be at all times kept in that office.
(b) Park register. The mobile home park license shall maintain a
park register, which shall be kept up-to-date with the following
information: the name of each owner of each mobile home or
the tenant thereof, the serial number of each mobile home, the
body type and license number of each mobile home, the date of
arrival of each mobile home and the date of departure of each
mobile home. Likewise, a daily and monthly total of the total
number of mobile home spaces occupied shall be placed in the
register. A copy of the register shall be delivered to the Clerk of
the Township by the 10th day of the month following the end of
the reporting required by this Article.
(c) Inspection of register. The mobile home park owner shall keep
the register available for inspection by Township officials at all
times. The register shall not be destroyed for a period of three
years following the date of registration.
§ 205-92.10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-92.10
198:754
ARTICLE XXIII
Fences and Swimming Pools
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-93. Fences.
A. The following provisions are applicable to all districts:
(1) Fences hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in any zone in
the Township of North Brunswick shall be of the following types:
(a) Open fences not exceeding four feet in height above ground
level when located in a front yard area (except corner lots:
refer to § 205-22).
(b) Open or solid fences not exceeding six feet in height above
ground level when located in any side or rear yard area.
(c) Open wire fences not exceeding eight feet in height may be
erected within public park, public playground or public school
properties.
(d) Fences enclosing commercial and private pools as specified in
§§ 205-94 and 205-95.
(e) Fences specifically required by other provisions of this chapter.
(f) Residential property owners may erect a solid fence not
exceeding six feet in height or an open wire fence not
exceeding eight feet in height where the property abuts land
zoned and used for commercial and industrial purposes.
(g) Open fences enclosing private tennis courts not exceeding 10
feet in height may be erected in rear yards, provided that the
fence is located not closer than five feet to any property line.
(2) Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound upright condition.
(3) All fences must be erected within the property lines, and no fence
shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
(4) All supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of
the fence, and if erected along or adjacent to a property line, the
supporting members of the fence shall face the principal portion of
the tract of land of the property upon which the fence is erected.
(5) The following fences and fencing material are specifically
prohibited in all zones in the Township of North Brunswick:
(a) Barbed wire fences.
(b) Canvas fences.
(c) Cloth fences.
§ 205-93 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-93
198:755
§ 205-94. Private swimming pools.
The following regulations are applicable only to residential districts:
(d) Electrically charged fences.
(e) Expandable fences.
(f) Collapsible fences.
B. The following provisions are applicable to C-1, C-2, G-O, O-R, ERR, I-1
and I-2 Zone Districts:
(1) Fences hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in the abovementioned
zones shall be in accordance with the following:
(a) Fences permitted under the general provisions applicable to all
zones as specified in this section.
(b) Open wire fences not exceeding eight feet in height may be
erected in the rear or side yard areas and at the building
setback line.
A. Types of pools.
(1) Permanent underground.
(2) Permanent aboveground. All pools other than permanent
underground pools are considered permanent above-ground pools.
Those above ground equipped with fences above the top level of the
pool need no additional fencing.
B. Lighting. All lighting for a private swimming pool shall be installed so as
to comply with all safety regulations and shall be shielded so as to
prevent any direct beam of light from shining on any adjoining property.
C. Electric lines. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any
swimming pool or wading area.
D. Noise. No activities shall be conducted at any private swimming pool
which shall cause undue noise or constitute a nuisance to any neighbor.
E. Construction permit. When an application is made for a permit to
construct and locate a swimming pool, the applicant shall show an
approval from the Health Officer of the Township of North Brunswick as
to suitability and adequacy of design, materials and construction or
construction specifications of said pool, including all necessary
equipment and appurtenances thereto. The application for a private
swimming pool construction permit shall identify the building lot, the
location of the residence, location of the swimming pool, all accessory
equipment and apparatus, type of pool, all basic dimensions, including
the outside dimensions, of the pool, locations of steps, diving stands,
boards and location and detail specifications of enclosure and gate on
§ 205-93 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-94
198:756
§ 205-95. Commercial and private club swimming pools.
The following regulations for commercial or private club swimming pools
are applicable to all districts, except the TMU PUD and PUD-II Districts:
the lot. Application for a construction permit to erect or locate a private
swimming pool shall be made only by the owner of the property.
F. Maintenance. The private swimming pool shall be maintained in good
working order and in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. The area
surrounding the pool and its enclosure shall be kept neat and in good
order and attractive so as to be in conformity with surrounding
properties. No rubbish, debris or litter of any kind shall be permitted at
any time.
G. Inspection. The private swimming pool, bathing area and enclosure
shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Zoning Officer. In
addition, such facility shall be subject to inspection any time by the
Health Officer and Police Department of North Brunswick Township.
H. Pool location. An outdoor swimming pool shall be located not less than
eight feet from the side or rear of the residence on a building lot, to the
rear of the building setback line, not less than 10 feet from any side
property line and not less than 10 feet from the rear property line.
I. Pump location. The pump of a filtration or pumping system of a private
swimming pool shall be located not less than 15 feet from any side or
property line.
J. Enclosure. All pools, except for those pools equipped with fences above
the top level of the pool, shall be surrounded entirely by a suitably tight
fence, with no opening greater than two inches square and capable of
holding a live load of 250 pounds between posts located not more than
eight feet apart. However, one side or sides of the residence may serve
as part of the enclosure. The fence shall be located not less than six feet
from the closest edge of the pool. Fences shall be from four feet to six
feet in height and, if made of wire, must be of the chain-link type. Solid
fences six feet in height shall be permitted, provided that the residence
serves as part of the enclosure in such a manner to avoid obstruction to
visibility. All supporting structures shall be on the inside of the fence,
and the top of such support shall be at least one inch lower than the top
of the fence.
K. Gate. An opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the pool
shall be equipped with a substantial gate similar to the fence, which
gate shall extend from not more than two inches above the ground to
the height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type, opening
outwardly only, shall be equipped with a lock and key or padlock and
chain and shall be kept locked except when the pool is in use.
A. Location of club- or bathhouse. The club- or bathhouse for an outdoor
commercial or private club swimming pool shall be set back not less
§ 205-94 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-95
198:757
than 150 feet from the front property line and not closer than 100 feet
to the side and rear property lines. However, no club- or bathhouse
shall be required for a hotel or motel.
B. Pool location. An outdoor commercial or private club swimming pool
shall be located not less than 35 feet from the side or rear of the
clubhouse, bathhouse, motel or hotel on the building lot and not less
than 200 feet from the front property line and not less than 100 feet
from the side or rear property line.
C. Off-street parking. Ample parking space shall be provided in an area or
areas located not less than 100 feet from the front property line and not
less than 60 feet from the side or rear property lines and providing a
total area equal to 350 square feet to each car space. For a private club
with a membership of up to 100 members, not less than 80 car spaces
shall be provided. For each additional 25 members or fraction thereof,
not less than 20 additional car spaces will be provided. For a
commercial pool with up to 100 lockers or clothes baskets, there shall
be provided not less than 40 car spaces, and for each additional 25
lockers or clothes baskets, not less than 10 additional car spaces, and,
in addition thereto, two car spaces for each three family lockers.
D. Size of pool. A swimming pool for a private club, limited to a maximum
of 100 members, shall have a minimum size of 1,800 square feet, and
for each additional 25 members or fraction thereof, the pool shall be
enlarged by 500 square feet.
E. Swimming section. The diving section shall be greater than 5 1/2 feet in
depth. The area reserved around each diving board or platform
provided for diving purposes shall be not less than 300 square feet.
F. Pump location. The pump of a filtration or pumping system of a
commercial swimming pool or private club pool shall be located not less
than 75 feet from any side or rear property line.
G. Lounging and spectator area. In addition to the decks or walks
surrounding the swimming pool, an area shall be provided for lounging
or spectator use.
H. Club- and bathhouse facilities. The club- or bathhouse shall be equipped
with separate facilities for men and women. These facilities shall
include adequate dressing rooms, lockers, showers and toilets.
I. Wading pool. A swimming pool for private club or commercial use shall
provide a separate wading pool.
J. Pool enclosure. To provide safety and a degree of privacy, an outdoor
swimming pool for private club or commercial use shall be surrounded
entirely by a suitably strong tight fence, capable of holding a live load of
250 pounds between posts, located not more than eight feet apart.
However, one side or sides of the club- or bathhouse may serve as part
of the enclosure. The fence shall be located not less than 15 feet from
§ 205-95 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-95
198:758
the closest edge of the pool. The fence shall be from eight feet to 10 feet
high, having no opening larger than a two-inch square. All supporting
structures shall be on the inside of the fence, and the top of such
support shall be at least one inch lower than the top of the fence.
K. Gate. Any opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the pool
shall be equipped with a substantial gate similar to the fence, which
gate shall extend from not more than two inches above the ground to
the height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type, opening
outwardly only, and be equipped with a lock and key or chain and
padlock and shall be kept locked except when the pool is in use.
L. Lighting. A complete system of artificial lighting shall be provided for a
swimming pool, including lounging and parking areas, which is
operated by a private club or for commercial use. Arrangement and
design of lights shall be clearly visible to attendants. All lighting
fixtures shall be shielded so as to prevent any direct beam from falling
upon any adjoining property. Overhead wires shall not be carried across
the swimming pool and wading pool proper, decks and lounging areas.
Underwater lighting shall be designed, installed and grounded so as not
to create a hazard to bathers.
M. Noise. No sound-amplifying system shall be operated or other activities
permitted at any swimming pool for commercial or private club use,
which shall cause undue noise or constitute a nuisance to the
surrounding neighbors. Closing time shall be 10:30 p.m.
N. Maintenance. Swimming pools for commercial or private club use shall
be maintained in good working order and in a safe and sanitary
condition at all times as specified by the Swimming Pool Code of the
Township's Board of Health.133 The area surrounding the pools, its
enclosures, parking area and lounging areas shall be kept neat, in good
order and attractive so as to be in conformity with the surrounding
properties. No rubbish, debris or litter of any kind shall be permitted at
any time.
O. Inspection. Any swimming and wading pool for commercial or private
club use, including bath- or clubhouse, bathing, wading, lounging and
parking areas and all enclosures, shall be subject to inspection at any
time by the Health Officer and Police Department of the Township of
North Brunswick.
P. License to operate. An annual license to permit or operate a swimming
and wading pool for commercial or private club use shall be required on
or before the first day of May each year and shall be obtained from the
Clerk of North Brunswick Township upon payment of a fee of $50,
provided that no complaint of improper maintenance of the club or
bathhouse, swimming and wading pools, lounging and parking areas or
its enclosures has been filed by the Health Officer or Police Department
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 427, Swimming Pools.
§ 205-95 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-95
198:759
of the Township of North Brunswick. [Amended 3-2-2004 by Ord. No.
04-6]
§ 205-95 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-95
198:760
ARTICLE XXIV
Off-Street Parking and Loading
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-96. All districts.
A. Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in this
chapter and shall be furnished with necessary passageways and
driveways. All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the
lot on which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon or reduced
in any manner. All parking areas, passageways and driveways (except
when provided in connection with one-family and two-family
residences) shall be surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather
pavement, clearly marked for car spaces and shall be adequately
drained, subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Landscaping
consisting of attractive trees, shrubs, plants and grass lawns shall be
required and planted in accordance with the site plans. Special buffer
planting shall be provided along the side and rear property lines so as
to provide protection to adjacent properties when such lot lines abut
residential zones or uses. The buffer area shall adhere to the provisions
of Article XXVI.
B. None of the off-street parking facilities that are required in this chapter
shall be required for any existing building or use, unless said building
or use shall be enlarged, in which case the provisions of this chapter
shall apply only to the enlarged portions of the building or use. If the
use is to be changed, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
new use.
C. The collective use of an off-street parking area by two or more buildings
or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided that the total of
such facilities shall not be less than the sum required of the various
buildings or uses computed separately, and further provided that the
land upon which the collective facilities are located is owned or leased
by one or more or the collective users. The exception to this provision is
the TMU Zone where such parking is specifically permitted. [Amended
2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
D. No display vehicles or trailer devices for commercial purposes shall
remain in any district for longer than a twenty-four-hour period.
E. Parking areas may be located in any rear or side yard, but may not be
located in any required front yard area except where specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
F. Parking spaces, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked and
delineated. For safety and fire-fighting purposes, free access between
adjacent parking areas shall be provided.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain all
off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, aisles and
§ 205-96 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-96
198:761
§ 205-97. C-1, C-2, G-O, O-R, I-1 and I-2 Districts.
The following general provisions are applicable only to C-1, C-2, G-O, O-R,
I-1 and I-2 Districts:
accessways in good condition, free of sagging conditions, potholes,
cracked pavement, etc. All lighting, bumpers, markings, signs, drainage
and landscaping shall be similarly kept in workable, safe and good
condition. If the owner fails to undertake repairs, after proper
notification by the Building Inspector, the Mayor and Council may
authorize repairs to be made at the owner's expense if, in the Mayor
and Council's opinion, conditions constitute a hazard to the safety
and welfare of the Township residents and visitors or may revoke the
owner's certificate of occupancy and require property to be vacated.
A. All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways shall be
illuminated adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise
when the use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided to
protect adjacent residential zones from the glare of such illumination
and from that of automobile headlights.
B. Not more than two driveways used as a means of ingress or egress for
off-street parking areas shall be permitted for each 300 feet of frontage
on a public street, nor shall any driveway be located closer than 100
feet to the intersection of two public streets.
C. All parking areas for 20 or more vehicles shall be landscaped with
hedging and/or shade trees of a type and quantity approved by the
Planning Board.
D. All parking areas for 10 or more vehicles shall have artificial lighting
that will provide an adequate lighting level throughout the parking
area. Freestanding light poles shall be no higher than the height of the
highest principal building served by the parking area plus five feet.
E. Required parking area shall be provided within 150 feet of all uses. It
shall be measured from the nearest point of public entrance to the
building that such facility is required to serve. All parking spaces
located at the rear of any commercial use shall have public access to
rear entrances and exits.
F. Traffic patterns shall be reviewed with regard to ingress and egress, as
well as the internal system of vehicular and pedestrian movement, so as
to avoid congestion, provide adequate space for maneuvering into
parking spaces, provide for the safety of pedestrians going to and from
buildings and parking areas and the separation of truck traffic serving
the uses from pedestrian traffic.
G. Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient
amount to permit the transfer of goods and products on other than a
public street or public parking area.
§ 205-96 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-97
198:762
§ 205-98. Design standards.
H. For every building, structure or part thereof having over 5,000 square
feet of gross building area erected and occupied for commerce,
hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, places of public and quasi-public
assembly, industry and other similar uses involved in the receipt and
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be
provided and permanently maintained adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets or alleys. Every building, structure or
addition thereto having a use which complies with the above definitions
shall be provided with at least one truck standing, loading and
unloading space on the premises, not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet
in length and 14 feet in height. Such buildings that contain in excess of
25,000 square feet of gross building area will be required to provide
additional off-street loading spaces as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review.
I. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will
not interfere with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe
movement of truck vehicles.
J. Loading spaces as required under this section shall be provided in
addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
K. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located next
to a residential zone, said loading and unloading area shall be suitably
screened and buffered subject to approval by the Planning Board and in
accordance with the requirements of Article XXVI.
L. No off-street loading and unloading area shall be permitted in any
required front yard area.
A. Parking space size. Each off-street parking space shall measure not less
than nine feet wide and not less than 18 feet deep, exclusive of access
drives and aisles, except that parallel curb parking spaces shall be nine
feet wide and 23 feet deep. Except in the case of one-family dwellings,
no parking areas provided hereunder shall be established for less than
four spaces.
B. Access aisles and driveways.
(1) No access drive, driveway, pathway or any other means of egress or
ingress shall be located in any residential zone to provide access to
uses other than those permitted in any such residential zone.
(2) All driveways shall cross sidewalk areas at grade.
(3) No driveway to or from a parking area shall be located closer than
100 feet to the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
§ 205-97 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-98
198:763
§ 205-99. Off-street parking for residential districts. [Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-15]
The following off-street parking spaces and restrictions are required for R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, R-M and R-T Districts:
However, any major use, such as a shopping center or industrial
use, which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, will generate
large traffic volumes shall not be located closer than 200 feet to the
nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
(4) Driveways shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way
traffic and 25 feet for two-way traffic for all other uses.
(5) Aisles from which cars directly enter or leave parking spaces shall
not be less than:
(a) Twenty-five feet wide for perpendicular parking.
(b) Twenty-two feet wide for sixty-five-degree angle parking.
(c) Twenty feet wide for thirty-degree and forty-five-degree angle
parking.
(d) Twenty-five feet for all aisles following two-way traffic.
C. Sidewalks and curbing.
(1) Sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet shall be provided in all
parking areas for five or more vehicles, between parking areas and
principal structures, along aisles and driveways and wherever
pedestrian traffic shall occur.
(2) Sidewalks shall be raised six inches above the parking area, except
where crossing streets or driveways, and curbed as a protection to
pedestrians using the walks.
(3) Sidewalks and parking areas must be arranged to prevent cars
from extending over sidewalk areas.
A. One-family, two-family, duplex, mobile home and townhouse dwellings:
two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. The required parking
spaces may be within an enclosed garage, or vehicles may be parked on
an improved surface maintained in a weed-free condition. Off-street
parking is not permitted on grass surfaces in any front, side or rear
yards.
B. The following types of vehicles are prohibited from being parked on any
lot zoned for residential purposes, as well as on both sides of the street
in front of any residential use or directly across the street from any
residential use, except when engaged in providing emergency repair
services or actively engaged in moving the residents of the premises:
§ 205-98 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-99
198:764
§ 205-100. Off-street parking for nonresidential uses. [Amended
4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10; 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
The following off-street parking spaces are required for nonresidential uses:
(1) Trucks commonly identified as box, walk-in, rack or stake body
trucks of any gross vehicle weight, as shown and consistent with
nonpermitted commercial vehicles of a similar type displayed in
Exhibit A on file with the Department of Community Development;
and
(2) Tractors and tractor-trailers.
A. Industrial manufacturing, research plants and warehouses.
(1) Storage, warehousing, distribution and shipping activities: at least
one space for each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
(2) Manufacturing or fabrication activities: at least one space for each
500 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) 134Visitor parking: at least one parking space for each five executive
office workers.
(4) Research and development facilities: one parking space for each
500 square feet of gross floor area, excluding basements and
penthouse structures.
B. Commercial, retail, general office and other nonresidential uses.
(1) Beauty and barber shops: one parking space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area.
(2) Supermarkets and self-service food stores: one parking space for
each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Medical and dental offices: one parking space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area.
(4) Banks, financial and business offices and professional offices: one
parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) Furniture, appliance and hardware stores: one parking space for
each 400 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) All other retail and service stores: one parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area.
(7) Restaurants, taverns, cafeterias and diners: one parking space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
134. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), which pertained to administrative and executive
office activities, was repealed 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04. This ordinance also
redesignated former Subsection A(4) and (5) as Subsection A(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 205-99 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-100
198:765
(8) Drive-in restaurants: one parking area for each 20 square feet of
gross floor area.
(9) Laundromats: one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
(10) Bowling alleys: six parking spaces for each bowling lane.
(11)New car sales and service: one parking space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area, not including spaces used for storage of
new or used vehicles being offered for sale or being serviced, plus
one parking space for each employee during the largest shift.
(12) Motor vehicle service stations: one parking space for each service
bay, plus one parking space for each employee, with a minimum of
two parking spaces for employees.
(13) Auditoriums, churches, exhibition halls, assembly halls, union
halls, community centers and similar places of public and quasipublic
assembly not having fixed seating facilities: one parking
space for every four persons who may legally be admitted therein
at one time under the state fire prevention laws.
(14) Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly having fixed
seating facilities: one parking space for every four seats.
(15) Theaters: one parking space for every three theater seats, plus one
parking space for each projected employee at maximum shift.
(16) Hospitals and similar institutional uses for care of the ill or aged:
one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(17) Mortuaries and funeral homes: one parking space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area.
(18) Transportation and terminal facilities: one parking space for every
50 square feet of gross floor area.
(19) Parks and other outdoor recreation sites: five parking spaces for
each gross acre of land up to 50 acres, and one parking space per
gross acre of land above 50 acres.
§ 205-100 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-100
198:766
ARTICLE XXV
Signs and Outdoor Advertising
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-101. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply to all signs and outdoor advertising
and shall be in addition to other regulations for specific uses elsewhere in
this chapter.
§ 205-102. General regulations.
The following general provisions are applicable to all zones:
A. Unless otherwise provided for, all signs shall relate to the premises on
which they are erected.
B. Any signs not specifically permitted are hereby prohibited.
C. No sign shall be located closer than 20 feet to any lot line, except traffic
signs and other signs installed by governmental agencies.
D. No sign shall exceed 20 feet in height above ground level, except signs
erected against the side of a building, which signs shall not extend
above the height of the vertical wall or cornice to which they are
attached. The exception to this provision is the TMU Zone, where signs
may extend above the wall or cornice. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-2]
E. Signs may be double-faced, in which case the maximum sign area will
apply to only one side.
F. The area of a sign shall include every part of the sign, including
moldings, frames, posts, pylons or other supporting members.
G. Where the face of a sign has openings or is of an irregular shape, the
area of the sign, exclusive of supporting members, shall be considered
as the total area of the smallest rectangle that can enclose the sign.
H. Freestanding signs shall be supported by posts or pylons of durable
materials, which may include concrete, steel, treated wood or other
suitable material, and shall be set securely in the ground or concrete so
that the sign will be capable of withstanding high winds. No other
bracing or guy wire shall be permitted.
I. Any sign attached flat against the surface of a building shall be
constructed of durable material and attached securely to the building
with nonrusting hardware. The use of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited.
J. Advertising or identification of an establishment painted on the surface
of a building shall be considered part of the total allowable sign area
and shall be subject to the regulation of this Article.
§ 205-101 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-102
198:767
K. Signs attached to the side of the building shall not exceed more than 12
inches from the face of the building.
L. A permit shall be secured from the Construction Official after review
and approval of the Zoning Officer for the erection, alteration or
reconstruction of any signs, other than nameplate, identification,
temporary, sales or rental signs which are less than two square feet in
area.
M. Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety
of the building or the public, the Zoning Officer shall order such sign to
be made safe or removed. Such order shall be complied with within 10
days of the receipt thereof by the person, firm or corporation owning or
using the sign or the owner of the building or premises on which such
unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
N. Signs shall not be painted on or affixed to water towers, storage tanks,
smokestacks or similar structures.
O. The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat, clean and
landscaped. The owner of the property upon which the sign is located
shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the area.
P. Facade signs and freestanding signs for office, commercial and
industrial uses, permitted in § 205-105 of this Article, may be internally
illuminated.
Q. Temporary signs advertising public functions, fund-raising events other
than a building fund for charitable, nonprofit or religious organizations,
or political signs as permitted by §§ 205-104 and 205-105 shall be
subject to the following conditions: [Added 9-2-2003 by Ord. No.
3-29]
(1) A temporary sign may be placed not more than 40 days prior to the
function, event, or election to which it applies; and
(2) A temporary sign must be removed not more than seven days after
the function, event, or election to which it applies; and
(3) The owner of the property on which the temporary sign is placed
shall be responsible for its removal; and
(4) The temporary sign must comply with all other regulations related
to signs; and
(5) The temporary sign advertising a building fund for a charitable
nonprofit or religious extension organization may be placed for not
more than 10 days from its erection.
R. No signs in excess of three feet above curb level are permitted in the
site triangle pursuant to § 205-22. [Added 9-2-2003 by Ord. No.
3-29]
§ 205-102 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-102
198:768
§ 205-103. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
§ 205-104. Permitted signs in residential districts.
The following signs are permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, R-7,
R-M and R-T-D Districts:
S. No person shall erect a sign on or over any public property or public
right-of-way other than traffic directional signs or signs erected by a
governmental entity. [Added 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
A. Moving or revolving signs and signs using waving, blinking, flashing,
vibrating, flickering, tracer or sequential lighting, except in the TMU
Zone where such signs are permitted only to advertise a movie theater.
[Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
B. Signs using words such as "stop," "look" or "danger" or any other sign
which in the judgment of the Police Chief of the Township constitutes a
traffic hazard or otherwise interferes with the free flow of traffic.
C. Roof signs.
D. Signs advertising a product or service not sold on the premises, signs
advertising or directing attention to another premises and any other
sign not related to the premises on which the sign is erected.
E. Signs causing interference with radio or television reception.
F. Signs obstructing doors, fire escapes or stairways or keeping light or
air from windows used for living quarters.
G. Signs placed in awnings, trees, fences, utility poles or signs attached to
other signs.
H. Temporary mobile message signs.135
A. Nonilluminated directional signs identifying parking areas, entrances,
loading zones, exits and similar locations and not exceeding three
square feet in area.
B. Name and number plates identifying residences and affixed to a house,
apartment or mailbox and not exceeding 50 square inches in area.
C. Lawn signs identifying residents and not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in
area.
135. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, which prohibited the use of flags, banners and
pennants, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-20-2020 by
Ord. No. 19-11.
§ 205-102 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-104
198:769
§ 205-105. Permitted signs in nonresidential districts.
The following are permitted signs in C-1, C-2, G-O, ERR, O-R, I-1 and I-2
Districts:
D. Nonilluminated real estate signs announcing the sale, lease or rental of
the premises on which the sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed
three square feet in area in a residential zone.
E. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals or other signs
installed by a government agency.
F. Temporary signs advertising public functions or fund raising events for
charitable, nonprofit or religious organizations, the combined total area
of all such signs not exceeding an area of 32 square feet in total on one
premises. [Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
G. Religious institutions, hospitals, nursing homes, private schools and
service organizations may have one freestanding wall not exceeding 20
square feet in area.
H. Housing developments or garden apartment developments may place
one temporary sign at each entrance to the project and at the rental or
sales office during the course of the development. One sign shall not
exceed 20 square feet in area or six feet in height. Other signs shall not
exceed 15 square feet in area or five feet in height.
I. One nonflashing sign identifying farms, public and private parks and
recreation areas, and not exceeding 30 square feet in area on any one
side, and further provided that such sign shall not be closer than 35 feet
to any street or property line.
J. Temporary political signs, the combined total area of all such signs not
exceeding an area of 32 square feet in total on one premises.
[Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
A. Nonilluminated directional signs identifying parking areas, entrances,
loading zones, exits and similar locations and not exceeding three
square feet in area.
B. Nonilluminated real estate signs announcing the sale, lease or rental of
the premises on which the sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed
20 square feet in area for commercial and office uses and 50 square feet
in area for industrial properties.
C. Temporary signs advertising public functions or fund-raising events for
charitable, nonprofit or religious organizations or political signs and not
exceeding a combined total area of all such signs of 32 square feet in
total on one premises. [Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
D. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals or other signs
installed by a government agency.
§ 205-104 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-105
198:770
E. No person shall erect a sign on or over any public property or public
right-of-way other than traffic directional signs or signs erected by a
governmental entity. [Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29]
F. Religious institutions, hospitals, nursing homes, private schools and
service organizations may have one freestanding or wall sign not
exceeding 20 square feet in area.
G. Each office, commercial use or industry not exceeding two stories in
height may have one or more exterior signs identifying or advertising
the names of tenants or uses occupying the premises, provided that
such signs(s) shall not exceed 10% of the front facade area of the
building.
H. Freestanding signs.
(1) Any office, commercial or industrial building over two stories in
height having a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet
shall be permitted one freestanding sign, provided that the area of
such sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. Any office, commercial or
industrial building having a gross floor area of at least 10,000
square feet shall be permitted one freestanding sign, provided that
the area of such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. Where more
than one use is conducted in a building or attached buildings on the
same lot, only one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
(2) Freestanding signs for office, commercial and industrial buildings
in excess of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Maximum Size of Sign Face
(square feet)
10,000 to 15,000 50
15,000 to 30,000 75
30,000 to 50,000 100
Over 50,000 150
(3) Any office, commercial or industrial building having over 100,000
square feet of gross floor area may have two freestanding signs.
The total area of both signs shall not exceed the maximum size sign
face of 150 square feet.
(4) One nonflashing sign identifying farms, public and private parks
and recreation areas and not exceeding 30 square feet in area on
any one side, and further provided that such sign shall not be closer
than 35 feet to any street or property line.
I. Billboards. [Added 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 205-105 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-105
198:771
(1) Billboards are a permitted use only in the I-1 Zoning District.
[Added 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12136]
(2) No part of an advertising structure (billboard) shall be less than 20
feet nor more than 100 feet from the right-of-way line.
(3) Maximum billboard height shall be 40 feet as measured from an
elevation of the finished grade at the base of the structure to the
top of the billboard.
(4) The maximum permitted advertising area showing in one direction
shall not exceed 672 square feet. All dimensions include border,
trim, cutouts, and extensions but exclude decorative bases and
supports.
(5) The billboard support shall not be located closer than 15 feet from
a parking lot, driveway, sidewalk, patio, pedestrian plaza,
pedestrian-way, bikeway and the like.
(6) Billboards shall not interfere with or obscure driver sight distances.
(7) The location and design of an advertising structure shall comply
with N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq. (P.L. 1991, c. 413), entitled "Roadside
Sign Control and Outdoor Advertising Act," and N.J.A.C. 16:41C-1.1
et seq., entitled "Chapter 41C, Roadside Sign Control and Outdoor
Advertising Act," and any other regulations adopted thereunder.
(8) Billboards shall not be closer than 500 feet from a residential zone
line.
(9) Any billboard greater than 30 feet from the edge of the main travel
way of the highway shall be angled toward the driver's view.
(10) Billboards shall not be closer than 1,500 feet to another billboard
to minimize highway sign clutter and allow time for driver
recognition with minimum distraction.
(11)No part of an advertising structure shall be located closer than 25
feet to any building. Billboards shall not be attached to, wrapped
around, painted or projected on any building face or roof.
Billboards shall be located so as not to obscure existing signs or
building facades.
(12)Words used in the sign's message shall be of such size and brevity
as to be readable to the average driver at a minimum distance of
550 feet so its message can be read safely at highway speeds.
(13) Billboards which flash, blink, move, simulate or create the illusion
of motion, or contain an animated display or full motion video shall
be prohibited.
136. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection I(1) through (14) as
Subsection I(2) through (15), respectively.
§ 205-105 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-105
198:772
(14) Billboards with digital, electronic, LED, or changeable copy, and
multiple message signs, shall be permitted provided that the dwell
time for each message or message board is not less than eight
seconds. A message change shall be accomplished completely
within two seconds.
(15) The billboard advertising surface may be internally or externally
lighted from dusk until 11:00 p.m. Lighting fixtures shall be
directed so as not to cause glare on any street or building.
§ 205-105 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-105
198:773

ARTICLE XXVI
Landscaping and Buffer Areas
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-106. General regulations.
A. Within a buffer area, a solid and continuous landscape screen shall be
planted and maintained. Said landscaping shall consist of lawn, massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and density
as will provide, within two growing seasons, a solid and continuous
screen throughout the full course of the year. The intense density of the
buffer screen may be reduced by the Planning Board if it is found that
the proposed use is visually attractive and not detrimental to the
appearance of the neighboring uses.
B. The entire buffer area and all required yard areas not occupied by
parking areas shall be graded and planted with grass seed or sod and
such shrubbery or trees as may be desired by the Planning Board. The
entire area shall be attractively maintained and kept free of all debris
and rubbish. In the event that any of the plantings in accordance with
this section do not live within the first year, they shall be immediately
replaced.
C. The required height for a landscape screen shall be measured in
relationship to the elevation of the land at the edge of the adjacent area
or structure to be buffered. In such cases as when the ground elevation
of the location at which the screen is to be planted is less than the
elevation of the edge of adjacent area to be buffered, the required
height of the screen shall be increased in an amount equal to the
difference in elevation. In the event that the ground elevation of the
location at which the screen is to be planted is greater than that at the
edge of the adjacent area to be buffered, the required height may be
reduced in an amount equal to said difference in elevation, provided
that in no case shall the required height be reduced to less than three
feet.
D. All nonpaved areas in commercial, industrial, public and semi-public
buildings and use areas shall be suitably landscaped with grass, trees,
shrubs and other landscaped materials.
E. When a parking area of four or more vehicles or a loading and
unloading area adjoins an adjacent residential property area, a
landscaped buffer screen shall be provided between the parking area
and the adjoining property. The buffer screen shall be no less than six
feet in height.
F. The buffer screen around parking lots and loading and unloading areas
may be constructed of wood or other fence material, provided that not
more than 25% of the fence is open on its vertical surface. In such
cases, evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs shall be planted along
the fence to break up the monotony of the fence. Such landscaping may
§ 205-106 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-106
198:775
be omitted if it is the finding of the Planning Board that the type of
fence to be erected is visually attractive and not detrimental to the
appearance of surrounding areas.
G. If the Construction Official or Zoning Officer, upon inspection,
determines that the landscape materials, buffer areas and screens are
not being maintained in good condition, he shall notify the owner, in
writing, of his findings and order that any negligent maintenance on the
part of the owner be corrected within 30 days of the notice. In the event
that any planting required by this chapter fails to live, it shall be
replaced. If the owner fails to correct these conditions, after proper
notification by the Construction Official or the Zoning Officer, the
Mayor and Council may authorize correction of the condition by
authorizing the appropriate legal action.
H. The certificate of occupancy for the use on the premises shall not be
issued until such time as the landscaping requirements set forth in this
section are installed in accordance with the plan approved by the
Planning Board or until a performance bond is posted with the
Township in an amount equal to the estimated cost of said landscaping
installation. In any event, a performance bond shall be posted with the
Township in an amount equal to 50% of the total estimated cost to
ensure that the installed landscaping complies with the requirements
set forth at the completion of the second growing season.
I. Prior to commencing construction of any buildings, structures, railroad
tracks, driveways or parking areas, a permanent fence shall be
constructed along the entire length of any side or rear lot line that
abuts a residential zone or lot utilized for residential purposes in a
commercial or industrial zone. Such fence shall be a solid fence six feet
in height or an open fence eight feet in height and shall be of a type and
material approved by the Planning Board.
J. Unless the delineated buffer area shall contain such existing trees
either maintained at present grade or suitably welled so as to qualify to
meet the standards above, such buffer area shall be landscaped with
two rows of spruce trees or approved equal, with 10 feet between each
row. The trees in each row shall be 20 feet on centers. Each tree in one
row shall be 14 feet from any other tree in the other row so as to be
staggered in appearance. Each tree shall be a minimum of five feet in
height.
§ 205-106 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-106
198:776
ARTICLE XXVII
Performance Standards
[Amended 5-17-1982; 2-4-1985]
§ 205-107. General regulations.
§ 205-108. Specific standards.
A. As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of
any structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant
shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board or its
designated representative, that the proposed use, structure, process or
equipment will conform fully with all of the applicable performance
standards. As evidence of compliance, the Planning Board may require
certification of tests by appropriate government agencies or by
recognized testing laboratories, any costs thereof to be borne by the
applicant. The Planning Board may require that specific operation
procedures or methods be followed if the government agencies or
testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall determine
that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment, devices,
procedures or methods are required in order to assure compliance with
the applicable performance standards. Permits and certificates
required by other government agencies shall be submitted to the
Planning Board as proof of compliance with applicable codes.
B. The Planning Board may require that instruments and/or other devices
be used to determine compliance with all applicable performance
standards of an existing use, and the cost shall be incurred by the
specific use in question.
C. All applications for conditional uses and use variances which must meet
the performance standards of this Article shall include necessary
documentation indicating compliance with the performance standards
established herein.
D. In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of
application that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will
meet the standards established herein after completion or installation
and operation. Within 30 days after a conditional permit is granted, a
certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and satisfactory evidence
submitted that all standards established by this Article have been met.
A. Noise.
(1) Any noise produced on the premises shall not be in excess of
standards listed below when measured at any property line of the
lot on which the use is located:
§ 205-107 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-108
198:777
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibels re 0.002 dyne/cm)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
4,800 to 10,000 28
(2) If the noise is not smooth and continuous but is of an impulsive or
periodic character, the decibel levels indicated above shall be
reduced by 15%.
B. Air pollution. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property, or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Code, as amended and as augmented by
regulations hereinafter designated as the "code," and all the following
provisions stated, whichever shall be the more stringent, shall be
complied with:
(1) Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into the open air from any fuelburning
equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted during
the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or periods aggregating
no more than three minutes in any 30 consecutive minutes.
(2) Solid particles.
(a) In any residential zone, no discharge of solid particles through
a stack, duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than
50% of the allowable emission in pounds per hour established
by Chapters 7 and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Code.
(b) In any remaining zone, the allowable discharge shall be 75% of
the allowable emission permitted by the code.
(c) No open burning shall be permitted in any zone.
(d) All incinerators shall be approved by the State Department of
Health.
§ 205-108 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-108
198:778
(e) No solid fuel shall be used to heat or cool any building or used
in any process.
(f) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial
movement of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or
otherwise stabilized during construction sufficient to prevent
the generation of dust from the movement of such vehicles or
equipment.
(3) Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without
instruments. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained. Table I (Odor Thresholds
in Air) in Part I (Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals) of
Research on Chemical Odors, copyrighted October 1968 by the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall
be used as a guide in determining quantities of offensive odors.
C. Liquid waste. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse
in the Township except as herein provided. If the applicant proposes to
construct facilities for the treatment of waste, he shall supply:
(1) A statement by the New Jersey Department of Health that such
proposed facilities are in compliance with applicable state laws and
regulations.
(2) Approval of the installation of such facilities by the appropriate
officials. No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public sewage
collection and disposal system unless the appropriate municipal or
authority officials shall have first investigated the character and
volume of such waste and shall have certified that the system is
adequate to receive the liquid waste. The applicant shall comply
with any requirements of said officials, including the pretreating of
such wastes, the installation of processing methods, separation or
screening of wastes, control of pH and other methods of improving
such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of approval of such
facilities.
D. Solid waste. All uses in the Township shall:
(1) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse except if the Township assumes the
responsibility.
(2) Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Control
Code.
(3) Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Health.
§ 205-108 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-108
198:779
(4) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or
other objectionable materials.
(5) Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property
except as may be permitted by other Township codes and
ordinances.
E. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may
be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and
requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and any
codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such Act as well as the
Radiation Protection Act, P.L. 1958, c. 116, as amended,137 whichever
shall be more stringent.
F. Fire and explosion hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a fire
or explosion hazard, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
supply proof of:
(1) Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or
material from the State Department of Labor and Industry
indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have
been taken or installed.
(2) Approval from the appropriate Township fire prevention officer that
the applicant has complied with all applicable Township fire
prevention regulations.
G. No activity shall be maintained on the premises which will produce heat
or glare beyond any property line.
H. No machinery or operation shall be permitted which shall cause
perceptible earthshaking vibration beyond the property lines of the lot
on which the use is located.
I. Storage of flammable material. The storage of all flammable and
combustible liquids and gases shall be subject to approval by the North
Brunswick Fire Prevention Bureau.
J. Fireproof construction. All new construction and additions except oneand
two-family dwellings shall be of fireproof construction as defined in
the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code.138
K. Lighting and illumination. Artificial lighting or illumination provided on
any property or by any use shall adhere to the following standards:
(1) The illumination provided by artificial lighting shall not exceed 0.5
footcandle beyond any property line.
137. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 205-108 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-108
198:780
(2) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting that provide a
concentrated beam of light shall be so directed that the beam of
light does not extend beyond any property line.
(3) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting used to illuminate
signs or building faces shall be located above the areas they
illuminate and shall not emit beams of light that are directed above
the horizontal plane of light of the light source.
§ 205-108 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-108
198:781

ARTICLE XXVIII
Site Plan Review
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-109. Approval required; exceptions.
Before any permit is issued for a building or an addition, loading or
unloading facilities, railroad tracks, site development wherein a substantial
change of grade is made or a quantity of earth is moved or the construction
of a new off-street parking lot, a detailed site plan and other required
data shall be submitted for approval of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, except that the following shall be excluded from such
requirements: single- and two-family houses and industrial expansion in
the I-1 and I-2 Districts where the total floor or parking area addition
to an existing building or to an existing lot shall not be more than 20%
of the existing area and shall not reduce the existing distance between
any building or lot and an abutting residential district. Also excluded are
existing developed properties where there is a change from one permitted
use to another permitted use.
§ 205-109.1. Site plan approval checklist. [Added 12-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-23]
A site plan approval checklist designated as Appendix A shall be submitted
with a site plan application.139
§ 205-110. Applications.
Application for site plan review shall be made in 10 copies. The application
for site plan approval shall include the following:
A. Site plan. A site plan shall be professionally prepared, drawn at a scale
not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet and including the following for
the site and all areas within 100 feet of the site:
(1) The name and title of the person preparing the map.
(2) Dates, scale and North sign.
(3) The Tax Map block number and zone district in which the property
is located.
(4) The location of all existing watercourses, wooded areas,
easements, rights-of-way, streets, roads, highways, freeways,
railroads, canals, rivers, buildings, structures or any other feature
directly on the property or beyond the property if such feature has
an effect upon the use of said property.
(5) The location, use and ground area of such proposed building,
structure or any other land use, including all setback dimensions.
139. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-109 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-110
198:783
(6) The location and widths of proposed streets servicing the area.
(7) The capacity of proposed off-street parking areas and locations of
all off-street parking spaces.
(8) The location and size of proposed loading berths. The location and
treatment of proposed entrances and exits to public rights-of-way,
including the possible utilization of traffic signals, channelization,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width and any other
device necessary to traffic safety and/or convenience.
(9) The location of and identification of proposed open spaces, parks or
other recreation areas.
(10) The general location of landscaping and other forestry features.
(11) The location and design of buffer areas and screening devices to be
maintained.
(12) The location of sidewalks, walkways and all other areas proposed
to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(13) The general nature and location of public and private utilities,
including maintenance facilities.
(14) The specific location of signs.
(15) Interior traffic circulation.
(16) An exterior lighting plan showing the location, type, illumination
and direction of light for all proposed lighting fixtures.
(17) Topographical information, including the elevation of buildings,
contour lines at not less than two-foot intervals and grades of all
roads, driveways and sewers.
(18) All existing property lines and the name of the owner of each
property.
(19) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed buildings or
structures indicating typical floor plans, elevations, height and
general design or architectural styling.
(20) Any other information required by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment which is reasonably necessary to ascertain compliance
with the provisions of this chapter or other federal, state, county or
municipal laws, rules or regulations.
(21) For any area that will be developed in stages, a total development
plan must be submitted in accordance with this section.
(22) For multifamily residential developments, the applicant shall state
whether the dwelling units are going to be offered for sale, for rent
or for both sale and rent. [Added 11-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
§ 205-110 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-110
198:784
(23) Digital vector data of the proposed site plan shall be submitted in
New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System NAD83 in or compatible
with one of the following formats: AutoCAD drawing (DWG), ESRI
shapefile or Drawing Exchange (DXF) format. [Added 11-14-2005
by Ord. No. 05-34]
B. In reviewing the site plan, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
shall consider its conformity with the Master Plan and other codes and
ordinances of the Township. Traffic flow, circulation and parking shall
be reviewed to ensure the safety of the public and of the users of the
facility and to ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with
traffic on surrounding streets. The impact on drainage shall be
considered to ensure against flooding. Conservation features,
aesthetics, landscaping and impact on surrounding development, as
well as on the entire Township, shall be part of the review. In its review
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may request
recommendations for any local, county, state and/or federal agency
which may have an interest in the particular development for which site
plan approval is being sought.
C. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may require that public and
private improvements, landscaping and buffer area requirements be
secured by a performance guaranty in the same manner prescribed for
such improvements in the subdivision administration section of this
chapter.140
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Fees, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13. See now § 205-89, Fees and escrow deposits.
§ 205-110 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-110
198:785

ARTICLE XXIX
Conditional Uses
[Amended 11-17-1980; 5-17-1982; 6-21-1982; 10-18-1982;
2-4-1985]
§ 205-111. Guiding principles; site plan approval required.
§ 205-112. Private and parochial schools.
Private and parochial schools, excluding institutions of higher learning or
private trade or business schools, may be permitted as conditional uses in
certain zone districts as provided for in this chapter, provided that:
A. Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the Township of North Brunswick
and, at the same time, recognizing that such uses may be or may
become inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare if
located and operated without proper consideration being given to
existing conditions and character of the surrounding area, such uses
are hereby designated as conditional uses. In addition to other powers
conferred by this chapter and applicable statutes, the Planning Board
shall have jurisdiction and power to approve conditional uses, under the
terms and conditions established by this chapter under the following
stipulations and guiding principles:
(1) The use for which application is being made is specifically
authorized as a conditional use in the Article of this chapter for the
zoning district in which it is located.
(2) The design, arrangement and nature of the particular uses is such
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and
reasonable consideration afforded to the:
(a) Character of the neighborhood and zone.
(b) Conservation of property values.
(c) Health and safety of residents or worker on adjacent
properties and in the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) Potential congestion of vehicular traffic or creation of undue
hazard.
(e) Principles and objectives of this chapter and the Master Plan of
the Township of North Brunswick.
B. All applications for conditional uses shall require site plan approval.
A. The curriculum of the proposed school shall be approved by the New
Jersey Department of Education.
B. Lot area and coverage.
§ 205-111 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-112
198:787
(1) The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be 10 acres,
plus one additional acre for each 100 pupils.
(2) The minimum lot area for an intermediate school shall be 20 acres,
plus one additional acre for each 100 pupils.
(3) The minimum area for a high school shall be 30 acres, plus one
additional acre for each 100 pupils.
(4) No more than 10% of the site shall be covered by buildings.
C. The minimum street frontage for an elementary school shall be 500
feet. The minimum street frontage for all other schools shall be 700
feet.
D. A front and rear yard, each with a depth of not less than 100 feet, and
two side yards, each with a width of not less than 100 feet, shall be
provided. No parking or play area shall be allowed within 75 feet of any
street or property line, and no buildings shall be allowed within 125 feet
of any street or property line.
E. Off-street parking. Elementary schools shall provide one parking space
for each staff member or employee, plus one parking space for each 10
pupils, plus adequate space for buses and delivery vehicles. All other
schools shall provide one parking space for each staff member or
employee, plus one parking space for each five pupils, plus adequate
space for buses and delivery vehicles. These requirements may be
increased if, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such considerations
as the unavailability of the bus service, the distance from centers of
population or a relatively high percentage of pupils driving their own
cars make such increased requirements desirable.
F. No driveway shall open onto a public street within 150 feet of an
intersection of such street with another public street. In determining
the suitability of proposed or existing driveways upon the site, the
Planning Board shall consider such factors as grade and site clearance;
the number and pattern of driveways; the number, location and design
of ingress and egress points; the volume of traffic which may be
anticipated on the site and upon adjoining roads; and the condition and
width of pavement of adjoining roads.
G. Illumination of night athletic activities shall be shielded from view from
adjoining streets and residential areas.
H. The application shall include a complete set of architectural plans and
specifications and existing and proposed buildings and structures and a
statement setting forth in general terms the proposed courses of
instruction. This statement shall indicate the grade levels of the pupils
to be housed in the building or buildings, the planned pupil capacity of
such building or buildings and the contemplated eventual enrollment of
the school.
§ 205-112 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-113
198:788
§ 205-113. Churches and places of worship.
Churches and places of worship may be permitted as conditional uses in
certain zone districts as provided for in this chapter, provided that:
§ 205-114. Public utilities.
Public utility zones, which must be provided above ground, may be
permitted in any zone district, provided that:
A. The minimum lot area for public utility zones shall be 60,000 square feet; and the minimum
width shall be 300 feet.
B. All minimum requirements of lot depth, front, rear and side yard
setbacks and building height conform to those established in the same
zone.
C. Driveways must be at least 10 feet from any side lot lines and 100 feet
from the intersection of street lines. Not more than two driveways shall
be permitted for each 300 feet of street frontage.
D. Adequate buffer areas and planting and/or fencing shall be provided to
protect surrounding properties from the effect of light or noise
generated in connection with the use of the property in accordance with
Article XXVI.
A. The proposed installation must be provided above ground in a specific
location as is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the public
utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of service by
the utility to the neighborhood area in which the particular use is to be
located.
B. The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to
the general character of the area and will not adversely affect the safe
and comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is
located.
C. Adequate and attractive fences, buffer areas and other safety devices
will be provided in accordance with Article XXVI.
D. Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, is to be
provided and will be periodically maintained.
E. All of the area, yard and building coverage requirements of the
respective zone will be met.
F. A minimum of one off-street parking space for each employee during
the shift of largest employment shall be provided for those public utility
structures that require personnel to be on duty, either full- or part-time.
§ 205-113 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-115
198:789
§ 205-115. Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses.
Fraternal, social, civic, recreational, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses
may be permitted as a conditional use in certain zone districts as provided
for in this chapter, provided that:
§ 205-116. (Reserved)141
§ 205-117. (Reserved)142
§ 205-118. (Reserved)143
§ 205-119. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers, which may include all uses permitted in a C-2 General
Commercial District, may be permitted in certain industrial districts as
provided in this chapter, provided that:
A. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use is filed with the Planning Board by the applicant.
B. The Planning Board shall find that any parcel upon which such use is
proposed contains at least five acres of land; that no structure will be
erected nearer than 75 feet to any street line nor nearer than 30 feet to
any property line; that buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the
lot area; that all other requirements as set forth in this chapter for the
zone in which it is to be located are observed; that such use will in no
way be detrimental to the surrounding property values; and that the
structure or use proposed will serve a useful purpose to the general
welfare of the Township.
C. The front, rear and side yards shall be increased by one foot for each
foot by which such building exceeds the height limit herein established
for the zone in which it is located, but in no case shall any building
exceed a height of 50 feet.
D. The site plan provides adequate buffer areas, if needed, as well as an
attractive and functional landscaping scheme.
E. Signs may be illuminated but nonflashing and limited in area to not
more than 30 square feet on any one side. The number and location of
signs shall be determined by the Planning Board.
F. Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses shall provide off-street parking
spaces in a number and location as determined by the Planning Board
based upon the anticipated maximum occupancy of the building or use.
141. Editor's Note: Former § 205-116, Boardinghouses and rooming houses, was repealed
5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-13.
142. Editor’s Note: Former § 205-117, Motor vehicle service stations, was repealed 4-26-2018
by Ord. No. 18-06.
143. Editor's Note: Former § 205-118, Motels, was repealed 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 3-29.
§ 205-115 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-119
198:790
A. The site has a minimum of 700 feet of frontage and lot width on U.S.
Route 1 and U.S. Route 130.
B. The minimum lot area shall be 40 acres.
C. All uses shall conform to those established for the C-2 Zone.
D. All minimum requirements of front, side and rear yards and building
height shall conform to § 205-81.1A.
E. Not more than 20% of the land shall be covered by buildings.
F. There shall be a buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the property,
exclusive of the front yard, of at least 10 feet in width measured inward
from the property line and suitably landscaped with grass and/or
ground cover, shrubs and trees. The buffer strip shall adhere to the
standards set forth in Article XXVI.
G. Every building shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from all interior
development roads, driveways and parking areas.
H. The minimum open space shall be 20% of the lot area.
I. Topsoil shall be removed from the site during construction, but shall be
stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to view by occupants
and the public, and such areas shall be stabilized by seeding and
planting.
J. Interior development roads, parking areas, entranceways and
pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to
minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same
and shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid disturbing glares to
occupants or buildings. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining residential buildings.
K. Front yard areas may be utilized for parking, provided that no such
parking shall be within 200 feet of U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route 130, and
100 feet from all other streets.
L. The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and storm drains
and catch basins so located as to provide rapid runoff of stormwater,
under the normal range of water conditions, as may be required by the
Township Engineer and in accordance with § 205-31.
M. Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum of 7 1/2 spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, which includes allowance for
employee parking. "Gross leasable area" means the total floor area
designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and
measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall
faces.
§ 205-119 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-120
198:791
§ 205-120. County penal facilities.
County penal facilities may be permitted in the Education-Recreation-
Research District as a conditional use as provided for in this chapter,
provided that:
§ 205-121. Hospitals, nursing homes and sanatoriums.
Hospitals, nursing homes and sanatoriums may be permitted as conditional
uses in certain zone districts as provided in this chapter, provided that:
§ 205-122. Drive-in restaurants.
Drive-in restaurants may be permitted in certain zone districts as
conditional uses as provided in this chapter, provided that:
A. The site of a county penal facility shall contain a minimum of 100 acres.
B. Buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 500 feet from all
property lines.
C. No parking area or driveway shall be located within 200 feet of any side
or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone.
D. Where the side or rear lot line of a county penal facility abuts a
residential zone, a buffer strip shall be established in accordance with
Article XXVI.
E. The maximum building coverage shall be 10%.
F. Off-street parking areas shall provide a minimum of one parking space
for every five inmates plus one additional parking space for each
employee during the largest working shift.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
B. The minimum lot frontage shall be 500 feet.
C. The minimum lot depth shall be 400 feet.
D. All minimum requirements of front, rear and side yards, coverage, open
space, setbacks and building height shall conform to those established
in the same zone, except that greater requirements may be imposed by
the Planning Board.
A. The minimum lot area for drive-in restaurants shall be three acres.
B. The minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet.
C. The minimum lot depth shall be 300 feet.
D. The maximum lot coverage shall be 10%.
§ 205-120 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-122
198:792
§ 205-123. New car sales, services and showrooms.
New car sales, services and showrooms may be permitted in certain zone
districts as conditional uses as provided in Article XXIX of this chapter,
provided that:
E. All minimum requirements of front, rear and side yards, setbacks and
building height shall conform to those established for the zone, except
that greater requirements may be established by the Planning Board.
F. The applicant shall submit plans showing the placement, type, intensity
and direction of all lighting.
G. There shall be a buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the property,
exclusive of the front yard, of at least 10 feet in width measured inward
from the property line and suitably landscaped with grass and/or
ground cover, shrubs and trees. The buffer strip shall adhere to the
standards set forth in Article XXVI.
H. The minimum open space shall be 30% of the lot area.
I. Driveways shall be no more than 35 feet nor less than 25 feet wide at
any point. Driveways must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and
100 feet from the intersection of street lines. No more than one
driveway shall be permitted for each 150 feet of a street frontage.
J. The applicant shall demonstrate that trash will be adequately disposed
of.
K. The applicant shall demonstrate that the drive-in shall not become a
public nuisance.
L. All paved areas other than driveways shall be located no closer than 40
feet to the right-of-way.
A. The minimum lot area for planned office parks shall be five acres.
B. The minimum lot frontage shall be 400 feet.
C. The minimum lot depth shall be 400 feet.
D. All minimum requirements of front, rear and side yards, coverage
setbacks and building height shall conform to those established in the
zone.
E. Used cars shall not be sold except as an accessory use to a new car
dealer.
F. There shall be a building in conjunction with the use which shall contain
not less than 15,000 square feet of usable floor area.
G. The area devoted to outside display of new and used cars shall not
exceed 35% of the total lot area.
§ 205-122 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-123
198:793
§ 205-124. Commercial swimming pools and swimming clubs.
Commercial swimming pools and swimming clubs may be permitted as
conditional uses in certain zone districts as provided for in this chapter,
provided that:
§ 205-124.1. Truck sales, display, service and rental.
The sales, display, service and rental of trucks may be permitted in certain
zone districts as conditional uses as provided in Article XXIX of this chapter,
provided that:
H. The minimum open space shall be 25% of the lot area.
I. All outdoor display and service areas, including driveways and parking
facilities, shall be paved with a suitable asphalt or other similar
material commonly used in driveway construction.
J. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be located and maintained
as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the public using the
highway or to neighbors. In particular, so-called "string lights" shall not
be permitted.
K. Where the use is situated adjacent to residentially used property,
adequate screening shall be provided along the property line as
required by the Planning Board in individual cases and in accordance
with Article XXVI.
L. No cars shall be stored or displayed within the front yard area.
A. They shall adhere to the minimum standards specified in § 205-95 of
this chapter.
B. The standards for health and safety as specified in the Township
ordinance regulating swimming pools and swimming clubs shall be met.
C. Signs for swimming clubs shall be limited to one nonflashing sign
having an area not to exceed 30 square feet on any one side.
D. The minimum land area for swimming clubs shall be seven acres, with a
minimum frontage and depth of 400 feet.
A. The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. All minimum requirements of lot width and depth, front, rear and side
yards and building height shall conform to those established in the
zone.
C. The sale and rental of used trucks shall be an accessory use to a new
truck sales and service use.
D. There shall be a building in conjunction with the use which shall contain
not less than 15,000 square feet of usable floor area.
§ 205-123 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-124.1
198:794
§ 205-124.2. (Reserved)144
§ 205-124.3. Theaters. [Added 4-29-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A theater may be permitted as a conditional use in the C-2 Commercial
District as provided in Article XIV of this chapter, provided that:
E. The areas devoted to outside display of new and used trucks shall not
exceed 35% of the total lot area.
F. All outdoor display and service areas, including driveways and parking
facilities, shall be paved in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. All other areas not utilized for the above purposes may be
gravel.
G. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the public using
the highway or to adjoining property owners. In particular, so-called
"string lights" shall not be permitted.
H. No display or off-street parking shall be closer than 40 feet to the street
line, and all nonparking areas shall be landscaped.
I. Where the use is situated adjacent to residentially zoned or used
property, the following shall be required:
(1) A fifty-foot buffer, designed in accordance with the requirements of
Article XXVI of this chapter, shall be required along said residential
use.
(2) Overhead doors and windows shall not be permitted on the side of
any structure which faces a residentially zoned or developed
property if said structure will house service and maintenance
activities.
(3) Outside storage of parts, supplies and materials shall not be
permitted.
(4) No parking area or driveway shall be located within 60 feet of any
side or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone or use.
A. The maximum square footage of the building, specifically including all
those areas designated for auxiliary entertainment areas and eating
areas, does not exceed 50,000 square feet.
B. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of one space for
every three theater seats, plus one parking space for each projected
employee at maximum shift. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
144. Editor's Note: Former § 205-124.2, Community residence for developmentally disabled,
was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 205-124.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-124.3
198:795

ARTICLE XXX
Nonconforming Uses
[Amended 2-4-1985]
§ 205-125. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such use of buildings does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or
building is located; provided, however, that:
§ 205-126. Abandonment. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-27]
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when there occurs a
cessation of any use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the
part of the tenant or owners to reinstate such use within a period of one
year from the date of cessation or discontinuance.
§ 205-127. Restoration.
No building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 50%
of its assessed valuation shall be required or rebuilt except in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any wall, roof or floor
which has been declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
§ 205-128. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.
§ 205-129. Alterations.
A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered
during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50% of the assessed
value of the building unless said building is changed to a conforming use.
§ 205-130. Effect on prior approvals.
This chapter or any amendments thereto shall not affect any building so
as to cause a change of plans or construction or designated use purpose,
provided that any one of the following series of conditions and
circumstances has been satisfied, and provided that work has begun and all
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased
unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformity.
§ 205-125 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-130
198:797
foundations are in place up to the first-floor level within 18 months after the
effective date of this chapter:
§ 205-131. District boundary changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or
created thereby.
A. Application for a construction permit with a complete set of plans has
been made prior to the effective date of this chapter.
B. Either variance approval or site plan approval has been granted within
six months prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 205-130 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-131
198:798
ARTICLE XXXI
Land Subdivision Procedures
§ 205-132. Administration of approval provisions.
The approval provisions of this article shall be administered by the
Township of North Brunswick in accordance with the Municipal Land Use
Law.145
§ 205-132.1. Minimum requirements; exceptions; changes after
final approval; administration; checklists.
A. These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the Township of North Brunswick. The
Planning Board reserves the right to require more stringent standards
and procedures as may be deemed necessary and appropriate.
B. The approving authority, when acting upon applications for preliminary
or minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
of this article if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the
article is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
C. There shall be no change from final approval except if the applicant
affirmatively establishes that a deviation from the final plan is caused
by a change of conditions beyond the control of the developer, since the
date of final approval and the deviation would not substantially alter the
character of the development or substantially impair the intent and
purpose of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
D. The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment. In cases where the Board of Adjustment
has jurisdiction over subdivisions, action by the Board of Adjustment
will substitute for that of the Planning Board as required herein and in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.
E. Applications for the following types of subdivisions shall be companied
by the appropriate appendix146 as follows: [Added 12-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-23]
(1) Minor subdivision: Appendix B.
(2) Preliminary major: Appendix C.
(3) Final subdivision: Appendix D.
145. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Appendix C and Appendix D are included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 205-132 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.2
198:799
§ 205-132.2. Submission of application and sketch plat.
An application for the subdivision of land shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer in triplicate along with three copies of the sketch plat at least 20
days prior to a regular meeting of the approving authority. The Zoning
Officer shall determine if the application is complete and, if not, shall inform
the applicant of deficiencies. If complete, the Zoning Officer shall notify
the applicant of the procedure to be followed for action by the approving
authority.
§ 205-132.3. Submission of sketch plat and application for minor
subdivision; fee.
§ 205-132.4. Minor subdivision application requirements.
A. At least five copies of the sketch plat and three completed applications
shall be filed with the Secretary of the approving authority.
B. At the time of filing an application and plat classified as a minor
subdivision, the applicant shall pay to the Secretary of the approving
authority the fee specified for minor subdivisions in § 205-139 herein.
[Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
A. General requirements.
(1) The plat for minor subdivision shall be drawn at a scale of not less
than 100 feet to the inch and shall conform to the provisions of
Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960 of the State of New Jersey as
amended and supplemented147 and shall include or be accompanied
by the information specified below.
(2) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries
of the subdivision and all lots and all lands reserved or dedicated
for public use shall balance, and their descriptions shall close
within a limit of error of not more than one part in 10,000.
(3) The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the Planning Board finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of minor
subdivision in accordance with this chapter and the Municipal Land
Use Law. [Added 3-4-1985]
B. Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall include
the following:
(1) Title of plat.
(2) Name, if any.
(3) Tax Map sheet block and lot number(s) of the tract to be
subdivided, to the nearest tenth of an acre.
147. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 205-132.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.4
198:800
(4) Names and addresses of owner and subdivider so designated.
(5) Date (of original and all revisions).
(6) Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
engineer and/or of the land surveyor who prepared the map and
made the survey. The plat shall bear the embossed seal of said
engineer and/or land surveyor.
C. Detailed information:
(1) A key map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet
showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with reference to
surrounding areas existing which intersect or border the tract, the
names of all such streets and any Township boundary which is
within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(2) Names of all owners of parcels and property lines of parcels within
200 feet of the land to be subdivided, including properties across
the street, as shown by the most recent records of the municipality
of which the property is a part.
(3) All existing streets and watercourses within the proposed
subdivision and within 200 feet of the boundaries thereof, both the
width of the paving and the width of the right-of-way of each street,
existing easements and Township borders within 200 feet of the
subdivision.
(4) All existing structures and an indication of those which are to be
destroyed or removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions
of those to remain, referenced to proposed lot lines.
(5) All proposed public or private easements or rights-of-way, the
grantees thereof and the purposes thereof.
(6) The existing system of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger
tract of which it is a part, together with information on the
proposed method of disposal of surface drainage.
(7) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet. The
area and dimensions specified shall be shown to the nearest
hundredth square foot or hundredth linear foot.
(8) North arrow, with reference meridian.
(9) Written and graphic scales.
(10) A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided or certification that none
exists.
(11) Certification by the Township of North Brunswick Tax Collector
that all real estate taxes or assessments have been paid.
§ 205-132.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.4
198:801
§ 205-132.5. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision
for tentative approval.
§ 205-132.6. Information required prior to public hearing.
[Amended 4-4-1983]
Prior to placing any preliminary plat applications on the agenda for public
hearing, the following documents shall have been submitted in proper form:
(12) Such other information as the approving authority or Township
Engineer may require or request during the review of the
application for a minor subdivision.
A. At least 10 black and white prints of the preliminary plat, together with
three completed application forms for preliminary approval, shall be
submitted to the Secretary of the approving authority 20 days prior to
the meeting at which consideration and public hearing is desired.
B. At the time of filing an application and preliminary plan, the applicant
shall pay to the Secretary of the approving authority the fee specified
for preliminary major subdivisions in § 205-139 herein. [Amended
9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
C. In the event that a special meeting is scheduled to consider a
preliminary plat of a major subdivision by request of an applicant, the
applicant shall be required to deposit additional funds in sufficient
amount for professional services rendered by the Board Attorney,
planner, engineer, secretary and transcriber. Such funds shall be placed
in an escrow account by the Township Treasurer to be used as payment
to the Board staff. [Added 5-17-1982]
A. Certification by the Township of North Brunswick Tax Collector that all
real estate taxes and assessments have been paid.
B. Application fee as herein specified.
C. Preliminary plat meeting the requirements set forth below.
D. Such other submissions which may be required by state, county or
Township law or as may be requested by the approving authority, which
may include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Proof of application to Middlesex County Planning Board.
(2) Report of Township Planner and Engineer.
(3) Preliminary New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
floodplain delineation or Federal Insurance Administration flood
hazard building delineation, if available.
(4) Copy of application for soil erosion and sediment control permit.
(5) Copy of report of the Chief of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 205-132.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.6
198:802
§ 205-132.7. Preliminary plat requirements.
(6) Traffic Safety Officer's report, where required.
(7) Copy of application for sanitary sewer permit from New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(8) Copy of application for potable water distribution system extension
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(9) Copy of stream encroachment application.
(10) Copy of application for delineation of stream encroachment line if
required from New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
A. General requirements. No preliminary plat shall be accepted for
consideration or approval unless it fully conforms to the following
requirements of form, content and accompanying information. All plats
containing proposals or designs for drainage, streets and subdivision
layouts shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey and shall bear the address,
signature, embossed seal and license number of said professional
engineer. The preliminary plat shall be based on a land survey
conducted not more than five years prior to the date of application and
shall be drawn at a scale not less than 100 feet to the inch for
subdivisions up to 100 acres in size and not less than 200 feet to the
inch for subdivisions over 100 acres in size and shall show or be
accompanied by the information specified below.
B. Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include the
following:
(1) Title of tentative plan.
(2) Name, if any.
(3) Tax Map sheet block and lot number(s) of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall
also be shown.
(4) Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(5) Date (of original and all revisions).
(6) Names and addresses of owner and subdivider so designated.
(7) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the
tract, the number of lots, the zone, minimum required lot areas,
percent of lot coverage, setbacks, yards and dimensions and the
percentage of recreation acreage provided.
§ 205-132.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.7
198:803
(8) Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
engineer and land surveyor who prepared the map. The plat shall
bear the embossed seal of said engineer and land surveyor.
C. Detailed information:
(1) A key map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet
showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with reference to
surrounding areas, existing streets which intersect or border the
tract, the names of all such streets and any Township boundary
which is within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(2) Names of all owners of parcels and property lines of parcels within
200 feet of the land to be subdivided including properties across
the street as shown by the most recent records of the Township of
North Brunswick or of the municipality of which the property is a
part.
(3) The preliminary plat shall be based on a current certified boundary
survey, with sufficient lines of the adjoining tracts surveyed to
establish any overlap or gap between the adjoining boundary lines
and boundary lines of the tract in question. Date of the survey and
the name of the person making same shall be shown on the map.
(4) Existing one-foot-interval contours based on United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey data (MSL-O) shall be shown extending a
minimum of 100 feet beyond the boundary of the tract in question
and shall be certified by a New Jersey licensed surveyor or
professional engineer as to accuracy, except that where the slopes
exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible. The source of
elevation datum base shall be noted if contours have been
established by aerial photography. A check profile shall be made on
the boundary line of the tract and certified by a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor.
(a) Ninety percent of elevations interpolated from contour lines
will be within 1/2 of the contour interval when referred to the
nearest benchmark. All spot elevations shall be to the nearest
0.1 foot and be accurate within 0.3 foot.
(b) Ninety percent of all planimetric features shown on the map
will be within 1/4° of their true position, and no planimetric
features will be out of true position more than 1/2° at map
scale when referenced to the nearest field established station.
A statement of compliance and/or a complete statement
concerning any areas of noncompliance with this requirement
shall be placed on the tentative plat.
(5) All existing streets, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and flood
areas within the proposed subdivision and within 200 feet of the
boundaries thereof, both the width of the paving and the width of
§ 205-132.7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.7
198:804
the right-of-way of each street, existing public easements and
Township borders within 200 feet of all the subdivisions.
(6) All existing structures and an indication of those which are to be
destroyed or removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions
of those to remain.
(7) The boundaries, nature, extent and acreage of wooded areas and
other important physical features, including swamps, bogs and
ponds, within the proposed subdivision and within 200 feet thereof.
(8) The layout of the proposed subdivision drawn in compliance with
the provisions of this Article.
(9) All proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the purposes
thereof and proposed streets within the proposed subdivision. The
proposed streets shall show the right-of-way and proposed
pavement width.
(10) The existing system of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger
tract of which it is a part, together with information on how it is
proposed to dispose of surface drainage.
(11) The acreage of the drainage area or areas of each natural or manmade
watercourse traversing the subdivision, including the area
within the subdivision and the area upstream from the subdivision.
(12) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet. The
areas and dimensions specified should be accurate to within minus
zero percent (-0%) and plus four percent (+4%) (for example, a lot
line specified as 250 feet long should not be less than 250 feet but
may be as long as 260 feet).
(13) North arrow and basis therefor and written and graphic scales.
(14) A copy of any existing or proposed convenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided or certification that none
exists.
(15) Preliminary utility layouts showing methods of connection and
sources of service.
(16) The proposed location and area in acres or square feet of all
required or proposed open space areas.
(17) Such other information as the Planning Board and/or Planning
Board Engineer may require or request during the review or the
tentative submission.
(18) The tentative plat shall show on the property to be subdivided and
within 200 feet of that property all existing paper streets, dirt
roads, paved streets, curbs, manholes, sewer lines, water and gas
§ 205-132.7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.7
198:805
utility poles, pipes, ponds, swamps and all other topographical
features of a physical or engineering nature.
(19) Preliminary on-site grading and drainage plan.
(a) The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by a
pregrading and drainage plan which shall show locations of all
existing and proposed drainage swales and channels, retention
basins, recharge basins, the scheme of surface drainage and
other items pertinent to drainage, including the approximate
proposed grading contours at one-foot intervals, except that
slopes exceeding 5% at two-foot intervals may be used, and, if
they exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible.
(b) The plan shall outline the approximate area contributing to
each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes,
invert elevations, grades and direction of flow. The direction of
flow at all surface waters and of all watercourses shall be
shown.
(d) The preliminary grading and drainage plan shall be
accompanied by drainage calculations read in accordance with
standards set forth herein.
(20)Off-tract drainage plan. The tentative plat shall also be
accompanied by a preliminary off-site drainage plan prepared in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin
in which the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus
of the basin and existing ground contours or other basins for
determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) Pertinent off-tract existing drainage which receives or
discharges runoff from or onto the site shall be shown with
invert elevations, pipe types and sizes or other appropriate
physical data for open or nonpipe conduits.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained
from the County or Municipal Engineer(s), any existing plans
for drainage improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed,
tentative plans of that system shall be shown.
(21) Preliminary center-line profiles showing all proposed drainage; all
existing and proposed finished roadway grades; channel section
details; pipe sizes, type, inverts; road crowns and slopes; all other
proposed drainage structures and connections.
§ 205-132.7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.7
198:806
(22) Boring logs. The Planning Board may require that the tentative plat
application be accompanied by a set of boring lots and soil analyses
for borings made in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Borings shall be spaced evenly throughout the tract.
(b) One boring not less than 15 feet below proposed grade or 20
feet minimum depth shall be made for every five acres or
portion thereof of land within a tract where the water table is
found to be 10 feet or more below proposed or existing grade
at all boring locations.
(c) One additional boring shall be made per acre or portion thereof
in those areas where the water table is found to be less than 10
feet below the proposed or existing grade.
(d) In addition to the above, in those areas where the water table
is found to be five feet or less below the existing or proposed
grade, two additional borings per acre or portion thereof will
be required. If construction of homes with basements is
contemplated, at least one boring will be located on each lot
within the building setback lines.
(e) Boring lots shall show soil types and characteristics
encountered, groundwater depths, the methods and equipment
used, the name of the firm, if any, making the borings and the
name of the person in charge of the boring operation. The
boring logs shall also show surface elevations to the nearest
tenth of a foot.
(f) Based on the borings, the tentative plat shall clearly indicate
all areas having a water table within two feet of the existing
surface of the land or within two feet of proposed grade or all
areas within which two feet or more of fill is contemplated or
has previously been placed.
(23) Sectionalization and staging plan. The tentative plat shall be
accompanied by a preliminary sectionalization and staging plan
showing the following:
(a) If the subdivision is proposed to be filed for final approval in
sections, the plan shall show each such section and the
anticipated date of filing for each section. The staging of the
various sections in the subdivision shall be such that if
development of the subdivision were to be discontinued after
the completion of any section, the developed portion of the
subdivision would be provided with adequate street, drainage
and utility systems. The size and staging of the sections in a
subdivision shall be established to promote orderly
development and shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
§ 205-132.7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.7
198:807
§ 205-132.8. Scheduling of public hearing on preliminary plat.
Upon receipt of a tentative plat in compliance with this Article and all of the
required supporting documents, the Planning Board Secretary shall place
the application on the agenda for public hearing and shall immediately
notify the applicant. No application shall be considered complete until all of
the above subdivisions are complete in proper form. Sufficient notice shall
be given to the applicant to enable him to give notice of the hearing on the
application as required by the land use procedures section of this chapter.148
§ 205-132.9. Effect of preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant such rights as are set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
§ 205-132.10. Information required prior to final approval.
[Amended 4-4-1983]
Prior to placing the application on the agenda for final approval the
Planning Board may, at its discretion, require that the following documents
properly prepared have been filed with the Planning Board office in proper
form:
(b) The sectionalization and staging plan shall identify for each lot
or groups of lots in the subdivision those improvements that
will be completed prior to application for certificates of
occupancy. The plan should demonstrate that the staging of
construction will minimize adverse effects upon occupied
buildings in the subdivision and adjoining properties.
A. Middlesex County Utilities Authority approval.
B. Middlesex County Planning Board approval, where required.
C. Soil erosion and sediment control permit.
D. Final state and/or municipal floodplain approval, where required.
E. Reports of the Township Engineer and Township Planner.
F. Certification by the Township of North Brunswick Tax Collector that all
real estate taxes or assessments have been paid.
G. Proper and sufficient inspection fees and performance guaranties as
required by this chapter for the installation of all improvements shown
on the map and other exhibits submitted therewith.
H. Evidence of a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, in an
amount not less than $300,000 per occurrence, identifying and saving
harmless the Township of North Brunswick and its agencies, employees
and agents from any liability for any acts of the subdivider or his agents,
148. Editor's Note: See § 205-135.2.
§ 205-132.7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.10
198:808
§ 205-132.11. Final plat requirements.
contractors or employees in the implementing of the approved
subdivision. The subdivider at his option may provide a statement that
such evidence will be provided simultaneously with the provision of
bonds and fees, but in no event will any signatures be affixed to the final
plat until such evidence is provided. The insurance policy shall provide
for 10 days' notice to the Township prior to cancellation. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any property owner, subdivider or builder to
carry on the construction of a subdivision without having current valid
evidence of insurance on file.
I. A certificate of title which may be in letter form, signed by a member of
the New Jersey Bar or by a title office or authorized agent of a title
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
which certificate shall confirm that the owner of the premises in
question is the applicant as shown on the plat.
J. Approval by the Fire Subcode Official. [Amended 10-1-1990]
K. All improvements, if any, specifically required by the Planning Board to
be installed prior to the filing of an application for approval of a final
plat shall have been installed within the time specified by the Planning
Board and shall be certified as satisfactory by the Township Engineer.
L. A final plat and/or attachments, meeting the requirements set forth
below.
M. A development agreement executed between the applicant and the
North Brunswick Mayor and Council.
N. Such other submissions as may be required by state, county or
Township law.
A. General requirements. All requirements set forth in this chapter for
tentative plats shall apply to final plats, with the addition of the specific
additional requirements set forth herein:
(1) A final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the
inch, shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 141 of the Laws of
1960 of the State of New Jersey as amended and supplemented149
and shall include or be accompanied by the information specified
herein.
(2) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries
of the subdivision and all lots and all lands reserved or dedicated
for public use shall balance, and their description shall close within
a limit of error of not more than one part in 10,000.
149. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 205-132.10 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.11
198:809
(3) Digital vector data of the newly created subdivision shall be
submitted in New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System NAD83 in
or compatible with one of the following formats: AutoCAD drawing
(DWG), ESRI shapefile or Drawing Exchange (DXF) format. [Added
11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-34]
B. Purpose of final plat. A final plat and supporting drawings and
documents for a proposed subdivision constitute the complete and fully
detailed and documented development of the subdivision proposal and
become the basis for the construction of the subdivision and inspection
by the Township Engineer, other officials and the Planning Board. The
portion of the plat intended for filing must be recorded in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
C. Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall include:
(1) Title of final plat.
(2) Name, if any.
(3) Tax Map sheet block and lot number(s) of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which shall
also be shown.
(4) Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(5) Date of original and all revisions.
(6) Names and addresses of owner and subdivider, so designated.
(7) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage.
(8) Name(s), signature(s), address(es), and license number(s) of the
engineer and land surveyor who prepared the map. The plat shall
bear the embossed seal of said engineer and land surveyor.
D. Final plat details.
(1) The final plat shall be based on a monumented, current, certified
boundary survey. Date of the survey and the name of the person
making same shall be shown on the map. If 12 months or more have
passed since the date of the survey or date of its last recertification,
it shall be recertified, and, if necessary, revisions shall be brought
up-to-date. Any necessary revisions from the survey used as a base
for the tentative plat shall be specifically noted.
(2) All design information submissions required by the provisions of
the improvements and design standards sections of this chapter
shall accompany the final plat.
(3) Grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at
one-foot intervals throughout the tract, except that if slopes exceed
5%, a two-foot interval may be used, and, if they exceed 10%, a five-
§ 205-132.11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.11
198:810
foot interval is permissible. Data shall be United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey (MSL-O) and the source of data shall be noted.
In addition to proposed grading contours, sufficient additional spot
elevations shall be shown to clearly delineate proposed grading.
(4) The limits of all areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of
excavations for basements, shall be clearly designated.
(5) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse
diversions by the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, where required.
(6) On-site drainage plan:
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which
shall closely show the street and lot layout and those items
which are pertinent to drainage, including existing and
proposed contours as previously required.
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes,
invert and grate or rim elevations, grades and direction of flow.
The direction of flow of all surface waters and of all streams
shall be shown.
(d) The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with standards set forth
herein.
(7) Off-tract drainage plan. The final plat shall also be accompanied by
an off-site drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin
in which the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus
of the basin and existing ground contours or other basis for
determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off-tract existing drainage shall be shown with
elevations of inverts and grade to the nearest tenth of a foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained
from the County or Municipal Engineer(s), any existing plans
for drainage improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, full
plans of that system shall be shown.
(8) Center-line profiles, proposed grades and cross sections to at least
10 feet outside of any grading limit at intervals of at least every 100
feet at all proposed streets.
§ 205-132.11 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.11
198:811
(9) Off-tract existing drainage shall be accompanied by profiles of all
proposed drainage, showing existing and proposed finished grades,
channel section details, pipe sizes, type, inverts, crowns and slopes,
all proposed structures and connections and design hydraulic
grade lines for all conduits designed to carry 40 or more cubic feet
per second. Cross sections at intervals not exceeding 100 feet shall
be shown for all open channels.
(10) The location, caliper and type of all trees retained and the natural
growth areas to be preserved shall be specified.
(11) The number, location and species of all proposed shade trees or
other plantings.
(12) Detailed utility layouts, specifications and cross sections (sewers,
water, gas, electric, telephone, etc.) showing feasible connections
to any existing or proposed utility systems; provided, however, that
detailed layouts of gas, electric and telephone lines are not
required. An indication of these on a typical road cross section shall
be sufficient. Layouts shall include proposed locations of
streetlights and fire hydrants. If private utilities are proposed, they
shall comply with all local, county and state regulations.
(13) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood
hazard areas of all existing watercourses, where such have been
delineated or the limits of alluvial soils where the boundaries of
floodways and flood hazard areas have not been determined and/or
such other information as may assist the Planning Board in the
determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits.
(14) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to public use,
all lot lines and site easement lines, with accurate dimensions and
bearings and radii, tangents, chords, arcs and central angles of all
curves and all front, rear and side (or yard) setback lines.
(15) All monuments in accordance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960
of the State of New Jersey,150 including all monuments set and
monuments to be set and an indication of monumentation found
and reset.
(16) Certificate of engineer or land surveyor as to accuracy of the
details of the plat.
(17) Lot and block numbers shown on the final plat shall conform to the
Township Tax Map, or proposed revisions thereof, and shall be
obtained by the applicant's engineer from the Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer shall not affix his signature to the final plat
unless the applicant has fully complied in this regard.
150. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 205-132.11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.11
198:812
§ 205-132.12. Procedure for approval of final plat of major
subdivision.
(18) Subdivision names and street names shown on the final plat shall
not be the same as or similar to any name of an existing subdivision
or street in the Township of North Brunswick and shall be approved
by the Planning Board.
(19) The location of areas dedicated for park and recreation facilities or
open space as approved by the Planning Board.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for final approval of a major subdivision, which shall be transmitted to
the Township Engineer and Planning Director for review and
determination of compliance with final plat requirements. When
determined to be complete, the Township Engineer and Planning
Director shall notify the Secretary of the Planning Board that the
application may be placed on the Planning Board Agenda.
B. At the time of filing an application and final plat, the applicant shall pay
to the Secretary of the approving authority the fee specified for final
major subdivisions in § 205-139 herein. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-13]
C. The applicant shall submit two Mylar copies, two cloth prints, at least
10 black and white prints and three copies of the application form for
final approval to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days
prior to the regular meeting of the board.
D. Required approvals. [Amended 4-4-1983]
(1) Unless other specific provisions are made in this chapter or by
statute, the Planning Board may require the submission of all
approvals required of federal, state, county and local agencies or
officials prior to approval of a final plat. This shall include but is not
limited to:
(a) Riparian grants and licenses.
(b) Utility construction permits, such as stream encroachment,
potable water and sanitary sewer facilities, soil erosion and
sediment control approval.
(c) Highway drainage and access permits.
(2) The Planning Board may grant final approval conditioned upon the
receipt of all necessary approvals as may be required by the Board,
but no approval signatures will be affixed to any plat prior to
obtaining any such required approvals. The Board may determine a
reasonable time for obtaining all such required approvals; such
time, in no case, shall exceed one year. In the event that such
required approvals are not obtained within such time, the
§ 205-132.11 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-132.12
198:813
conditional approval shall lapse, and submission of a new
application will be necessary.
E. If the Planning Board acts favorably on a final plat, the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board shall affix their signatures and the date
of approval to the plat. For this purpose the final plat shall, in addition
to other statements required by statute, contain a signature block in the
following form:
Approved on a final plat by the North Brunswick Township Planning
Board on
Signed
(Chairman)
Attest
(Secretary) (Date)
F. If the applicant desires to proceed with a subdivision for which final
approval has been granted, he shall file with the county recording
officer a plat map drawn in compliance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of
1960, as amended and supplemented, within 95 days from the date of
the signing of the final plat. It shall be the duty of the county recording
officer to notify the Planning Board in writing within seven days of the
filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date and
number. In the event that the subdivider fails to so file within the period
allowed, the approval of the plat shall expire unless, prior to expiration,
such time is extended by the Planning Board for a period not to exceed
190 days from the date of signing of the plat, for good cause shown.
§ 205-132.12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-132.12
198:814
ARTICLE XXXII
Improvements; Site Maintenance; Assignment of Contractors
§ 205-133. General requirements regarding public and private
improvements. [Amended 3-19-1990; 6-7-1993]
A. Public improvements to be installed. The subdivider shall install or
guarantee the installation of all required public improvements,
including but not limited to grading, streets, off-street parking, gutters,
curbs and sidewalks, streetlighting, street signs, landscaping and shade
trees, recreational facilities, culverts, storm sewers, drainage
structures, utilities (electric, telephone, water mains or other means of
water supply, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal and all
appurtenances to such facilities properly connected with approved
systems of water supply and sewerage, as the case may be, and
adequate to handle all present and probable future development), fire
hydrants and monuments.
B. Criteria in determining required public improvements. To determine
the required public improvements, the approving authority will
consider:
(1) The probable development at various parts of the Township as
referred in the Master Plan and the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The necessity of safe, convenient and pleasant means for the
movement of traffic.
(3) The protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare and the preservation of the ecology and
natural environment if necessary public services allow the
preservation of such environment.
(4) The definition of public improvements, as "public improvements"
shall include streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors' monuments, water mains,
culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, erosion-control and sedimentationcontrol
devices, public improvements of open space and all
nonpublic improvements whose operation may substantially affect
or decrease the life of any and all public improvements.
C. Public improvements required prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use or
building involving the installation of utilities or street improvements,
parking areas, buffer areas, storm drainage facilities, the alteration of
the existing grade on a lot or the utilization of a new on-site well or
sanitary disposal system unless the Township Engineer or other
appropriate authority shall have, where applicable, certified to the
following:
§ 205-133 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133
198:815
(1) Utilities and drainage. All utilities, including but not limited to
water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers, electric lines and
telephone lines, shall have been properly installed, and service to
the lot, building or use from such utilities shall be available.
(2) Grading of street rights-of-way. All street rights-of-way necessary to
provide access to the lot in question shall have been completely
graded, and all slope-retaining devices or slope planting shall have
been installed.
(3) Sidewalks. All sidewalks necessary to provide access to the lot in
question shall have been properly installed.
(4) Curbing, parking areas and streets. Curbing, parking areas and the
bituminous base course of bituminous concrete streets or the
curbing and pavement course for portland cement concrete streets
necessary to provide access to the proposed lot, building or use
shall have been properly installed.
(5) Roadway obstructions. All exposed obstructions in bituminous
concrete streets, such as manhole frames, water boxes and the like,
shall be set to the existing grade and raised to final grade upon
installation of any final wearing surface.
(6) Buffer areas and grading of lots. The lot in question shall have been
fully graded and all lot grading on adjacent areas affecting
drainage on or across the lot in question shall be complete and all
topsoiling and planting and required buffer areas or fences shall
have been provided or bonded in accordance with the requirements
of an approved site plan or final plat, if any, or as required by the
Township Engineer, to permit proper surface drainage and prevent
erosion of the soils. Conformance with the approved soil
disturbance plan shall be certified to by the subdivider's engineer.
(7) On-site wells. All on-site wells shall have been installed, tested and
approved by the Township Board of Health.
(8) On-site sanitary disposal systems. All on-site sanitary disposal
systems shall have been installed and approved by the Township
Board of Health.
(9) Public water supply. Where the proposed lot, building or use is
served by a public water supply, said supply shall have been
installed and tested and all required fire hydrants or fire
connections shall have been installed and tested and approved by
the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and/or the Fire
Prevention Subcode Official.151
(10) Street signs and traffic control devices. All street signs and/or
traffic control devices affecting the proposed lot, building or use
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention.
§ 205-133 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133
198:816
§ 205-133.1. Design of public improvements. [Amended 3-19-1990]
Public improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the requirements herein. Should public improvements be required which
are not provided for within the particular sections of this chapter, they
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with good engineering
practice and recognized design standards. The subdivider or his engineer
shall submit detailed design calculations and construction specifications in
each such instance. Prior to the approval of such specialized design, the
particular standards to be utilized shall be submitted for review by the
Planning Board and the Township Engineer.
§ 205-133.2. Standards for public improvements.
and required under the terms of approval of a final plat or by
federal, state, county or municipal rules, regulations or laws shall
have been installed.
(11) Other. Any other conditions established for issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the Planning Board as a condition of final approval
shall be complied with.
D. Responsibility for public improvements. Installation of all public
improvements throughout a subdivision shall be under the inspection of
the Township Engineer, shall be at the sole expense of the subdivider
and shall be in accordance with the approved final plan as modified by
other action of the Planning Board and the Township Council herein
provided and in accordance with law.
A. General. All public improvements shall be installed in complete
accordance with the standards of this chapter, with other particular
specifications approved by the Planning Board and the Township
Engineer and with all other applicable Township, county and state
regulations. [Amended 3-19-1990]
B. Standard specifications and construction details.
(1) The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of
the New Jersey Department of Transportation, latest revisions, as
modified, supplemented, amended or superseded by the
requirements of this chapter, by the approved final plat, by
particular agreement among the Planning Board, Township Council
and subdivider or by other applicable Township, county or state
regulations, shall govern the completion of the required
improvements. Such Standard Specifications and Standard
Construction Details are made a part of this chapter by this
reference and will not be herein repeated. It is the responsibility of
all the subdividers to familiarize themselves with these standards,
copies of which may be examined at the offices of the Township
Clerk and the Township Engineer and may be obtained, upon
payment of the cost thereof, from the New Jersey Department of
§ 205-133 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:817
Transportation. The requirements of this chapter, an approved final
plat or of particular agreements and conditions of approval and
of applicable Township, county or state regulations shall govern
and prevail in the case of conflict between them and the Standard
Specifications or Standard Construction Details. [Amended
3-19-1990]
(2) Should the Township adopt, subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter, particular and specific standard construction details for
the Township of North Brunswick, they shall govern and prevail
over the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation previously referred to.
C. Clearing and grading.
(1) All grading, excavation or embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the approved final plat and shall provide for the
disposal of all stormwater runoff and such groundwater seepage as
may be encountered. All clearing, excavation and embankment
construction shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the Standard Specifications. No excavated
material may be removed from the site except in accordance with
an approved final plat nor without the prior approval of the
Township Engineer. Where borrow excavation materials from offsite
sources are required to complete the necessary grading, such
material shall meet the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Borrow Excavation Zone 3, and shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) Material which the Township Engineer judges is unsuitable for use
in roadway embankments may be used for grading outside the
roadway right-of-way of building areas with the permission of the
Township Engineer. Any unsuitable material which cannot be
satisfactorily utilized on the site shall be removed from the site and
disposed of at places to be provided by the subdivider.
(3) All construction layout and grading stakes shall be set by a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer employed by the subdivider
or his contractor.
(4) All rough grading must be completed prior to the construction of
the roadway subgrade. All sidewalk areas and slope areas must be
fully graded prior to the construction of finished pavements or
pavement base courses.
D. Roadways.
(1) General requirements. Roadways and all appurtenances, including
subgrade, subbases, base courses and pavements, shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of the
Standard Specifications as modified herein. All subsurface utilities
including service connections (terminating at least two feet behind
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:818
the sidewalk, or if no sidewalks are to be installed, terminating at
least seven feet behind the curb), to each lot and all storm drains
shall be installed in all roadway areas prior to the construction of
final pavement surfaces.
(2) Type of pavement. All roadways shall be constructed with either a
bituminous concrete flexible pavement structure or a portland
cement concrete rigid pavement structure. Only one type of
pavement shall be utilized throughout any subdivision.
(3) Pavement structure design.
(a) The pavement structure design for each particular subdivision
utilizing either a flexible or rigid pavement type shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider or his engineer. The pavement
design shall be based upon traffic loading projections and field
sampling and laboratory analysis of the subgrade soils to be
encountered in roadway areas in the subdivision and shall
follow current design recommendations of the Asphalt
Institute, the Portland Cement Concrete Association or such
other generally recognized standards as may be acceptable to
the Township Engineer.
(b) As minimum requirements, rigid Portland cement paving shall
be expansion joint type paving utilizing joints similar to Type A
expansion joints, according to the Standard Construction
Details of the New Jersey Department of Transportation, shall
be reinforced, constructed with Class B air-entrained concrete,
and shall have a minimum thickness of six inches for local and
minor collector streets and eight inches for other
classifications. Flexible bituminous concrete pavements shall
have an equivalent structural depth of at least eight inches of
bituminous concrete for local and minor collector streets,
having a minimum wearing surface of not less than two inches
of pavement Type FABC and a minimum bituminous stabilized
base course of not less than six inches. This required pavement
shall be a minimum requirement and may be modified or
increased by the Planning Board if required by soil, traffic
volumes or other conditions.
(4) Subgrades. All subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Standard Specifications for
bituminous concrete and reinforced concrete pavements. Prior to
the construction of any subbase base of pavement course all salt or
unyielding portions of the subgrade which do not attain the
required stability will be removed and replaced with the suitable
material, and the whole surface of the subgrade shall be
compacted. The provision of a uniform roadway subgrade meeting
the requirements of the Standard Specifications shall be the full
responsibility of the subdivider. In certain cases, special treatment
may be required because of the character or nature of the subsoil.
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:819
Such special treatment may include lime or cement stabilization,
wet excavation or construction of underdrainage fields. Any
proposal by the subdivider to stabilize subgrade shall be subject to
the approval of the Township Engineer.
(5) Subbase and/or aggregate base courses. Where granular subbase
courses are included in the pavement design section proposed by
the subdivider, they shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Standard Specifications.
Bituminous concrete pavements and stabilized bases may be
constructed on subgrade without subbase or aggregate base
courses, provided that the subgrade can be satisfactorily prepared
as hereinbefore described. Dense graded aggregate base courses
shall comply with the requirements of the Standard Specifications
for soil aggregate Type 5, Class A, or Type 2, Class A or B. Portland
cement concrete pavements must be constructed with a minimum
of six inches of a granular type subbase meeting the requirements
of the Standard Specifications for soil aggregate Type 4, Class E.
Any subbase course or aggregate base course to be utilized with
any type of pavement shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches.
(6) Bituminous base courses.
(a) Bituminous base courses for use with bituminous concrete
pavements shall consist of a plant-mixed bituminous stabilized
base course (stone mix or gravel mix) in accordance with the
requirements of the Standard Specifications, except that the
requirements for the construction of base course shall be
amended to allow the laying of the base course with a single lift
maximum thickness not exceeding four inches.
(b) Prior to placement of any bituminous stabilized base coat, the
finished surface of any underlying subbase or aggregate base
shall receive a prime coat in accordance with the requirements
of the Standard Specifications.
(7) Bituminous pavements. Bituminous pavements shall consist of a
bituminous concrete surface course Type FABC 1 in accordance
with the requirements of the Standard Specifications. The
bituminous pavement wearing surface should generally not be
installed until just prior to the time the streets are prepared for
final acceptance. Prior to the installation of a bituminous concrete
surface, the bituminous base course shall be inspected by the
Township Engineer. Any areas of the base course in need of repair
shall be removed and replaced at the direction of the Township
Engineer. If the Township Engineer directs, a leveling course of
FABC material shall be placed on any uneven or below-grade base
courses prior to the placement of finished pavement. No pavement
surfaces shall be placed unless permission to do so has been
granted by the Township Engineer. No paving shall be done until all
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:820
road structures, such as manholes, catch basins and other
underground utility access chambers, are brought to grade level.
(8) Concrete pavements. Concrete pavements shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Standard Specifications.
Expansion joints shall be New Jersey State Department of
Transportation Type A expansion joints. The subdivider may submit
at the time of submission of the tentative plat for preliminary
approval an alternate expansion joint detail. The use of such an
alternate must be recommended by the Township Engineer and
approved by the Planning Board. Where existing concrete
roadways are being widened as the result of abutting properties,
the widened pavement shall be required to be of portland cement
concrete. The remaining pavement in the subdivision may, if the
subdivider elects, be bituminous concrete. This will be an
exception. The requirement is that all pavement constructed within
a subdivision be of the type as specified in this section.
(9) Alternate pavement types. In areas where alternate pavement
types are proposed or desired for decorative purposes because of
physical restrictions on existing conditions or because of
limitations or shortages in certain types of construction materials,
a detail of the type and/or location of alternate pavement types
proposed shall be submitted for approval with the tentative and/or
final plat. The use of alternate pavement types may only be
permitted if the applicant submits for review and approval details
and specifications concerning the equipment, materials and
methods proposed for use and if the Township Engineer has
inspected the installation of and tested and approved a suitable
sample section of such pavement. In the event that the Township
Engineer does not approve the sample section of pavement, the
subdivider shall remove the same section and replace it with a type
of pavement permitted by this chapter or such other alternate as
may be approved by the Planning Board.
E. Curbs and gutters.
(1) General requirements. The Planning Board may require curbs and
gutters to be constructed along both sides of every street within a
subdivision. Any existing properties damaged by curb construction
shall be repaired to the standards herein and/or as shown on the
final plat. Where one side of the subdivision boundary shall be
constructed only on the subdivision side, curbs and/or
combinations of curb and gutter shall be constructed of concrete
having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,500 pounds
per square inch in accordance with the requirements of the
Standard Specifications. Preformed bituminous cellular-type joints
filled 1/2 inch thick and cut to match the cross section of the curb
shall be used at all expansion joints at intervals not greater than 20
feet. Intermediate plate joints shall be provided at intervals not
exceeding 10 feet. At places where the concrete curb shall be
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:821
placed to match the paving joints, intermediate joints shall be
placed so as to create equal curb panels not longer than 20 feet.
When a concrete curb and gutter are required, the gutter shall be
eight inches thick and shall be constructed of concrete having a
twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,500 pounds per square
inch. Joints in the gutter shall be formed simultaneously with joints
in the curb. Curb and combination curb and gutter cross sections
shall be shown. The requirements of the Standard Specifications
regarding curing precautions must be strictly observed.
(2) Use of combination curb and gutter. Use of a combination curb and
gutter will be allowed in all areas and required in those areas
having a bituminous pavement with profile grade greater than 5%,
with the following exceptions:
(a) Both sides of a street for the entire block length shall be
constructed with one type of curb; that is, where only a portion
of a block is required to have a combination curb and gutter,
the entire block shall be constructed using the combination
curb and gutter.
(b) Where 50% or more of the curb length of any street would be
required to have a combination curb and gutter, the entire
street shall be constructed with the combination curb and
gutter.
(c) Where 50% or more of any subdivision is required to have a
combination curb and gutter, the entire subdivision shall be
constructed with a combination curb and gutter.
(3) Timing of curb construction. In areas with bituminous concrete
pavement, the required curb and/or curb and gutter shall be
constructed prior to the construction of the bituminous base
courses. Any required repairs to curbs and/or combination curbs
and gutters which are not suitable for acceptance shall be made
prior to construction of the final pavement wearing course. In those
areas having portland cement concrete pavement, the curb shall be
constructed after the construction and curing of the portland
cement concrete pavement.
(4) Alternate curb types. In certain instances it may be necessary or
desirable to construct alternate curb types. For example, these may
be required by the Planning Board on the perimeter of channelizing
islands or in areas of unusually heavy gutter drainage flow or may
be desired by the subdivider for decorative purposes or to preserve
vegetation, e.g., granite block curb, rolled concrete curb, etc. If
alternate curb types are to be permitted, an appropriate
construction detail shall be submitted for approval with the
tentative and final plat. A continuous slip-formed curb or a
combination curb and gutter may be permitted if such is
considered to be desirable by the Township Engineer. The use of a
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:822
continuous slip-formed curb or a combination curb and gutter may
only be permitted if the applicant submits for review and approval
details and specifications concerning equipment, materials and
methods proposed for use, and if the Township Engineer has
inspected the installation of and tested and approved as suitable
a sample section of curb or combination curb and gutter, the
subdivider shall remove the sample section and replace it with a
type of curb or curb and gutter permitted by this chapter or such
other alternate as may be approved by the Planning Board.
F. Parking lots. Parking lots shall be constructed with a minimum of two
inches of fine aggregate bituminous concrete surface course and four
inches of bituminous stabilized base, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board with such other requirements as approved by the
Planning Board.
G. Sidewalks and aprons.
(1) General requirements. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both
sides of all streets within a subdivision and entirely around the
perimeter of all culs-de-sac. Where the subdivision abuts one side
of an existing street, the sidewalk shall be constructed only on that
side. Sidewalks shall also be constructed at any other places, such
as pedestrian walkways or access points to open space, as shown
on or required at the approval of the final plat.
(2) Location. Sidewalks shall generally be located within the roadway
right-of-way with the sidewalk edge farthest from the roadway
placed one foot from the property line. In cases where topography
dictates or a proposed subdivision provides for the extension of an
existing street or abuts an existing street, where sidewalks have
already been installed in a location other than as specified above,
or where such variations in sidewalk locations are needed to
preserve trees or natural features, the Planning Board may approve
alternate sidewalk locations in order to provide for the
preservation of physical features or the continuation of the existing
sidewalks.
(3) Sidewalk construction. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four
inches thick, except that when crossing driveways the thickness
shall be increased to six inches. Where the Planning Board
determines that a sidewalk may be subject to unusually heavy
pedestrian traffic, it may require that the width be increased to a
maximum of eight feet, except for two-way bike paths. All sidewalk
construction shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the Standard Specifications. Concrete shall be
Class A, air-entrained. One-half-inch-thick preformed bituminous
cellular joint fillers shall be placed at intervals not exceeding 20
feet. Dummy (formed) joints shall be cut into the concrete sidewalk
between the expansion joints at equal intervals not exceeding the
width of the sidewalk. The sidewalk subgrade shall be compacted
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:823
prior to the placement of any sidewalk. Any unsuitable material
encountered in the subgrade shall be removed and replaced with
suitable material acceptable to the Engineer. All six-inch sidewalk
areas crossing driveways shall be reinforced at the midpoint of
the sidewalk section. Reinforcement shall be welded wire fabric
(66-1212) or an equivalent approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Apron construction. Reinforced concrete aprons shall be
constructed at all driveways between the concrete curb, or
combination curb and gutter, and the concrete sidewalk. Such
aprons shall be six inches thick and shall be reinforced with welded
wire fabric (66-1212) or an equivalent approved by the Township
Engineer located at the midpoint of the apron section. Concrete
shall be Class C, air-entrained. The width of the apron at the
curbline shall be not less than the width of the driveway plus 10
feet or a minimum of 20 feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Driveway depressions. At each driveway, the concrete curb or
combination curb and gutter shall be depressed to form a driveway
opening. The depression shall be 20 feet long or equal in length to
the width of the driveway plus 10 feet, whichever is greater. The
depression shall be smoothly formed to maintain a lowered
curbface across the depression of at least one inch but not more
than two inches. The bottom of the curb shall be lowered to
maintain full curb depth across the depression. If a driveway is
installed in an area which does not have depressed curbing, the
entire curbing shall be removed and replaced to the next existing
curbing joints.
(6) Alternate sidewalk or apron types and/or locations. In areas where
alternate sidewalk or apron types and/or locations are proposed or
desired either for decorative purposes or because of physical
restrictions or existing conditions, a detail of the type and/or
location of sidewalk and apron proposed shall be submitted for
approval with the tentative and/or final plat. The color of all
concrete shall be the natural, normal color of concrete. Continuous
slip formed sidewalks may be permitted if such is considered to be
desirable by the Township Engineer. The use of continuous slip
formed sidewalks may only be permitted if the applicant submits
for review and approval details and specifications concerning the
equipment, materials and methods proposed for use and if the
Township Engineer has inspected the installation of and tested and
approved a suitable sample section of such sidewalk. In the event
that the Township Engineer does not approve the sample section of
continuous slip-formed sidewalk, the subdivider shall remove the
sample section and replace it with a type of sidewalk permitted by
this chapter or such other alternate as may be approved by the
Planning Board.
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:824
(7) A depressed pedestrian ramp shall be provided on the tangent side
of all curb returns except where waiver of this requirement is
approved by the Planning Board.
H. Concrete requirements.
(1) All concrete used in the work of the subdivision shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the Standard Specifications
for the various classes of concrete used, except that the twentyeight-
day compressive strength of the concrete used shall not be
less than the following:
(a) Class A: 4,500 pounds per square inch.
(b) Class B: 3,500 pounds per square inch.
(c) Class C: 3,000 pounds per square inch.
(d) Class D: 2,500 pounds per square inch.
(2) Unless specific written permission is obtained from the Township
Engineer to the contrary, only concrete obtained from dry-batched
redi-mixed trucks shall be allowed.
I. Storm drainage facilities.
(1) General requirements. All storm drainage facilities shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of the
Standard Specifications. The subdivider or his engineer shall
submit complete calculations, specifications, plans and details for
all proposed storm drainage facilities. Any field samples or
laboratory tests required to document the conclusions of such
calculations shall be performed at the sole expense of the
subdivider.
(2) Storm drain pipe. All storm drain pipe shall be either slip-joint-type
reinforced concrete or, subject to the restrictions herein, fully
coated, invert paved, corrugated metal steel culvert pipe meeting
the requirements of the Standard Specifications and of a wall
thickness sufficient to meet the proposed conditions of service, but
in any event, no wall thickness less than Class 3. Wall B for
concrete pipe or No. 14 gauge for corrugated metal steel pipe shall
be allowed. Generally, concrete pipe will be used except in areas of
steep grades or other restrictive physical conditions where
corrugated metal or other types of pipe may be permitted. No
concrete pipe may be laid on grades exceeding 10%. Concrete pipe
below 30 inches, or equivalent, in size will be jointed using a
mortared joint in accordance with the specifications. Concrete
storm drain pipe 30 inches in diameter or larger will be jointed
using a preformed bituminous mastic pressure-type joint sealer or
rubber-ring-type joint or other equivalent approved joint. All
corrugated metal pipe shall be fully bituminous coated with paved
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:825
invert and a gauge meeting the requirements of the Standard
Specifications sufficient for the proposed service. All storm drains
shall be tangent between inlets, manholes or other structures.
Prior to laying any storm drains, the bottom of all trenches shall
be inspected by the Township Engineer. Should the Engineer
determine that the trench is unsuitable for the placement of the
pipe, the subdivider shall take all necessary action to remove or
eliminate any unsuitable conditions. These may include but are not
limited to excavation and backfill with suitable material, placement
of bedding material, construction of pipe cradles or such other
action necessary to remove all unsuitable conditions. Proposed
storm drainage installations which do not conform to the above
must be fully detailed and approved as part of the final plat.
(3) Inlets and manholes. Inlets and manholes shall be constructed
where required in accordance with the requirements of the
Standard Specifications and Standard Construction Details.
(4) Headwalls. All pipe terminations shall be provided with poured
concrete headwalls, precast concrete end sections or corrugated
metal end sections in accordance with the approved final plat.
Poured concrete headwall shall be wing-type headwalls with
aprons in accordance with the Standard Construction Details.
(5) Prior approvals. Where the approval of any other jurisdiction (e.g.,
county, Water Policy and Supply Council or others) is required for
any proposed drainage facility, such approval shall be obtained
prior to the granting of final approval. The Planning Board shall
have the right to require more stringent conditions than those
imposed by other jurisdictions for such drainage improvements in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
J. Shade trees.
(1) All trees planted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
or as required by the Planning Board shall be placed in a proper
manner and in a good grade of topsoil and within the area of the
tree well at the point where the tree is planted. In the event that
any individual person or group of individual persons desires to
plant a tree(s) in a tree well or within the jurisdiction of the North
Brunswick Township Shade Tree Commission, such person or
persons may do so; provided that they conform to the provisions of
this chapter, and further provided that permission of the said North
Brunswick Township Shade Tree Commission is obtained.
(2) All shade trees to be hereafter planted in accordance with this
chapter shall be nursery grown, of substantially uniform size and
shape and shall have straight trunks. Ornamental trees need not
have straight trunks, but must conform in all other respects with
the provisions for trees and tree plantings outlined in this chapter.
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:826
(3) All trees planted pursuant to this chapter shall be planted in a
dormant state.
(4) Subsequent or replacement plants shall conform to the type of
existing tree in a given area, provided that if any deviation is
anticipated, it must be done only with the permission of the North
Brunswick Township Shade Tree Commission. In a newly planted
area, only one type of tree may be used on a given street, unless
otherwise specified by the North Brunswick Township Shade Tree
Commission.
(5) A hole in which a tree is to be planted shall be, in each case, 1/3
larger in width and in depth than the existing root ball of the
particular tree to be planted. The hole for a tree to be planted shall
contain proper amounts of topsoil and peat moss, but no chemical
fertilizer shall be added until the tree has been planted for one
year.
K. Landscaping.
(1) Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil, except as may be provided for in a soil removal
permit issued in accordance with the ordinances of North
Brunswick Township regulating mining operations.152 All topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on
all regraded surfaces so as to provide an even cover and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting. All regraded areas shall be
covered by a four-inch minimum thickness of topsoil, and, if
sufficient topsoil is not available on the site, topsoil meeting the
requirements of the Standard Specifications shall be provided to
result in a four-inch minimum thickness.
(2) Tree removal. All tree removal shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Township ordinances.
(3) Protection of trees. No material or temporary soil deposits shall be
placed within six feet of any trees or shrubs designated to be
retained on the tentative and/or final plat. Where grading may be
required, trees not shown for removal shall be walled-in and
extension tiled to the outer crown of the tree.
(4) Removal of debris. All tree stumps and other parts or other debris
shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with
law. No tree stumps, portions of a tree trunk or limbs shall be
buried anywhere in the subdivision. All dead or dying trees,
standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If trees and limbs
are reduced to chips they may, subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped areas.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 292, Soil Removal.
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:827
(5) Slope plantings. Landscaping of the areas of all cuts or fills and
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, shall be approved by
the Planning Board and shall be in accordance with North
Brunswick Township ordinances. All roadway slopes steeper than
one foot vertical to three feet horizontal shall be planted with
suitable cover plants combined with grass and/or sodding. Grass or
sodding alone shall not be acceptable.
(6) Selective thinning. Throughout the subdivision, except in areas
specifically designated to remain in their natural state, both on
building lots and in open space areas for public or quasi-public use,
the subdivider shall selectively thin to remove all dead or dying
vegetation, either standing or fallen, and shall remove, including
grubbing out stumps, all undesirable trees and other growth. The
subdivider shall, in accordance with overall site development and
his proposed landscaping scheme, provided cleared, graded and
drained pathways approximately four feet wide through all public
or quasi-public open space in heavily wooded areas. Such pathways
should be sited to conform to the existing natural conditions and
should remain unobtrusive. They are not intended to provide
improved walkways but only to provide easy access to open space.
(7) Additional trees. Besides the shade tree requirements outlined
above, additional trees shall be planted throughout the subdivision
in accordance with a planting plan approved by the Planning Board
at the time of final approval. The variety of plantings may vary from
those listed under shade tree requirements and may include
flowering types and evergreens.
(8) Waiver. The Planning Board, after examination and review, may
waive, fully or partially, provisions of this section for good cause
shown.
(9) Specifications. All planting, clearing, selective thinning, topsoiling,
seeding and other landscaping work shall conform to the applicable
requirements of the Standard Specifications.
L. Water supply.
(1) The design and construction approval of all public and individual
water supply systems or extensions of existing systems, shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Township of North Brunswick and the
State of New Jersey, respectively. Prior to the approval of any final
plat, the full approval of any public water system must have been
obtained from the appropriate parties and filed with the Planning
Board.
(2) All lots in any major subdivision must be connected to a public
water supply.
M. Sewage disposal.
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:828
(1) The design and construction or approval of all public systems or
extensions of existing systems, either publicly or privately owned,
shall be under the jurisdiction of the Township of North Brunswick.
(2) In the event that the Planning Board determines that the lots in any
major subdivision cannot be served at the time of application by a
public sewage disposal system, septic systems may be installed,
provided that:
(a) The requirements of state statutes, including the New Jersey
Realty Improvements Act, are met.
(b) They are installed in accordance with the regulations of the
North Brunswick Township Board of Health.153
(c) The lot use conforms to the requirements herein.
(d) If any existing land drainage structures, such as French drains,
are encountered during the course of construction of any
subdivision, no septic system or any part thereof shall be
installed on any lot within 400 feet thereof without the prior
approval of the Township of North Brunswick Board of Health.
Such approval shall only be granted if new percolation tests,
taken at least two months after such drainage structures are
removed, show that satisfactory soil conditions exist and that
installation of such septic system in the area affected by the
removal of the drainage structures will not be detrimental to
the health of the Township residents or cause pollution of any
of its waters.
N. Streetlighting. Streetlights shall be of a type approved by resolution of
the Township Council and by the electric utility company serving the
proposed subdivision. The subdivider shall pay the full cost for initial
installation of any streetlights. After final acceptance, operation and
maintenance costs shall be the responsibility of the Township.
[Amended 3-19-1990]
O. Street Signs. Street signs shall be similar to those presently installed by
the Township and shall be of a type and size approved by the Township
Council and shall be properly installed at each street intersection.
Streets signs shall be placed two per intersection, on the near righthand
corner as viewed from both directions on the street which is
expected to carry the greatest traffic through the intersection.
Mountings shall be in accordance with the standard procedures of the
Township or with requirements adopted by the Township Council.
[Amended 3-19-1990]
P. Fire hydrants.
153. Editor's Note: See Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of the Code.
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.2
198:829
(1) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any residential
structure located in an area serviced by a public or private water
company unless the distance from the midpoint of the frontage of
such premises to a functioning fire hydrant, which has been tested
and approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Water
Utilities Department154 and shall be installed in approved locations.
(2) Final subdivision plats shall not be approved by the Planning Board
unless fire hydrants are indicated on the final plat in accordance
with the requirements herein contained as to location of and
distances between fire hydrants.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be located not more than 500 feet apart. The
water lines to the same shall be looped, and the plans for the same
shall be approved by the Fire Subcode Official and the Water
Utilities Division. [Amended 10-20-1986]
(4) Installation of fire hydrants with respect to any subdivision shall
not be considered a subdivision improvement to be included in the
bonding requirements, but rather the proper installation of fire
hydrants shall be a condition of the issuance of certificates of
occupancy.
(5) All fire hydrants shall be classified as follows:
(a) Class A: flow capacity greater than 1,000 gallons per minute.
(b) Class B: flow capacity of 500 gallons per minute.
(c) Class C: flow capacity of less than 500 gallons per minute.
(d) Said flow capacities are to be rated by a flow measurement test
at a period of ordinary demand, the rating to be based on 20
pounds per square inch of residual pressure when initial
pressures exceed 40 pounds per square inch. When initial
pressures are less than 40 pounds per square inch, residual
pressure shall be at least half of the initial pressures.
Q. Guardrails. Guardrails, pipe rolling or other appropriate barricades, as
required by the Planning Board, shall be designed and placed at
drainage structures, streams, embankment limits, curves and other
required locations. Guardrails shall be standard steel beam type with
galvanized steel posts in accordance with the Standard Construction
Details. Alternate designs and guardrails and barricades may be used
and shall be submitted for approval as part of the approval of the final
plat.
R. Monuments and iron stakes. Monuments shall be of a size and shape
required by Section 4, Chapter 358, of the Laws of 1953,155 and shall be
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 352, Water.
155. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 205-133.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.2
198:830
§ 205-133.3. Off-tract public improvements.
placed in accordance with said statute. In addition to the required
monuments, after grading is finished, the developer shall install a steel
stake one inch in diameter and 30 inches in length on all lot corners,
lot line angle points or other changes in direction not marked by
monuments and at all angle points or discontinuities in easement lines
where such easements are not parallel to property lines.
S. Easements. Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-ofway,
an appropriate utility easement not less than 25 feet in width shall
be provided.
T. Traffic control devices. The subdivider shall, prior to final acceptance,
install all traffic control devices required within any subdivision or, with
the consent of the Township Council, may pay to the Township
Treasurer a nonrefundable sum in cash or certified check in the amount
set by the Township Engineer as equal to the cost of all necessary traffic
control devices, including but not limited to signs, traffic lines, lights,
reflectors and channelizing markers. The number, type, legend,
placement and size of all traffic control devices shall be in accordance
with the Manual on Uniform Control Devices by the United States
Department of Transportation and the requirements of municipal,
county and state regulations and shall be according to an approved plan
submitted at the time of final plat approval. Construction details of all
proposed traffic control devices shall be in accordance with standards
prepared by the Township Engineer and approved by the Township
Council. [Amended 3-19-1990]
U. Inspection notice. All of the above-listed public improvements, except
those utility improvements which are not the responsibility of the
Township, shall be subject to an inspection and approval by the
Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least five
days prior to the initial start of construction and again 24 hours prior to
the resumption of work after any idle period exceeding one working
day. All of the utility improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the owner or an agency controlling the utility, who shall be
notified by the developer in accordance with the utility's requirements.
No underground installation shall be covered until it is inspected and
approved by the owner of or agency controlling the facility for utilities
or by the Township Engineer in all other cases. [Amended 3-19-1990]
A. General requirements. Where the Planning Board determines that offtract
public improvements are necessary for proper development and
utilization of the proposed subdivision and the surrounding area, it may
require the subdivider to install or contribute to the installation of offtract
public improvements. Where the Planning Board has determined
that off-tract public improvements are required, the subdivider, prior to
the granting of final approval, shall have constructed or made payments
toward the ultimate installation of off-tract public improvements, such
as but not limited to streets, curb and gutters, sidewalks, water mains,
§ 205-133.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.3
198:831
sanitary sewers, storm sewers and culverts, monuments and
streetlights, all in accordance with the specifications governing on-site
public improvements. Required off-tract public improvements shall be
based upon adopted circulation plans and comprehensive utility plans
for the Township. [Amended 3-19-1990]
B. Cost allocation. The Planning Board shall allocate the cost of said offtract
public improvements in accordance with the standards
hereinafter set forth. The improvement of a stream and/or widening of a
street or road fronting on the tract to be subdivided shall not constitute
an off-tract public improvement, and the cost of said improvement shall
not be allocated. [Amended 3-19-1990]
(1) The allocation of cost for off-tract public improvements shall be
determined in accordance with the following:
(a) The Planning Board may consider the total cost of the off-tract
public improvements, the benefits conferred upon the
subdivision, the needs created by the subdivision population
and land use projections for the general areas of the
subdivision and other areas to be served by the off-tract public
improvements, the estimated times of construction of off-tract
public improvements and the condition and periods of
usefulness. The Planning Board may further consider the
criteria set forth below.
(b) Road, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements may be based
upon the anticipated increase of traffic generated by the
subdivision. In determining such traffic increase, the Planning
Board may consider traffic counts, existing and projected
traffic patterns, quality of roads and sidewalks in the area and
the other factors related to the need created by the subdivision
and anticipated thereto.
(c) Drainage facilities may be based upon the percentage
relationship between the subdivision acreage and the acreage
of the total drainage basins involved or upon calculations
developing the percentage contribution that the storm runoff
from a particular subdivision bears to the total design capacity
of any public improvement, the particular methods to be
selected in each instance by the Township Engineer.
(d) Sewerage facilities shall be based upon a proportion as
determined by the current rules and regulations of the North
Brunswick Mayor and Council.
(e) Water supply and distribution facilities may be based upon the
current rules and regulations governing the particular utility
supplying water service.156
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 352, Water.
§ 205-133.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.3
198:832
§ 205-133.4. Inspections; payment to contractors; acceptance of
public improvements.
(2) All moneys received by the Township in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be paid to the Township Treasurer,
who shall provide for a suitable depository therefor. Such funds
shall be used only for the public improvements for which they are
deposited or public improvements serving the same purposes,
unless such public improvements are not initiated for a period of
five years from the date of payment, after which time said funds
shall be transferred to the capital improvement fund of the
Township.
(3) The apportionment of costs shall be determined by the Planning
Board. The subdivider shall be afforded an opportunity before said
Board to present evidence relative thereto.
C. Assessment not precluded. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
Township from assessing any property benefitting from installation of
any off-tract improvements as provided in this Article pursuant to the
provisions of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, allowance being made to
the respective parcels of realty for payments herein.
A. General requirements. All public improvements, except as otherwise
provided, shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Township
Engineer. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved by the Township Engineer or those agencies having
jurisdiction over the particular installation. If such installation is
covered prior to inspection, it shall be uncovered or other inspection
means used, such as television or other pipeline camera, as may be
deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, and charges for such
work will be paid by the subdivider. [Amended 3-19-1990]
B. Inspection not acceptance. Inspection of any work by the Township
Engineer or his authorized representative shall not be considered to be
final approval or rejection of the work, but shall only be considered to
be a determination of whether or not the specific work involved was
being done to Township specifications or other required standards at
the time of inspection. Any damage to such work or other unforeseen
circumstances, such as the effect of the weather, other construction,
changing conditions, settlement, etc., between the time of installation
and the time that the developer wishes to be released from his
performance guaranty, shall be the full responsibility of the developer,
and no work shall be considered accepted until release of the
performance guaranty.
C. Payment to contractors. No developer shall enter into any contract
requiring the Township Council, the Township Engineer or any of their
agents, employees or other representatives to make any declarations,
written or otherwise, as a condition of payment of said developer to a
contractor as to the acceptance or rejection of the work. Neither the
§ 205-133.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.4
198:833
Township Council, the Township Engineer nor any of their agents,
employees or representatives shall make any such declaration.
[Amended 3-19-1990]
D. Procedure on acceptance of public improvements. [Amended
4-7-1980; 3-19-1990]
(1) When the subdivider has constructed and installed the streets,
drainage facilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs, monuments and
other improvements in accordance with Township regulations,
standards and specifications and desires the Township to accept
said public improvements, he shall notify the Township Council, in
writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Township Clerk,
of the completion of said public improvements, with copies thereof
to the Township Engineer, requesting inspection of the public
improvements. The Township Engineer shall inspect the public
improvements as directed by the Township Council and shall file a
detailed written report indicating approval, partial approval or
rejection of the public improvements. The Township Engineer's
report may be filed subsequent to any public hearing which is held
concerning said public improvements pursuant to this section. The
Township Council shall notify the subdivider, in writing, by certified
mail, of the action to be taken not later than 45 days after receipt of
the Township Engineer's report that public improvements have
been completed. However, any request by the developer/subdivider
for postponement or adjournment of the decision to be made on the
release or reduction request, inspection or public hearing shall
eliminate the forty-five-day action requirement, and the developer
shall be required to renew his request thereafter. If the public
improvements have been constructed under a performance
guaranty after approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit
an as-built plan showing as-built grades, profiles and sections and
location of all subsurface utilities, such as French drains,
combination drains, sanitary sewage disposal systems, both public
and individual waterlines and control valves, gas lines, telephone
conduits, monuments, property iron markers and any other utilities
or public improvements which are constructed prior to final plat
approval, and the final plat shall reflect all changes and as-built
conditions and be so certified. Said as-build plan(s) shall be
submitted on reproducible media. [Amended 6-7-1993]
(2) Prior to any request for release or reduction of the performance
guaranty, the subdivider shall file the as-built plans with the
Township Engineer. The subdivider shall also submit digital vector
data of all bonded utilities associated with the project, in New
Jersey State Plane Coordinate System NAD83 in or compatible with
one of the following formats: AutoCAD drawing (DWG), ESRI
shapefile or Drawing Exchange (DXF) format. Thereafter the
subdivider/developer shall, in writing to the Township Clerk,
submit a request for release or reduction of the performance
§ 205-133.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.4
198:834
guaranty. The request shall state either the percentage of the
original performance guaranty amount sought to be reduced or
that complete release of the performance guaranty is requested.
In the event that the request is for a complete release of the
performance guaranty or for a reduction of the performance
guaranty which would result in 30% or less of the original
performance guaranty amount to remain in effect, the developer
shall determine from the Township Clerk the date when the
Township Council shall hold a public hearing on the release or
reduction of the performance guaranty, said date to be fixed during
the period within 45 days following the submission by the
developer of such as-built tracings and written request to the
Township Clerk. At least 10 days prior to the date fixed for said
hearing by the Township Clerk, the subdivider shall notify, by
certified mail or personal service, each property owner within the
development and shall cause to be advertised in the Township's
official newspaper a notice of the time and place of the hearing
during which the Township Council will consider the release of
the subdivider's performance bond. At least one week prior to said
hearing, the subdivider shall submit and file with the Township
Clerk a listing of all property owners within the development upon
whom notice was served; photostats or other acceptable
reproduction copies of all receipts for certified mail or an affidavit
stating that personal service was made and indicating the method
of personal service that was utilized; and proof in affidavit form
of publication in the Township's official newspaper. In the event
that the request is for a complete release of the performance
guaranty or for a reduction of the performance guaranty which
would result in 30% or less of the original performance guaranty
amount to remain in effect, the request shall be accompanied by
a certification of the developer/subdivider that all of the public
improvements covered under the performance guaranty have been
completed. Any such request not accompanied by the required
certification shall be rejected by the Township Clerk. [Amended
6-7-1993; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-34]
(3) The Township Council shall approve, partially approve or reject the
developer's request for release or reduction of the performance
guaranty based upon a determination as to whether those public
improvements coming within the scope of the performance
guaranty have been completed in accordance with the municipal
requirements which may be established by the various municipal
agencies having jurisdiction and in accordance with all
agreements, conditions of approval and other requirements of the
various municipal agencies having jurisdiction. The public
improvements generally included within the scope of the
performance guaranty constitute items as specifically enumerated
in the performance guaranty to be accepted by the Township.
Additional items which shall be included within the scope of the
performance guaranty are all nonpublic improvements whose
§ 205-133.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.4
198:835
operation may substantially affect or decrease the life of any and all
public improvements included within the scope of the performance
guaranty.
E. Procedure on release of performance bond for private site work
improvements. [Added 6-7-1993]
(1) When the subdivider has constructed and installed the private site
work improvements in accordance with Township regulations,
standards and specifications and desires the Township to accept
said private site work improvements, he shall notify the Township
Council, in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Township Clerk, of the completion of said private site work
improvements, with copies thereof to the Township Engineer,
requesting inspection of the private site work improvements. The
Township Engineer shall then inspect the private site work
improvements as directed by the Township Council and shall file a
written report indicating whether the private site work
improvements have been installed, which report shall in part be
based upon the as-built drawing for subsurface utilities. The
Township Engineer's report may be filed subsequent to any public
hearing which is held concerning said private site work
improvements pursuant to this section. The Township Council shall
notify the subdivider, in writing, by certified mail, of the action to
be taken not later than 45 days after receipt of the Township
Engineer's report. However, any request by the developer/
subdivider for postponement or adjournment of the decision to be
made on the release or reduction request, inspection or public
hearing shall eliminate the forty-five-day action requirement, and
the developer shall be required to renew his request thereafter.
Said as-built plans shall be certified to by the applicant's
professional engineer. Said as-built plan(s) shall be submitted on
reproducible media.
(2) Prior to any request for release of the private site work
performance guaranty, the subdivider shall file the as-built plans
with the Township Engineer. The subdivider shall also submit
digital vector data of all bonded utilities associated with the
project, in New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System NAD83 in or
compatible with one of the following formats: AutoCAD drawing
(DWG), ESRI shapefile or Drawing Exchange (DXF) format.
Thereafter the subdivider/developer shall, in writing to the
Township Clerk, submit a request for release or reduction of the
performance guaranty. The developer shall determine from the
Township Clerk the date when the Township Council shall hold a
public hearing on the release or reduction of the performance
guaranty, said date to be fixed during the period within 45 days
following the submission by the developer of such as-built tracings
and written request to the Township Clerk. At least 10 days prior to
the date fixed for said hearing by the Township Clerk, the
§ 205-133.4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.4
198:836
§ 205-133.5. Modification of public improvements. [Amended
3-19-1990]
subdivider shall notify, by certified mail or personal service, each
property owner within the development and shall cause to be
advertised in the Township's official newspaper a notice of the
time and place of the hearing during which the Township Council
will consider the release of the subdivider's private site work
performance bond. At least one week prior to said hearing, the
subdivider shall submit and file with the Township Clerk a listing
of all property owners within the development upon whom notice
was served; photostats or other acceptable reproduction copies of
all receipts for certified mail or an affidavit stating that personal
service was made and indicating the method of personal service
that was utilized; and proof in affidavit form of publication in the
Township's official newspaper. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-34]
(3) The Township Council shall approve or reject the developer's
request for release or reduction of the performance guaranty based
upon determination as to whether those private site work
improvements coming within the scope of the performance
guaranty have been completed in accordance with the municipal
requirements which may be established by the various municipal
agencies having jurisdiction and in accordance with all
agreements, conditions of approval and other requirements of the
various municipal agencies having jurisdiction. The private site
work improvements generally included within the scope of the
performance guaranty constitute items as specifically enumerated
in the performance guaranty to be accepted by the Township.
A. (Reserved)157
B. Modification of public improvements. At any time, whether as a result
of his inspection of work underway or otherwise, the Township
Engineer may recommend that the subdivider be required to modify the
design and extent of the public improvements required, notifying the
Planning Board of his recommendations. The Planning Board shall, if it
considers such modifications to be major or if requested by the
subdivider or the Township Engineer, take formal action to approve or
disapprove such recommendations; provided, however, that it must first
afford the subdivider an opportunity to be heard. If the Board takes no
formal action within 30 days of such recommendations, or where the
subdivider has not requested formal Planning Board action, its approval
will be assumed. Similarly, the Planning Board may grant or deny the
subdivider permission to effect such modification upon his application
and the Township Engineer's approval. In either event, where such
modification is to be effected, the appropriate subdivision map or plat
157. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Inspection fees, was repealed 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-13. See now § 205-89, Fees and escrow deposits.
§ 205-133.4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.5
198:837
§ 205-133.6. Performance guaranties. [Amended 3-19-1990;
6-7-1993; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-34; 9-4-2018 by Ord. No.
18-11]
must be revised by the subdivider or his engineer to reflect such
modification, and six copies thereof must be submitted to the Township
Engineer, who shall transmit two copies to the Secretary of the
Planning Board.
A. Before recording final subdivision plats or recording of minor
subdivision deeds or as a condition of a final site plan approval or as a
condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may
require and shall accept, in accordance with the standards adopted
herein, for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of
certain on-tract public improvements:
(1) Performance guaranty required.
(a) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
Township of North Brunswick in an amount equal to 120% of
the cost of only those improvements required by an approval or
developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be
dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the developer and
approved by the Municipal Engineer, according to the method
of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for the
following improvements as shown on the approved plans or
plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.
141,158 water mains, sanitary sewers, community septic
systems, drainage structures, public improvements of open
space, and any grading necessitated by the preceding
improvements.
(b) The performance guaranty may also be required to include, at
the discretion of the Township, Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, a guaranty for the installation of
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping. A separate
performance guaranty, if required, shall be posted for the
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping or may be
included in the performance guaranty for the bonded public
improvements. The developer shall prepare an itemized cost
estimate of the improvements covered by the performance
guaranty for review and approval by the Municipal Engineer,
which improvements shall be appended to each performance
guaranty posted by the obligor. The developer shall also submit
digital vector data of all bonded as-built utilities associated
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 205-133.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.6
198:838
with the project, in New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System
NAD83 in or compatible with one of the following formats:
AutoCAD drawing (DWG), ESRI shapefile or Drawing
Exchange (DXF) format.
(2) The developer shall post with the Township, prior to the release of
the performance guaranty, a maintenance guaranty in an amount
equal to 15% of the cost of the installation of the improvements
covered under the performance guaranty, along with the following
private site improvements: stormwater management basins, inflow
and water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if any,
which itemized cost shall be determined by the developer and
approved by the Municipal Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. The term of the
maintenance guaranty shall be for a period not to exceed two years
and shall automatically expire at the end of the established term.
(3) The furnishing of a safety and stabilization guaranty in favor of the
Township of North Brunswick to ensure that the Township has an
adequate guaranty to return the property that has been disturbed
to a safe and stable condition or otherwise implement measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition.
The Township shall be permitted to access the guaranty when site
disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure, and work has not recommenced within 30 days following
the provision of written notice by the Township to the developer of
the Township's intent to claim payment under the guaranty. At the
developer's option, the safety and stabilization guaranty may be
included as a line item for safety and stabilization in the
performance guaranty rather than in the form of a separate
guaranty. The amount of the safety and stabilization guaranty shall
be calculated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as follows:
(a) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs;
plus
(b) 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $100,000 up to
$1,000,000; plus
(c) 1% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
B. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined by the developer and approved by
§ 205-133.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.6
198:839
the Municipal Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may,
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements.
D. Approved bonded improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail addressed in
care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or substantial
completion of bonded improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the Municipal Engineer. The request shall indicate which bonded
improvements have been completed and which bonded
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
Thereupon, the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all bonded
improvements of which such notice has been given and shall file a
detailed report, in writing, with the governing body, indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
(2) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Municipal Engineer or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guaranty relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Municipal Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
governing body, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guaranty with respect to those
approved bonded improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the total
performance guaranty and safety and stabilization guaranty posted
may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements. The safety and stabilization guaranty shall be
reduced by the same percentage as the performance guaranty is
being reduced at the time of each performance guaranty reduction.
§ 205-133.6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.6
198:840
(3) For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guaranty, the amount of the performance guaranty
attributable to each approved bonded improvement shall be
reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate which formed the basis
of the performance guaranty and appended to the performance
guaranty pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including any
contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of
the approved bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total
amount of the performance guaranty, then the municipality may
retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guaranty and
safety and stabilization guaranty to ensure completion and
acceptability of bonded improvements, as provided above, except
that any amount of the performance guaranty attributable to
bonded improvements for which a temporary certificate of
occupancy guaranty has been posted shall be released from the
performance guaranty even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the municipality below 30%.
E. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
F. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Municipal Engineer.
G. Inspection fees.
(1) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of the improvements, which fees shall not exceed the
sum of the amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The municipality
may require the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in
an amount calculated as follows: except for extraordinary
circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of
improvements subject to a performance guaranty, plus an amount
not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements not
subject to a performance guaranty, which cost shall be determined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. If the inspection fees required are
less than $10,000, the developer shall have the option of paying
same in two equal installments with the initial amount deposited to
be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance of inspections fees
on deposit reaches 10%, the remaining installment shall be due and
payable. If the inspection fees required are $10,000 or greater, the
developer shall have the option of paying same in up to four
installments with the initial amount deposited to be 25% of the
inspection fees. When the balance of inspection fees on deposit
reaches 10%, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25%
of the inspection fees.
§ 205-133.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.6
198:841
(2) If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated herein, is insufficient to
cover the cost of additional required inspections, the Township may
require the developer to deposit additional funds in escrow,
provided that the Township delivers to the developer a written
inspection escrow deposit request, prepared by the Municipal
Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for additional
inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
(3) In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 29 of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the provisions of this
section shall be applied by stage or section.
H. Temporary certificate of occupancy guaranty.
(1) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guaranty, referred to herein as a
"temporary certificate of occupancy guaranty," in favor of the
Township of North Brunswick in an amount equal to 120% of the
cost of installation of only those improvements or items which
remain to be completed or installed under the terms of the
temporary certificate of occupancy and which are required to be
installed or completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of
the permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit,
lot, building or phase of development and which are not covered by
an existing performance guaranty. Upon posting of a temporary
certificate of occupancy guaranty, all sums remaining under a
performance guaranty, required pursuant to § 205-133.6 of the
North Brunswick Code, which relate to the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase of development for which the temporary
certificate of occupancy is sought, shall be released.
(2) The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guaranty shall be determined by the Construction Code Official,
Zoning Officer, Municipal Engineer, or any other municipal official
designated by ordinance. The temporary certificate of occupancy
guaranty shall be released by the Construction Code Official,
Zoning Officer, Municipal Engineer, or other municipal official
designated by ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
I. If the property or any part of same is sold, or otherwise conveyed to a
successor developer prior to the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, an assignment of developer's agreement and new
§ 205-133.6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.6
198:842
§ 205-133.7. (Reserved)159
§ 205-133.8. Site maintenance during construction.
performance, maintenance or other guaranties shall be required from
the new owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership
of property that is the subject of a construction permit, and prior to
beginning or continuing work authorized by the construction permit,
the new owner or successor developer shall file with the Building
Department an application for a permit update to notify the Building
Department of the name and address of the new owner or successor
developer and of all other changes to information previously submitted
to the Building Department. The Building Department shall not approve
the application for a permit update until it receives notification from
the governing body, or its designee, that the new owner or successor
developer has furnished adequate replacement performance,
maintenance or other guaranties and assignment of developer's
agreement.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain the entire
subdivision in a safe and orderly condition during construction.
Necessary steps shall be taken by the subdivider to protect occupants
of the subdivision and the general public from hazardous and unsightly
conditions during the entire construction period. These steps shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Open excavation shall be enclosed by fencing or barricades during
nonconstruction hours. Movable barricades shall be equipped with
yellow flashing hazard markers or other lighting during hours of
darkness.
(2) Excavation of previously installed sidewalk and pavement areas
which provide access to occupied buildings in the subdivision shall
be clearly marked with signs and barricades. Alternate safe access
shall be provided for pedestrians and vehicles to the occupied
buildings.
(3) Materials stored on the site shall be screened from the view of
occupants of the subdivision and adjoining streets and properties.
(4) Construction equipment, materials and trucks shall not be stored
within 150 feet of occupied buildings in the subdivision and
adjoining streets and properties during nonconstruction hours.
(5) Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to occupied buildings in the
subdivision shall be provided at all times.
159. Editor’s Note: Former § 205-133.7, Maintenance guaranty, was repealed 9-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-11.
§ 205-133.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.8
198:843
§ 205-133.9. Transfer or assignment of interest; contractor
performance requirements. [Amended 3-19-1990]
(6) Construction activities which create dust, fumes, odor, smoke,
vibration or glare noticeable on occupied lots in the subdivision and
adjoining properties and streets shall not be permitted.
(7) Construction activities which will result in damage to trees and
landscaping on occupied lots in the subdivision or adjoining
properties shall not be permitted.
(8) All locations and activities in the subdivision which present
potential hazards shall be marked with signs indicating the
potential hazard.
(9) Unsightly construction debris, including scrap materials, cartons,
boxes and wrappings must be removed daily at the end of each
working day.
(10) Construction traffic control devices shall be provided in
accordance with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Service,
with any subsequent addendum, as approved by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
(11) Snow shall be removed from all streets and roadways not yet
accepted by the Township but used by residents of the development
within 12 hours after daylight after any such street or roadway is
covered with snow or ice, and if same cannot be wholly removed
from such streets and roadways, sand, salt or other proper
substance shall be sprinkled thereon so that such street or roadway
shall be safe for travel. This obligation shall commence upon the
first occupancy of the development. [Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
03-17]
B. Should the developer fail in his obligation to maintain the subdivision in
a safe and orderly condition, the Township may, on two days' written
notice, or immediately in the case of hazard to life, health, or property,
undertake whatever work may be necessary to return the subdivision to
a safe and orderly condition. The cost thereof shall be charged against
the performance guaranty.
A. Before any subdivider transfers or assigns any of his interest in any
tentative or final approval of any subdivision, he must notify the
Township Council and supply detailed information with regard to the
name, address, principals, type of organization, competency,
experience and past performance of the assignee, transferee or agent.
Notice of such assignment or transfer shall be given at least 10 days
prior to its effective date, and the assignee must be made acquainted
with all the conditions of approval, and the subdivider shall so certify.
B. No contractor, builder, developer or subcontractor shall engage any
personnel in any of the work on constructing any public improvements
§ 205-133.8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-133.9
198:844
on the site of the subdivision unless they are continually supervised by
a competent supervisor acceptable to the Township Engineer.
C. Not less than five days prior to commencing construction of any public
improvements on the site, the subdivider or his agent shall provide the
Township Engineer with the names, addresses, phone numbers and
emergency phone numbers of the subdivider and/or a representative
empowered to act for the subdivider and of each contractor and the
supervisor in charge of the construction, setting forth the aspect of
construction for which each is responsible.
§ 205-133.9 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-133.9
198:845

ARTICLE XXXIII
Subdivision Design Standards; Miscellaneous Requirements
§ 205-134. General standards; waiver of requirements.
A. Responsibility for design. Within the criteria established by and subject
to the review and approval of the Planning Board, all design of a
subdivision is the responsibility of the subdivider, and he shall be
responsible for and bear the entire cost of any and all investigations,
tests, reports, surveys, samples, calculations, environmental
assessments, designs, researches or any other activity necessary to the
completion of the subdivision design. The standards set in this Article
shall be taken to be the minimum necessary to meet its purposes as set
forth elsewhere herein. The responsibility of the Planning Board shall
be to see that these minimum standards are followed and, in those
cases not covered by these standards, that sufficient precautions are
taken to assure that the eventual subdivision design is conducive to the
implementation of the purposes of this chapter. The Planning Board
may employ professionals in various disciplines to advise and assist it in
its determinations. Any decision of the Planning Board regarding the
suitability or sufficiency of any design proposal, taken upon advice of its
professionals and subject to the provisions of this Article, shall be
deemed conclusive.
B. Design data. To properly execute the design of a subdivision, it is
anticipated that the subdivider will obtain or cause to be obtained
certain design data, including but not limited to soil tests and analyses,
environmental assessments, traffic studies and traffic projections,
surveys, reports and similar design data. Any and all such data obtained
by the subdivider, or by others retained by him to complete the design
of the subdivision, shall be made available to the Planning Board and its
employees and professional staff for the purposes of reviewing the
proposed subdivision design. Should the Planning Board feel the design
data submitted is not sufficient for the purpose of completing a full
review of the subdivision proposal, it may request the applicant to
provide such additional information as is deemed necessary. Until the
applicant supplies such information, no submission under the
provisions of this section shall be termed complete. Nothing contained
herein shall be interpreted to prevent the Planning Board from making
or causing to be made such independent studies, calculations or other
undertakings as it deems necessary in the review of any proposal.
C. Design standards. When a subdivider determines that it will be
necessary to utilize design standards in addition to or other than those
minimum requirements established herein, he is advised to consult with
the Township Engineer prior to beginning his detailed design, for
review and approval of his proposed design standards. Standards
utilized should generally be nationally recognized and in common use in
this area. Design standards may not be utilized if they do not have the
approval of the Township Engineer.
§ 205-134 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134
198:847
§ 205-134.1. Streets and roadways.
D. Waiver of requirements. It is recognized that, in certain instances,
preexisting conditions or the uniqueness of a particular proposal may
require the waiver of some of the standards presented herein. The
Planning Board may consider and, for cause shown, may waive strict
conformance to such of these detailed design standards as it sees fit.
Any subdivider desiring such action shall present with his application
for final approval a listing of all such waivers desired together with the
reasons therefor.
A. Street extensions. The arrangement of streets within the subdivision
shall provide for the extension and/or realignment of existing major
arterial highways, major thoroughfares and collector streets.
Arrangements should be made to extend existing minor streets only
when such extension is necessary and the Planning Board concurs that
such extension will promote safety and conform to the minor street
standards contained in this section.
B. Street widening. Where subdivisions abut existing roadways, sufficient
right-of-way shall be reserved to provide the right-of-way width
proposed for the functional classification of the street in question.
C. Design of local streets. Local streets shall be designed in accordance
with the schedule of street design standards and the following
requirements:
(1) Local streets shall be so arranged that there exists a minimum
possibility of their use by traffic which does not have its origin or
destination at the lots to which the local streets provide access.
(2) Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) may be used where necessary, but
should not have a center-line length from the intersecting street
center line to the center point of the cul-de-sac of less than 100 feet
nor longer than 1,200 feet. They shall provide an end turnaround
with a pavement radius of not less than 50 feet, which shall have its
center point at or to the left of the center line of the street, when
viewed toward the closed end. In the event that it is contemplated
that a dead-end street shall be extended in the future, a temporary
cul-de-sac meeting the aforementioned design criteria shall be
required.
(3) When their use is possible, short loop streets are preferred to culsde-
sac. Loop streets shall have both of their terminuses located on
the same major street to be so classified.
(4) P-loops, which are loop streets with a single access point, should
have an entrance not exceeding 700 feet in distance from the loop
intersection. There should also be provided an emergency
vehicular and pedestrian right-of-way of 15 feet, minimum width,
from the loop and providing access to a street which is not a part of
§ 205-134 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.1
198:848
the P-loop. The loop of a P-loop should have a street length not
exceeding 3,000 feet. The entrance street of P-loops should be
designed in accordance with the design standards for minor
collector streets.
(5) Artificial modifications in street rights-of-way for the purpose of
increasing lot frontage shall be prohibited. Such prohibited
modifications shall include but not be limited to widening the rightof-
way of a continuous street through the use of semi-circular
projections.
(6) One-way streets. When a loop street provides access to 25 or fewer
lots and topographical conditions provide for difficult construction,
the Planning Board may consider the use of a one-way street and a
reduced paving width in accordance with the schedule of street
design standards. The Planning Board may also consider the use of
one-way streets and reduced paving width where, by reason of
topography, physical features or other conditions, reduced width
would substantially reduce disruption of the subdivision's
environment. Such one-way streets and reduced paving width are
subject to the review and approval of the Traffic Bureau of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation. Such review and approval
must be obtained by the subdivider before tentative approval of a
preliminary plat will be granted.
D. Classification of streets.
(1) In any subdivision it shall be the duty of the Planning Board to
approve classification of proposed streets according to their use. In
making its decisions, the Planning Board shall refer to the Master
Plan and shall consider conditions within the subdivision and the
surrounding areas and shall use as a guide the following street
classifications and criteria:
LOCAL STREET — A street providing access to abutting properties
and, where feasible, should be either a cul-de-sac or a loop street
meeting the requirements hereinabove set forth. A street which
serves traffic having origins and destinations other than within the
lots which abut the street shall not be considered a local street.
MINOR COLLECTOR STREET — Generally a street gathering
traffic from local streets and feeding it into a system of major
collectors, major thoroughfares or major arterial roadways and
could be utilized by traffic other than residential in nature.
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET — Generally a street gathering
traffic from local streets or minor collector streets and feeding
it into a system of major thoroughfares or arterial highways and
could be utilized by traffic other than residential in nature.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street gathering traffic from more
than one minor or major collector and leading it to a system of
other major thoroughfares or major arterial streets.
§ 205-134.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.1
198:849
MAJOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — Any federal, state or county
highway or Township street or road intended to carry traffic
between other major arterials and major thoroughfares and
between the various neighborhoods of the Township or from the
Township's neighborhoods to destinations outside the Township.
(2) Classification criteria. Street classifications will be approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with the foregoing definitions, in
accordance with the provisions of the Master Plan and Official Map
if such are adopted, in accordance with the provisions of applicable
county and state regulations or plans or, in the absence of specific
information, from the above, in accordance with its own best
judgment concerning the use to which the various streets in any
subdivision will be put.
E. Lots abutting major collector streets, major thoroughfares and arterial
highways. In any subdivision abutting or being traversed by a major
collector street, major thoroughfare or major arterial highway, one of
the following conditions shall be required by the Board:
(1) A marginal street meeting the classifications herein for a local
street shall be provided along each major collector, major
thoroughfare or major arterial highway and shall be separated
from the major collector, major thoroughfare or arterial highway by
a landscaped strip at least 25 feet in width.
(2) The frontage of all lots abutting the major collector, major
thoroughfare or major arterial highway shall be reversed so that
the lots will front on an internal local street. A natural wooded or
landscaped buffer strip at least 50 feet in width will be provided on
the abutting lots along the right-of-way of the major collector, major
thoroughfare or major arterial highway. The area of such buffer
strip shall not be considered part of the required minimum lot size.
(3) All lots abutting major collector streets may, in lieu of the above, be
provided with suitable driveway turnarounds eliminating any
necessity for vehicles to back into a collector street [or may be
designed as in Subsection E(1) or (2) above].
(4) Other means of providing a satisfactory buffer separating through
and local traffic shall be provided as may be deemed proper by the
Planning Board.
(5) Dwellings on corner lots shall be diagonally oriented or shall have
their driveway access on the roadway designed and intended to
carry the lesser amount of traffic.
F. Street design standards. Street design standards shall be appropriate
to the expected use of the street, soil, topographical and other physical
conditions and to the maintenance of the purposes of this section, but
shall not be less than those set forth in the Schedule of Street Design
Standards contained herein.
§ 205-134.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.1
198:850
Schedule of Street Design Standards
Local Streets
Minor
Collector
Streets
Major
Collector
Streets
Major
Thoroughfares
Major
Arterial
Highways
Nominal traffic
capacity (ADT)
400 1,000 2,500 10,000 --2
Minimum rightof-
way width
(feet)
50 60 70 100 120
Minimum shade
tree and utility
easement, each
side (feet)
5 5 5 5 --
Minimum paving
width (feet):
Two-way 30 40 50 60 --2
One-way 22 -- -- -- --
Shoulder or
parking- area
width1
-- -- -- 2 at 8 ft. --2
Two-way 30 40 50 60 --2
One-way 22 -- -- -- --
Sidewalks:
Width 4 4 4 4 --
Setback (from
face of curb)
3 4 5 7 --
Design speed
(miles per hour3)
40 40 50 60 60
Minimum radius
of horizontal
curvature at
center line
150 500 750 2,000 2,000
Minimum
tangent between
reverse curbs
100 200 4004 6004 42
Maximum
longitudinal
grade (percent)
8 8 6 4 4
Minimum
longitudinal
grade (percent):
Desirable 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75
§ 205-134.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.1
198:851
Schedule of Street Design Standards
Local Streets
Minor
Collector
Streets
Major
Collector
Streets
Major
Thoroughfares
Major
Arterial
Highways
Absolute 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50
Maximum
longitudinal
grade for 200
feet from each
side of
intersection
(percent)
3.5 -- 2.5 -- --
Minimum curb
return radius at
intersection9
15 25 25 45 45
Vertical curve5
Crest: Minimum length equals 100 feet, based on stopping sight distance or design speed.
Sag: Minimum length equals 100 feet, based on headlight illumination and stopping sight
distance or design speed.
Maximum superelevation
(percent)
Not required Not required 6 6 6
Pavement crossslope,
minimum
(percent)
2.947 3.19 2 1 1/28 --2
Pavement crossslope,
maximum
(percent)
2.947 3.198 4 3 --2
Curbface
required
(inches)6
6 8 8 8 --2
Minimum
property line
corner radius
(feet)9
7 15 15 30 --2
NOTES:
1 Shoulders or parking areas as required may be of reduced structural design.
2 To be individually designed based on traffic projections and on design standards of the American
Association of State Highway Officials. Design to meet at least major thoroughfare standards.
3 For sight distance and vertical curve calculations only.
4 Or as required to run out superelevation (1% per second of travel at design speed).
§ 205-134.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.1
198:852
Schedule of Street Design Standards
Local Streets
Minor
Collector
Streets
Major
Collector
Streets
Major
Thoroughfares
Major
Arterial
Highways
5 Not required if algebraic difference of intersecting grades does not exceed one.
6 Except in superelevation areas.
7 Six-inch crown.
8 Eight-inch crown.
9 When dissimilar streets interest, the larger radius will be used.
G. Street intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to
the following standards:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross the same point. Street
intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than 70° (measured at the center line of
streets) shall not be permitted.
(2) Streets should not enter the same side of major collector streets at
intervals of less than 500 feet, major thoroughfares at intervals of
less than 1,200 feet or arterials at intervals of less than 2,500 feet.
Streets which enter collectors, major thoroughfares or major
arterials from opposite sides shall be directly opposite to each
other or must be separated by at least 150 feet between their
center lines measured along the center line of an intersected
collector or 500 feet along the center line of a major thoroughfare
or 800 feet along the center line of a major arterial.
(3) Approaches of any major collector, major thoroughfare, or major
arterial street shall be tangent or have a center-line radius greater
than 5,000 feet for at least 500 feet from the intersection.
(4) Where a minor or major collector, major thoroughfare or major
arterial street intersect, the right-of-way of each minor collector
shall be widened by 10 feet (five feet on each side) for a distance of
300 feet in all directions from the intersection of the center lines,
and the right-of-way of each major collector, major thoroughfare
and major arterial shall be widened by 20 feet (10 feet on each
side) for 500 feet in all directions from the intersection of the
center lines.
(5) Approaches of any local or minor collector street to any other street
shall be tangent (straight) for a distance of at least 50 feet from the
intersection or have a center-line radius greater than 1,000 feet for
at least 150 feet from the intersection and have a clear sight of a
point three feet high in the intersection for a distance of not less
than 400 feet.
§ 205-134.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.1
198:853
H. Street layout.
(1) Curved local and minor collector streets are preferred to
discourage speed and monotony. The maximum straight line
distance should not exceed 1,000 feet.
(2) In all cases the Planning Board may, and in the case of subdivisions
having 100 or more lots the Planning Board shall, require provision
for continuing circulation patterns onto adjacent properties and,
for this purpose, may require the provision of stub streets abutting
adjacent properties.
(3) Subdivisions containing more than 150 lots should have two access
points from collector streets, major thoroughfares or arterial
highways.
I. Grading for roadways. To preserve the integrity of pavements,
embankments and excavations for streets or roadways shall be
provided with slopes no steeper than one foot vertical rise for every
three feet of horizontal distance. Such slopes shall be suitably planted
with perennial grasses or other ground cover plantings in accordance
with the plans approved by the Planning Board. In areas where
excavations or embankments would extend significantly beyond road
rights-of-way, thereby causing disruption to the natural environment of
the subdivision, the Planning Board may, upon the application of the
subdivider, consider or may, upon its own initiative, direct the use of
terraces, retaining walls, crib walls or other means of maintaining
roadway slopes. In any event, the entire roadway right-of-way shall be
fully graded, and any retaining walls, crib walls or terraces shall be
located out of the right-of-way, and maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which they are
constructed. The subdivider shall make suitable provisions in the
instruments transferring title to any property containing such terraces,
retaining walls or crib walls and shall provide a copy thereof to the
Planning Board. All graded areas within or outside of the roadway rightof-
way shall be neatly graded, topsoiled and fertilized and seeded, to
establish a stand of perennial grasses. Top of slopes in excavations and
top of slopes in embankment areas shall coincide with the right-of-way
line or the exterior line of the five-foot-wide shade tree and utility
easement required herein. Sidewalk and easement areas shall slope at
2% to the top of curb elevation, and sidewalk construction shall
conform to this slope.
J. Limit of improvements. The subdivider shall complete all improvements
to the limits of the subdivision, unless other provisions have been made
and approved by the Planning Board. In those instances where
completion of certain improvements would not be possible until the
development of adjacent land takes place, alternate temporary
improvements may be constructed subject to the approval of the
Planning Board, and cash or a certified check representing the
difference between the value of the temporary improvements and the
§ 205-134.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.1
198:854
§ 205-134.2. Drainage facilities.
required improvements may be accepted by the Mayor and Council to
be credited toward the completion of such improvements at such time
as the adjacent land develops.
K. Streets serving other than single-family detached homes. The right-ofway
width and other standards for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be determined
by the Board on an individual basis and shall in all cases be at sufficient
width and design to safely accommodate maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment and
shall generally conform to the requirements herein.
L. Reserve strips. There shall be no reserve strips or areas controlling
access to streets except where control and disposal of the land
comprising such strips or areas have been placed in the hands of the
Mayor and Council under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
A. Layout of storm sewer system.
(1) Inlet spacing shall not exceed 600 feet or a design inlet flow of 4.0
cubic feet per second for Type B inlets and 1.5 cubic feet per
second for Type E inlets, and, in addition, gutter flow shall also be
limited to provide a maximum gutter flow surface width of nine feet
for local and minor collector streets, six feet for major collector
streets and shall be retained within the shoulder areas on all major
thoroughfares and major arterials.
(2) Gutter flow across intersections will not be allowed. Sufficient
inlets will be placed to prevent flow across intersections. No swales
or dish gutters will be permitted. Sewers shall be tangent between
junctions. Manholes shall be placed at all sewer junctions where
inlets are not required and at maximum intervals of 600 feet in
continuous drainage runs.
B. Type of inlets. All street inlets shall be New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Type B; and all yard inlets shall be Standard
Type E. Casting heights on street inlets shall be two inches greater than
the specified curbface.
C. Open channels.
(1) Open channels shall be designed to contain the required flow and
shall have a design velocity low enough in the judgment of the
Township Engineer to prevent erosion. The minimum easement for
open channel sections shall be the maximum design top width of
the channel section segment plus 25 feet rounded to the next
highest five-foot increment. The excess easement area shall be
provided offset to that side of the channel most convenient for use
by maintenance crews; and the minimum distance between the
channel top edge and any easement line shall be five feet. Excess
§ 205-134.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.2
198:855
velocity, if any, as determined by the Township Engineer, in open
channels must be controlled by sod, riprap, paving, ditch checks
or other suitable methods. Changes of direction in open channels
must have a minimum radius of 800 feet or be adequately paved or
riprapped.
(2) Generally, unlined open channel cross sections shall have side
slopes not steeper than four to one for channel depths of two feet or
less and not steeper than six to one for channel depths of more than
two feet. Lined open channel side slopes shall not be steeper than
two to one.
(3) The bottoms of all unlined open channels and the channel side
slopes to at least the design flow level will be sodded with suitable
coarse grass sod.
(4) All unlined open channel side slopes above the design minimum
flow level will be topsoiled and seeded or otherwise suitably
stabilized in accordance with an approved soil disturbance permit.
(5) All unlined open channels which can be expected to have a base
flow of five cubic feet per second or more for at least two out of
every 12 months will be provided with a low flow channel using
gabions, riprap, lining, one-third pipe sections or other
arrangements approved as part of the final plat submission.
D. Minimum basis for calculations. The following criteria shall be utilized
unless other agencies having appropriate jurisdiction require design
criteria for greater flows.
(1) Design storm frequency:
(a) For closed conduits: 15 years; or if the above results in a
conduit size at least equivalent to a twenty-one-inch reinforced
concrete pipe, then 20 years for that conduit; or if the above
results in a conduit size at least equivalent to a thirty-inch
reinforced concrete pipe, then 25 years for that conduit; or if
the above results in a conduit size at least equivalent to a fiftyfour-
inch reinforced concrete pipe, then 50 years for that
conduit.
(b) For open channels: 15 years; or if the tributary area exceeds 50
acres, then 25 years; or if the tributary area exceeds 250 acres,
then 50 years. The flooding limits for storms with a return
period of twice the design storm shall be determined for all
open channels. Such limits shall be in the drainage or
conservation easements delineated on the plat.
(c) For detention facilities: a twenty-four-hour flood with a return
period not less than 50 years; or if the tributary area exceeds
50 acres, then 100 years. Design shall be in accordance with
§ 205-134.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.2
198:856
the criteria established by the Soil Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture.
(d) For gutter flow calculations: 15 years for local and minor
collector streets; 25 years for major collectors and major
thoroughfares; and 50 years for major arterials.
(2) Runoff calculations. Runoff determinations should be made using
the rational formula or, in unusual cases, other methods with the
prior approval of the Planning Board. Upstream areas should be
considered based on their full development potential according to
current zoning or the current use, whichever produces the greatest
runoff. Runoff coefficients used should generally fall in the
following ranges:
Classification, Fully Developed Range of Coefficient
Public parks, open space and land
conservation
0.15 to 0.30
Low-density residential 0.30 to 0.45
Medium-density residential 0.40 to 0.60
High-density residential 0.55 to 0.70
Commercial and industrial 0.60 to 0.90
Pavements, roadways and shoulders 1.00
(3) Velocity restriction.
(a) In general, velocities in closed conduits at design flow should
be at least two feet per second but not more than that velocity
which will cause erosion damage to the conduit. In general,
velocities in open channels at design flow shall not be less than
1/2 foot per second and not greater than that velocity which
will begin to cause erosion or scouring of the channel. For
unlined earth channels, the maximum velocity allowed will be
two feet per second. For other channels, sufficient design data
and soil tests to determine the character of the channel shall
be made by the subdivider and shall be made available to the
Planning Board at the time of drainage review.
(b) At transitions between closed conduits and open channels or
different types of open channels, suitable provisions must be
made to accommodate the velocity transitions. These
provisions may include riprapping, gabions, lining, aprons,
chutes and checks or others, all suitably detailed and approved
as part (c) of the final plat submission. For all flow of 40 cubic
feet per second or more, tailwater depth and velocity
calculations shall be submitted.
(4) Design formulas and friction factors. In general, the Manning
Formula will be used by the Planning Board to review the adequacy
§ 205-134.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.2
198:857
of proposed drainage facilities. Other formulas may be used in
particular cases with the previous agreement of the Board. A
friction factor (n) of 0.0212 will be used for nonporous concrete
pipe; and a factor of 0.020 will be used for fully coated corrugated
metal pipe with paved invert. Commensurate factors will be used
for other pipe type or shapes. A friction factor (n) not less than
0.012 will be used for fully lined concrete channels; a factor not
less than 0.025 will be used for good earth channels; and a factor
not less than 0.100 will be used for fair to poor natural streams
and watercourses. Commensurate factors will be used for other
channel types.
(5) All drainage facilities Carrying runoff from tributary areas larger
than 1/2 square mile must have the approval of the New Jersey
Division of Water Policy and Supply. Such approval shall be granted
prior to approval of a tentative plat.
(6) All encroachments of natural waterways must be referred to the
New Jersey Division of Water Policy and Supply for approval in
accordance with statute. The state may retain jurisdiction, in which
case a permit will be necessary, or may refer the matter to the
County Engineer for review.
(7) All nonpipe culverts shall be designed for AASHO H20-44 loading.
All culverts of any type shall be carried to the roadway right-of-way
and shall terminate with headwalls or other approved end
treatment. All conduits terminating or beginning in open channels
shall be provided with headwalls or other appropriate end
treatment.
(8) Guardrail and/or railings shall be placed at all drainage structures
where the interests of pedestrian or vehicular safety would dictate.
The Planning Board may require that any open channel, other than
naturally occurring streams, be fenced with forty-eight-inch-high
chain link fencing if the banks of the channel are steeper than one
foot vertical for every four feet horizontal and either the total depth
of the channel exceeds four feet or the channel would be expected
to have a depth of flow greater than two feet more often than once
every 10 years. For maintenance purposes, gates may be required
by the Planning Board at intervals of approximately 200 feet.
(9) Storm drainage systems shall be designed to include not only the
proper drainage of the actual area of the specific subdivision, and
the area tributary thereto, but shall also include the disposal of the
stormwater runoff to an adequate outlet or other means of final
disposal of the stormwater, such as lake, pond, running stream or
existing adequate storm sewers.
(10) The use of siltation and sedimentation basins with controlled
outflows may be required during construction or permanently.
E. Special drainage provisions.
§ 205-134.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.2
198:858
§ 205-134.3. Lots.
(1) The existing system of natural drainage within each subdivision
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. To this end the
Board may require the preservation of natural drainage swales,
recharge areas, wet-weather ponds and similar features and may
require suitable drainage and conservation easements and possible
increases in lot size to allow usable lots with the preservation of
such features.
(2) Subject to review and approval by the Board, the design of the
subdivision may be modified to take advantage of the natural
drainage features of the land. In such review the Board will use the
following criteria:
(a) The utilization of the natural drainage system to the extent
possible.
(b) The maintenance of the natural drainage system as much as
possible in its unimproved state.
(c) When drainage channels are required, wide shallow swales
with natural vegetation will be preferred to other sections.
(d) The construction of flow-retarding devices, detention areas
and recharge berm to minimize runoff value increases.
(e) Maintenance of base flow in streams, reservoirs and ponds.
(f) The reinforcement, improvement and/or extension of the
natural drainage system to such an extent as is necessary to
eliminate flooding and excess maintenance requirements.
(3) All developments or portions of total schemes of development
which, based upon the tentative plat submission, total 15 or more
acres will be expected, to the extent that the Board considers
possible, to limit the total stormwater runoff from the site after
development to not more than 115% of the runoff from the site in
its undeveloped state. The utilization of the provisions of this
section to limit such runoff are encouraged. However, the Board
may require the use of reasonable artificial methods of detention
and/or recharge if it determines that natural provisions are not
feasible.
(4) The Board may waive the provisions of Subsection E if the nature of
the development, the character of adjacent previously developed
areas or other factors make the utilization of natural drainage
features or runoff limiting devices inadvisable or impractical.
F. Pipe sizes. Minimum pipe sizes shall be 15 inches in diameter or elevenby-
eighteen-inch elliptical pipe, unless otherwise specified herein.
§ 205-134.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.3
198:859
A. Lot size. Minimum lot size and dimensions shall be governed by other
sections of this chapter, except that:
(1) When either on-site sewage disposal or water supply or both are
proposed, the minimum lot size for PUD shall not be less than 30,000 square
feet. However, the Board of Health may require a larger lot size if it
deems that such increased lot size is necessary for such purposes.
The Planning Board shall abide by the decisions of the Board of
Health in this matter.
(2) The Planning Board may require larger lots where additional area
will partially or completely eliminate the necessity of changes in
grade which in the opinion of the Board would cause unreasonable
destruction of the topography or environment or would create
drainage or erosion problems.
(3) The Planning Board may require larger lots adjacent to collector,
major thoroughfare or major arterial streets where, in the opinion
of the Board, the larger lots promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the public.
B. Lot and block numbers. In accordance with the Tax Map Specifications
of the State of New Jersey, dated January 1968, prepared by the State of
New Jersey, Department of the Treasury, as amended, subdivided lots
and blocks shall generally bear the original numbers with a number
added as a subscript. The use of letter designations should particularly
be avoided. Prior to final plat approval by the Planning Board, assigned
lot and block number designations shall be reviewed and approved by
the Township Engineer, Tax Assessor and Planning Director.
C. House numbers. House numbers shall be assigned each lot by the
Planning Board after lot and block numbers have been approved, but
prior to final plat approval by the Planning Board.
D. Area and side lot lines. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than
the requirements of this chapter or as may be approved by the Planning
Board. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
E. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they
are intended to be used. To prevent the use of lots which are not
suitable because of adverse topography, rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may require
such revisions in the layout of the subdivision as will accomplish one of
the following:
(1) The area of the unsuitable lots is included in other lots by
increasing the size of the remaining lots.
(2) It is included in an area to be deeded to the Township or other
public or quasi-public body and will be held in its natural state for
conservation and/or recreation purposes.
§ 205-134.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.3
198:860
§ 205-134.4. Blocks.
§ 205-134.5. Easements.
(3) Some other suitable arrangement is made.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the zone and to provide
for convenient access, circulation control and safety of vehicles and
pedestrians.
B. Block lengths may vary between 500 and 3,000 feet, but blocks along
other than local, minor collector or collector streets shall not be less
than 1,200 feet long. Interior crosswalks with a right-of-way 20 feet
wide containing a sidewalk of from four feet to 16 feet wide and fenced
on both sides may be required for blocks longer than 1,200 feet, from
the ends of culs-de-sac to adjacent streets and elsewhere as required by
the public convenience, including the provision of walks giving access
to schools, playgrounds and shopping centers, without the necessity of
crossing traffic thoroughfares.
A. Drainage easements.
(1) If the property on which a proposed subdivision is to be located is
or is proposed to be traversed by a drainage facility of any kind,
including a pipe, a channel, a stream or a swale, the Planning
Board may require that a stormwater and drainage easement or
right-of-way along said facility be provided by the subdivider. If
existing land drainage structures, such as French drains, are
encountered during the course of construction of any subdivision,
such drainage structures shall either be removed entirely or a
revised final plat showing the location of such drainage structures
and accompanied with detailed cross sections thereof shall be filed
with the Township Engineer for consideration by the Planning
Board.
(2) All easements shall be shown on the final plat with a notation as to
the purpose and restrictions of the easement. Easement lines on
the final plat shall be shown with accurate dimensions and bearings
unless the easement lines are parallel or concentric with lot lines.
(3) The Planning Board, after consulting its Engineer and the Board of
Health, shall either require a drainage easement, require that the
structure be removed in part or in its entirety or recommend such
other action to the Mayor and Council as it deems appropriate. The
land which is the subject of an easement or right-of-way shall, in
the case of storm drains or constructed channels, be of a suitable
width meeting the requirements for design of drainage facilities
enumerated hereinbefore or be a strip which conforms
substantially to the floodplain of any watercourse along both sides
of the watercourse to a width of 50 feet in each direction from the
§ 205-134.3 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.5
198:861
§ 205-134.6. Miscellaneous requirements.
center line of the watercourse, whichever is the greatest; except,
however, that if the location of such watercourse is at or near
the boundary of the subdivision, the dimensions of the easement
and right-of-way shall be modified to retain it within the confines
of the subdivision. Said easement and right-of-way shall include
provisions assuring the following: preservation of the channel of
the watercourse, except in the course of an authorized drainage
improvement; prohibition of alteration of the contour, topography
or composition of the land within the easement and right-of-way;
prohibition within the boundaries of the easement and right-of-way
of construction which will obstruct or interfere with the natural
flow of the watercourse; and reservation to the public of a rightof-
entry for the purpose of maintaining the storm drain, drainage
channel or the natural flow of drainage through the watercourse,
of maintaining any and all structures related to the exercise of
the easement and right-of-way and of installing and maintaining a
storm or sanitary sewer system or other public utility.
B. Conservation easement.
(1) Conservation easements may be required along all drainage and
stormwater rights-of-way in the subdivision and may be required
also along ponds and streams or other watercourses along which
drainage rights-of-way are not required. Such easements are
intended to help prevent the siltation of streams and other courses
and the erosion of stream banks, other watercourses and adjacent
lands. The land subjected to a conservation easement shall be a
strip at least 25 feet but not more than 100 feet in width
independently located or running adjacent to each side of any
required drainage or stormwater right-of-way. Such conservation
easement shall contain provisions to restrict the removal of trees
and ground cover except for the following purposes: removal of
dead or diseased trees; thinning of trees and other growth to
encourage the more desirable growth; removal of trees to allow for
structures designed to impound water; and removal of trees in
areas to be flooded for the creation of ponds or lakes. The
easements shall also prohibit filling or grading of the lands or the
disposal of refuse or waste material of any type within the limits of
the easement.
(2) The easement shall be indicated on the plat and shall be marked on
the land by iron pipes wherever the lines of such easement change
direction or intersect lot lines.
A. Areas for public use. Any land shown on the Master Plan as intended for
parks, playgrounds, school site or other public use shall be designated
and reserved for such use. The Planning Board, in acting on the final
plat of a subdivision, shall apply all standards for the provisions of park
and recreation areas or other public use areas that have been adopted
§ 205-134.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-134.6
198:862
§ 205-134.7. Violations and penalties.
If, before final approval has been granted, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board and/or the Mayor
and Council is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed
a separate violation.
as a part of the Master Plan. The Planning Board shall designate the
lands required for parks, recreation areas or other public uses, and
such lands shall be shown and reserved on the plat.
B. Preservation of community assets and landmarks. Wherever possible,
subdividers shall preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic points,
historic areas and other community assets and landmarks.
C. Handicapped facilities. The requirements of the state or any other
agency having appropriate jurisdiction for facilities for the handicapped
shall be met.
§ 205-134.6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-134.7
198:863

ARTICLE XXXIV
Administration
§ 205-135. Planning Board.
A. Establishment; composition. There is hereby established pursuant to
P.L. 1975, c. 291,160 in the Township of North Brunswick, a Planning
Board of nine members and two alternates, consisting of the following
four classes: [Amended 1-16-1984; 1-17-1995]
(1) Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Mayor and Council, to be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) Class III: a member of the Mayor and Council, to be appointed by
it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education.
(5) Alternate members: two alternate members, to be appointed by the
Mayor. These members shall meet the qualifications of Class IV
members and shall be designated at the time of appointment by the
Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. Terms. [Amended 1-16-1984]
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the
Mayor's official tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in
the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the
members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a
member of the Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or
at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The
terms of all Class IV members appointed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of
the Municipal Council; provided, however, that no term of any
member shall exceed four years, and further provided that nothing
herein shall affect the terms of any present members of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
160. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 205-135 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135
198:865
completion of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years
except as otherwise herein above provided. [Amended
1-17-1995]
(2) All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made.
(3) The terms of the alternate members shall be two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the terms of
not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority, the Mayor, for the unexpired term only.
(4) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(5) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
[Amended 1-17-1995]
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of a term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided
for the unexpired term.
D. Organization. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from a member of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may
be either a member of the Planning Board or such other Township
employee designated by it.
E. Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney.
The Planning Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of
or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney,
who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
F. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may employ or contract for the
services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Mayor and Council for its use.
The Board may also employ experts to study, review and provide
testimony on elements of a specific development application should it
be determined that such additional professional expertise is necessary
for the Board to make a judgment on an application. The cost of such
professional services shall be paid by the applicant to the Township
§ 205-135 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135
198:866
Treasurer and shall be placed in the appropriate account. [Amended
5-17-1982]
G. Powers and duties. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws
governing its procedural operation. It shall also have the following
powers and duties:
(1) To make and adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for
the physical development of the Township, including any areas
outside its boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear
essential relation to the planning of the Township of North
Brunswick, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick in
accordance with the provisions of said ordinances and the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(3) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
(4) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(5) To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments
thereto, and recommend same to the Mayor and Council.
(6) To consider and make a report to the Mayor and Council within 35
days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the
Planning Board by the Mayor and Council of the Township of North
Brunswick pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
(7) Granting of variances and direction for issuance of permits.
(a) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats,
site plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment:
[1] Variances pursuant to Section 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291,161
from lot area, lot dimensional, setback and yard
requirements, provided that such relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
[2] Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said Act162 for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin
161. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
162. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
§ 205-135 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135
198:867
or public area reserved pursuant to Section 23 of said
Act.163
[3] Direction pursuant to Section 27 of said Act164 for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure not related to a
street.
(b) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection,
notice of a hearing on the application for development shall
include reference to the request for a variance or direction for
issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
(8) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Mayor and Council for the aid and
assistance of the Mayor and Council or other agencies or officers.
H. Time limits for decisions.
(1) Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted
or denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board
approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law165 or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the
developer with the county recording officer, the Township Engineer
and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before
it will be accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
(2) Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval for
the subdivision.
(3) Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as
set forth in § 205-135G(7) of this chapter, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within
163. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
165. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 205-135 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135
198:868
§ 205-135.1. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued upon the request of the applicant.
(4) Final approval.
(a) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(b) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from
the date of the signing of the plat unless within such period
that plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the
county recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good
cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional
period not to exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of
the plat.
I. Procedure for filing applications. Applications for development within
the jurisdiction of the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of P.L.
1975, c. 291, shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board.
The applicant shall file, at least 20 days before the date of the monthly
meeting of the Board, four copies of all applications, five copies of a
sketch plat or 10 copies of a preliminary plat, site plan or plan for
conditional use approval or planned development. At the time of filing
the application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set
for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from
the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and
of the regular meetings dates of the Board.
J. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and
taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
A. Establishment; composition.
(1) A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the
Township of North Brunswick appointed by the Mayor and Council
to serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year of their
appointment. In addition, there shall be two alternate members of
§ 205-135 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135.1
198:869
the Zoning Board of Adjustment appointed by the Mayor and
Council for terms of two years from January 1 of the year of their
appointment. The Chairman shall designate the alternate members
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," and said alternates
shall serve in rotation during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member or members. The terms of the regular members
first appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest
practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four years after their appointment, provided
that the initial term of no member shall exceed four years. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to affect the terms of any present
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. [Amended 12-18-1978]
(2) No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any
elective office or position under the municipality.
(3) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
B. Organization. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may
be either a Board member or municipal employee designated by it.
C. Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually
appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of
compensation of the Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be
an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
D. Experts and staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or
contract for the services of experts and other staff and services as it
may deem necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Mayor and Council for
its use. The Board may also employ experts to study, review and provide
testimony on elements of a specific development application should it
be determined that such additional professional expertise is necessary
for the Board to make a judgment on an application. The cost of such
professional services shall be paid by the applicant to the Township
Treasurer and shall be placed in the appropriate account. [Amended
5-17-1982]
E. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and
taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
F. Powers.
§ 205-135.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135.1
198:870
(1) The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and
supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning
Board of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully
be conferred upon such Board, including, but not by way of
limitation, the authority, in connection with any case, action or
proceeding before the Board, to interpret and construe the
provisions of this chapter, or any term, clause, sentence or word
hereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance with the general rules
of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
(3) The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules hereby laid
down that equity shall be done in cases where the strict
construction of the provisions of this chapter would work undue
hardship. The powers and duties of the Board having been
delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the Board shall in all
cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L. 1975, c. 291,
or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided, and it shall
from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same a copy
of its rules and information as to how appeals or applications may
properly be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
G. Appeals and applications; checklist.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or agency of the
Township affected by any decision of the administrative officer.
Each appeal shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by the
statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with four copies of said notice with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
(2) Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Four copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the
appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the
date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
§ 205-135.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135.1
198:871
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
(3) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Superior Court of New Jersey
on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
(4) Applications for bifurcated "d" variances, under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76b., where no subdivision or site plan is being submitted
at the time of application for the "d" variance, shall be accompanied
by appendix E.166
H. Power to reverse or modify decisions. In exercising the abovementioned
power, the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or amendments thereto or subsequent
statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make
such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
I. Expiration of variance. Any variance from the terms of any ordinance
hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting the erection
or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use
of any premises shall expire by limitation, unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every
structure permitted by said variance or unless such permitted use has
actually been commenced within 12 months from the date of entry of
the judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided
shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to a court of competent
jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such appeal or
proceeding.
J. Powers granted by law.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by
law to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
166. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-135.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135.1
198:872
refusal made by an administrative official or agency based on
or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map
or Zoning Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning
Ordinance to pass.
(c) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situations or conditions of such piece of property,
the strict application of any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to
or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to
such property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship;
provided, however, that no variance shall be granted under this
subsection to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use, and further provided that the
proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to Section 47a of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975, P.L. 1975, c. 291.167
(d) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use in a particular case
and for special reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at
least 2/3 of the full authorized membership of the Board.
(2) No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
Zoning Ordinance. Any application under any subsection of this
section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
K. Additional powers.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in this Article, have the power given by law to:
(a) Direct the issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34,
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
167. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60c.
§ 205-135.1 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135.1
198:873
§ 205-135.2. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
on the Official Map.
(b) Direct the issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34,
for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291, or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
whenever the Board is reviewing an application or approval of a
use variance pursuant to § 205-135.1J(1) of this Article.
L. Time limit for decision. The Board of Adjustment shall render its
decision not later than 120 days after the date that an appeal is taken
from the decision of an administrative officer or 120 days after the
submission of a complete application for development to the Board,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. Failure of the Board
to render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
A. Conflict of interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which meeting shall be
held upon notice to its members and the public in accordance with
all applicable legal requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
(4) Any actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291.
(5) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance
§ 205-135.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135.2
198:874
with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975,
c. 231.168
C. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Board and the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Secretary of the Planning Board and
the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence
in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
Such interested party shall be charged a fee for reproduction of the
minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
D. Fees. Fees for application or for the rendering of any service by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs shall be as specified in this chapter.
E. Hearings.
(1) Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or this chapter.
(2) Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he
may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
(3) Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application
for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(4) Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
(5) Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
168. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 205-135.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135.2
198:875
F. Notice requirements for hearing. Whenever a hearing is required on an
application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the
applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in
all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing
and whether located within or without the municipality in which
the applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by
serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the said current
tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a
copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his address
as shown on the said current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not
required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service
upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation.
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to that required to be
given pursuant to § 205-135.2F(2) of this Article to the owners of
land in such adjoining municipality which are located within 200
feet of the subject premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section
6b of P.L. 1975, c. 291.
(7) All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the
§ 205-135.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135.2
198:876
applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of such service with the
Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
(8) Any notice made by certified mail, as hereinabove required, shall
be deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
(9) Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office
and the location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought are available as required by law.
G. List of property owners furnished. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the Secretary of the Planning Board or the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment of the Township of North Brunswick shall, within
seven days after receipt of a request therefor, make and certify a list
from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to
whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
§ 205-135.2F(2) of this chapter. A sum of $10 shall be charged for such
a list.
H. Decisions.
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth
in writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall
include findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days
of the date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented, to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the
fees prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the
decision shall also be filed in the office of the Township Clerk, who
shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested
party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as
those established for copies of other public documents in the
municipality.
I. Publication. The applicant shall publish a brief notice of every final
decision in the official newspaper of the Township. Said notice shall be
sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date
of any such decision. In the case of a denial, if the applicant fails to
publish such notice, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may at its sole
discretion choose to publish the notice and bill the cost to the applicant
as an out-of-pocket expense to be paid from the technical review escrow
fees. [Amended 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 00-9]
§ 205-135.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-135.2
198:877
J. Payment of taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and
40:55D-65, every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by
proof that no taxes, liens or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application prior to scheduling the application for action by the
approving authority. Should additional payments become due during
the application process, they shall be paid prior to any action of the
approving authority.
K. Signs. [Added 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03-39]
(1) Not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled date for any public
hearing by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board
on any application for development, the applicant shall cause to be
erected on the property which is the subject of the application for
development a freestanding sign which shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name of the applicant;
(b) The name of the Board from which the applicant is seeking
approval/relief;
(c) The phone number of the Board where a person may seek
information as to the date and time of the public hearing on the
application and a statement that this number may be called to
obtain such information;
(d) A brief description of the nature of the approval sought,
including the number of proposed dwelling units, the type of
units, e.g., single-family homes, townhomes, garden
apartments, and in the case of nonresidential uses, the nature
of the proposed construction, e.g. warehouses, commercial use
and the proposed square footage of the construction.
(2) The sign shall be not less than 32 square feet in area nor greater
than 64 square feet in area, shall face a public street abutting the
premises and shall be located not more than 30 feet from such
street.
(3) The lettering on the sign shall be of such a type face and size as to
be clearly visible to motorists and pedestrians in or on the abutting
street. Such sign shall remain on the property until such time as the
Board shall grant or deny final approval or until the applicant shall
withdraw any such application.
(4) Such sign shall comply with §§ 205-22 and 205-102 of this chapter.
(5) This notice shall not be considered jurisdictional. The failure to
provide such notice shall, however, constitute a violation of this
§ 205-135.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-135.2
198:878
§ 205-135.3. Appeals.
§ 205-135.4. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 205-136. (Reserved)
chapter and the violator shall be subject to the penalties specified
in § 205-141.
A. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. An appeal to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party affected by a
decision of the administrative officer of the Township based on or made
in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a notice of appeal in the
manner set forth in § 205-135.1G(1) of this chapter and in accordance
with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of
1975.169
A. Definitions. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in
P.L. 1975, c. 291,170 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth
in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-4-1985.
170. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 205-135.2 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-136
198:879

ARTICLE XXXV
Enforcement; Certificates and Permits
§ 205-137. Enforcement authority.
§ 205-138. Certificates and permits. [Amended 10-4-1982;
10-20-1986; 6-1-1987; 6-7-1993; 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-1;
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 08-25]
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer, who shall have such powers
as are conferred upon him by this chapter, and as reasonably may be
implied. He shall be appointed as provided in the Administrative
Code.171 In no case shall a permit be granted for the construction or
alteration of any building where the proposed construction, alteration
or use thereof would be in violation of any provisions of this chapter. It
shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to cause any building, plans or
premises to be inspected or examined and to order, in writing, the
remedying of any conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter,
and he shall have the right to enter any building or premises during the
daytime in the course of his duties.
B. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning approval report to the
Construction Official prior to the issuance of a permit for use,
construction, erection or alteration of any structure or part of a
structure or upon a change in the use of the land or structure.
C. The Zoning Officer shall be the administrative officer designated to
receive and review all plans for development prior to the submittal of
applications for action by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
A. Construction permits and location survey.
(1) Construction permits. No building or structure shall be erected,
restored, added to or structurally altered until a permit therefor
has been issued by the Construction Official. All applications for
such permits shall be in accordance with the State Uniform
Construction Code.172 No permits shall be issued until zoning
approval has been given by the Zoning Officer and approval has
been given by the Fire Marshal for all uses except single- and twofamily
houses.
(2) Location survey. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be furnished
with a foundation location and elevation survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor for verification of compliance with approval
by the Code Enforcement Officer before the construction of a
superstructure may proceed.
171. Editor's Note: For information concerning the Administrative Code, see Ch. 3,
Administration of Government.
172. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 205-137 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-138
198:881
(3) Certificate of occupancy improvement completion plan. The
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require a
developer, pursuant to a subdivision or site plan application, to
provide a plan showing which site work improvements will be in
place prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This plan shall,
unless otherwise specified in the resolution of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, be required to be submitted prior
to final approval in the case of a subdivision, or with the application
for site plan approval.
B. Certificates of occupancy/fire certificate of compliance/zoning change
of use permit.
(1) No new building, structure or land shall be occupied or used until
such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Construction Official with approval given by the Zoning Officer. In
addition, the Fire Marshal's office shall issue a fire certificate of
compliance permit for all new nonresidential uses, other than oneand
two-family homes, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Whenever there occurs a change in the use or
occupancy of an existing nonresidential building or structure, a
new zoning change of use permit shall be applied for and required
to insure compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. In
addition, a new fire certificate of compliance permit shall be
applied for and issued by the Bureau of Fire Safety/Fire Marshal's
office.
(2) Requirements. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
use or building involving the installation of utilities or street
improvements, the alteration of the existing grade on the lot or the
utilization of a new on-site well or sanitary disposal system unless
the Township Engineer shall have, where applicable, certified to
the following:
(a) Utilities and drainage. All underground utilities, including but
not limited to water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers,
electric lines and telephone lines, shall have been properly
installed.
(b) Grading of streets. All streets necessary to provide access shall
have been graded, and all slope-retaining devices or slope
planting shall have been installed.
(c) Sidewalks. All sidewalks, necessary to provide access, shall
have been properly installed.
(d) Curbing and streets. Curbing and the bituminous base course
for bituminous concrete streets or the curbing and pavement
course for portland cement concrete streets shall have been
properly installed.
§ 205-138 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-138
198:882
(e) Roadway obstructions. All exposed obstructions in bituminous
concrete streets, such as manhole frames, water boxes, gas
boxes and the like, shall be protected by building to the top of
such exposures with bituminous concrete as directed by the
Township Engineer.
(f) Grading of lots. The lot shall have been fully graded and all
plantings shall have been provided in accordance with the
requirements of an approved site plan or preliminary plat, if
any, or as required by the Township Engineer, to permit proper
surface drainage and prevent erosion of the soils.
(g) An as-built site work drawing signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor, provided by the permit
holder, including, whether publicly or privately owned, all
driveways, parking lots, curbing, sidewalks, grading,
landscaping and utilities, but not including any of these items
covered by the Uniform Construction Code, nor as-built
drawings required by any other sections of the code or
requirements of the Township. As-built drawings shall also
include the public improvements which are pertinent to the
building for which final grading permit approval has been
requested.
C. Fire subcode permits. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit for
the erection, addition to or alteration of any building or structure, a fire
subcode permit signed by the Fire Subcode Official shall be required.
The permit shall certify that the plans and specifications submitted with
the application for said construction permit conform to all Township
codes and ordinances relative to fire protection and fire safety.
D. Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion is a certificate
issued by the Construction Official, in lieu of a certificate of occupancy,
upon completion of a building, structure, alteration or addition not
intended for habitable use.
E. Zoning permits.
(1) Zoning permit. No structures shall be erected, restored, added to
or structurally altered, and a building permit will not be issued,
until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Zoning Officer
consistent with Subsection A of this section. Permits for all
structures shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer on a form
required by that officer and shall include a diagram of the property,
including an indication of the location of the proposed structure.
(2) Zoning permit fees shall be required for all structures including,
but not limited to, the following:
(a) New building.
(b) Building addition.
§ 205-138 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-138
198:883
(c) Building alteration, first 50,000 square feet.
(d) Building alteration, second 50,000 square feet.
(e) Building alteration over 100,000 square feet.
(f) Deck/patio.
(g) Fence.
(h) Finished basement.
(i) Garage, detached.
(j) Pool, aboveground.
(k) Pool, in-ground.
(l) Sign.
(m) Temporary sign.
(n) Temporary structures. [NOTE: "Temporary structures" are
defined as any membrane or fabric structures which exceed
400 square feet and which will be in place for a period of time
greater than 14 days.]
(o) Yard utility building (shed) less than 100 square feet.
(p) Temporary storage containers. [NOTE: "Temporary storage
containers" are defined as containers without wheels on a
nonresidential property for a one-time nonrenewable period of
one year.]
(q) Portable storage units.
(r) Retaining walls. [NOTE: "Retaining walls" are defined as not
connected to the principal building and exceeding 30 inches in
height.]
(s) Telecommunications tower.
(t) Occupancy for use up to 2,500 square feet.
(u) Occupancy for use up to 20,000 square feet.
(v) Occupancy for use up to 50,000 square feet.
(w) Occupancy for use over 50,000 square feet.
F. Engineering permits.
(1) Engineering permit. An engineering permit must be obtained from
the Department of Community Development prior to the
construction of any dwelling unit; installation of public and private
improvements; private driveway expansion or extension; or
§ 205-138 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-138
198:884
alteration of existing grades, associated with the following types of
projects:
(a) Site improvements: Site improvements include clearing, site
grading, road improvements, soil importation or utility
installation for any property receiving subdivision and/or site
plan approval.
(b) Plot plans: Plot plan approval must be obtained for lots as part
of a major or minor subdivision, or approved building lots,
prior to issuance of a building permit.
(c) Grading/residential: Grading includes alteration of existing
grades within residential lots that are not associated with
subdivision or site plan approvals.
(d) Grading, nonresidential: Grading includes alteration of
existing grades within nonresidential lots that are not
associated with subdivision or site plan approvals.
(e) Driveways: Driveways include new or reconstructed driveways
that include expansion of the existing driveway limits, and are
not part of a plot plan approval.
(f) Swimming pools: above and in-ground pools that include
existing grade alterations.
(g) Accessory buildings: accessory buildings that include existing
grade alterations.
(h) Home additions, including garages: home additions and
garages that include existing grade alterations.
(2) Engineering permit fees. Fees for the issuance of an engineering
permit shall be set by resolution of the Township Council and shall
be in addition to the posting of any required technical review
escrow deposit required for engineering services. Such fees shall
provide for the review and inspection of the project(s) associated
with the engineering permit. All fees associated with the
engineering permit application are nonrefundable.
(3) Engineering permit expiration. All work associated with the
engineering permit shall be completed, inspected, and approved
within one calendar year of the permit issuance date. If work is not
completed, inspected and approved within the above time period,
the permit will be voided and a new application will be required to
be submitted for approval.
§ 205-138 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-138
198:885

ARTICLE XXXVI
Fees; Deposits; General Provisions
§ 205-139. Fees and escrow deposits. [Amended 3-17-1986;
10-20-1986; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No.
00-9; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 08-25]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IN-HOUSE PROFESSIONALS — Engineers, planners, attorneys and
other professionals whose salary, staff support and overhead are
provided by the Township.
OUTSIDE PROFESSIONALS — Engineers, planners, attorneys and
other professionals whose salary, staff support and overhead are not
provided by the Township of North Brunswick. Outside professionals
shall include, without limitation, consultants who are not normally
utilized by the Township or the reviewing board when an application
presents issues which are beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals who normally serve the reviewing board or the Township.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Includes, but is not limited to, time
spent by a professional engineer, professional planner, attorney, traffic
expert or other professional in connection with any of the following:
(1) Review of an application and associated documents and reports.
Review of relevant ordinance provisions, statutory laws, case law
or prior approvals.
(2)
(3) Site inspections.
(4) Attendance at meetings.
Preparation of resolutions, developer's agreements and other
documents.
(5)
B. Fees.
(1) Zoning permit fees. A nonrefundable zoning permit fee calculated
in accordance with this subsection shall be paid before any building
permit shall be issued and before any structures shall be erected,
restored, added to or structurally altered, pursuant to the
Department of Community Development Fee Schedule as adopted
by resolution of the Township of North Brunswick. If more than one
permit is required, the applicant shall pay the fee required for each
such permit.
(a) New building.
(b) Building addition.
(c) Building alteration, first 50,000 square feet.
§ 205-139 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-139
198:887
(d) Building alteration, second 50,000 square feet.
(e) Building alteration over 100,000 square feet.
(f) Deck.
(g) Fence.
(h) Finished basement.
(i) Garage, detached.
(j) Pool, aboveground.
(k) Pool, in-ground.
(l) Sign.
(m) Temporary sign.
(n) Temporary structures. [NOTE: "Temporary structures" are
defined as any membrane or fabric structures which exceed
400 square feet and which will be in place for a period of time
greater than 14 days.]
(o) Yard utility building (shed) less than 100 square feet.
(p) Temporary storage containers. [NOTE: "Temporary storage
containers" are defined as containers without wheels on a
nonresidential property for a one-time nonrenewable period of
one year.]
(q) Portable storage units.
(r) Retaining walls. [NOTE: "Retaining walls" are defined as not
connected to the principal building and exceeding 30 inches in
height.]
(s) Telecommunications tower.
(t) Occupancy for use up to 2,500 square feet.
(u) Occupancy for use up to 20,000 square feet.
(v) Occupancy for use up to 50,000 square feet.
(w) Occupancy for use over 50,000 square feet.
(2) Engineering permit. A nonrefundable engineering permit
calculated in accordance with this subsection shall be paid prior to
the construction of any dwelling unit; installation of public and
private improvements; private driveway expansion or extension; or
alteration of existing grades, associated with the following types of
projects, pursuant to the Department of Community Development
Fee Schedule as adopted by resolution of the Township of North
Brunswick;
§ 205-139 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-139
198:888
(a) Site improvements.
(b) Plot plan.
(c) Grading (residential).
(d) Grading (nonresidential).
(e) Driveway.
(f) Aboveground pool.
(g) In-ground pool.
(h) Home addition, including garage.
(3) Land use application fees. A nonrefundable zoning application fee
calculated in accordance with this subsection shall be paid at the
time of filing for an approval before the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board or action listed herein, pursuant to
the Department of Community Development Fee Schedule as
adopted by resolution of the Township of North Brunswick. If more
than one approval is required, the applicant shall pay the fee
required for each such approval.
(a) Minor subdivision.
(b) Preliminary major subdivision.
(c) Final major subdivision.
(d) Site plan.
(e) Revised subdivision and site plan.
(f) Informal reviews.
(g) General development plan.
(h) Conditional use.
(i) C variances: residential single- and two-family units per
variance.
(j) C variances: all others.
(k) D variances: residential single-family units.
(l) D variances: all others.
(m) Development permit (per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-35).
(n) Extension of time: residential single- and two-family approvals.
(o) Extension of time: all others.
§ 205-139 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-139
198:889
(p) Appeal from decision of Zoning Officer (per N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a).
(q) Interpretation of Zoning Map or ordinance.
(r) Request for zoning change.
(s) Certificate of nonconformity.
(t) Zoning certification letters.
C. Technical review escrow deposits. A technical review escrow deposit
calculated in accordance with this subsection shall be paid at the time
of filing for any approval or action listed herein. The required escrow
deposits for technical review fees shall be as follows:
(1) Minor subdivision: $200 per lot.
(2) Preliminary major subdivision: $500 per lot for the first 10 lots,
plus $100 per lot for all lots in excess of 10.
(3) Final major subdivision: 1/3 of the escrow deposit calculated for
preliminary major subdivision.
(4) Site plan.
(a) For nonresidential development: an amount equal to $0.70 per
square foot up to 5,000 square feet of building area, plus $0.35
per square foot from 5,001 square feet to 15,000 square feet of
building area, plus $0.10 per square foot for all area in excess
of 15,000 square feet, including a minimum charge of $2,000
and up to a total maximum charge of $20,000.
(b) For residential development: an amount equal to $200 per unit
for the first 100 units, plus $25 per unit for all units in excess of
100.
(5) Revised subdivision and site plan submissions. One-third of the
escrow deposit calculated for the original submission.
(6) Informal reviews: $200.
(7) General development plan: $2,000.
(8) Conditional uses: $500.
(9) N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c variances.
(a) Single-family and two-family homes: $300.
(b) All other C variances: $300 per variance.
(10)N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d variances.
(a) Individual single-family home: $500.
§ 205-139 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-139
198:890
(b) All other D variances: $2,000.
(11) Development permit (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-35): $300.
(12) Extension of time:
(a) Single-family and two-family homes: $100.
(b) All other extensions: $300.
(13) Appeal from decision of Zoning Map or ordinance: $400.
(14) Interpretation of Zoning Map or ordinance: $400.
(15) Request for zoning change: $2,000.
(16) Certificate of nonconformity (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68): $100.
(17) Requests for processing of sanitary sewer or potable water
applications: $500.
D. Technical review fees.
(1) General. A technical review fee shall be charged by the Township
against the escrow deposit. The amount of the technical review fee
to be charged by the Township shall be equal to the professional
costs incurred by the Township during the application process.
(2) Components of technical review fee. The technical review fee to be
charged against the escrow deposit shall include the following
components:
(a) The dollar amount of all charges by outside professionals (as
defined herein) for professional services rendered to the
Township and/or the reviewing board in connection with the
application, plus all actual out-of-pocket disbursements
incurred in regard to such services. All charges for services by
each outside professional shall be billed at the same rate as all
other work of the same nature performed by such professional
for the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on an applicant. Charges for professional services of
outside professionals shall be based upon a schedule of fees
established by appropriate action of the Township Council or
review board.
(b) The dollar amount of the hourly base salary of each in-house
professional (as defined herein) who has rendered professional
services to the Township and/or the reviewing board in
connection with the application multiplied by both of the
following:
[1] The total number of hours of professional services
rendered by each in-house professional in connection with
the application.
§ 205-139 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-139
198:891
[2] Two hundred percent.
E. Post land use approval escrow deposits. A post land use approval
escrow deposit to support inspection fees shall be required to be posted
prior to the issuance of any Township permits to construct public
improvements or private site work improvement as specified in
§ 205-133.6D of the Code as follows:
(1) The developer shall, at the time of filing for any Township permits
to construct public improvements or private site work
improvements as specified in § 205-133.6D herein, post an escrow
deposit equal to the greater of $5,000 or 5% of the amount of the
performance guaranty estimates.
(2) The escrow deposit shall be equal to the total calculated for all
performance guaranty estimates for public improvements and
private site work improvements.
(3) For those developments for which the escrow deposit is less than
$10,000, the escrow deposit may, at the option of the developer, be
paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by the
developer shall be 50% of the total required escrow deposit. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the total required escrow
deposit because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by the amount paid by the Township for inspection, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the required escrow
deposit.
(4) For those developments where the escrow deposit is greater than
$10,000, the escrow deposit may, at the option of the developer, be
paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited by the
developer shall be 25% of the total required escrow deposit. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the required escrow deposit
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced
by the amount paid by the Township for inspection, the developer
shall deposit the remaining 25% of the required escrow deposit.
(5) In the event that the final approval is by stages or sections of
development, the provisions of this section shall be applied by
stage or section.
F. Components of inspections fees. The inspection fee shall include the
following components:
(1) The dollar amount of all charges by outside professionals (as
defined herein) for professional services rendered to the Township
and/or the reviewing board in connection with the application, plus
all actual out-of-pocket disbursements incurred in regard to such
services. All charges for services by each outside professional shall
be billed at the same rate as all other work of the same nature
performed by such professional for the Township when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on an applicant. Charges for
§ 205-139 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-139
198:892
professional services of outside professionals shall be based upon a
schedule of fees established by appropriate action of the Township
Council or reviewing board.
(2) The dollar amount of the hourly base salary of each in-house
professional (as defined herein) who has rendered professional
services to the Township and/or the reviewing board in connection
with the application multiplied by both of the following:
(a) The total number of hours of professional services rendered by
each in-house professional in connection with the application.
(b) Two hundred percent.
G. Limitations on scope of charges for professional services.
(1) All charges for professional services shall be reasonable and
necessary given the status and progress of the application. Such
charges shall be made only in connection with the following:
(a) An application which is presently pending before a reviewing
board or the Council.
(b) Review of an applicant's compliance with conditions of
approval.
(c) Review of an applicant's request for modification or
amendment of an application for approval.
(2) A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval
by a state governmental agency and which are not under municipal
jurisdiction, except to the extent that consultation with a state
agency is necessary due to the effect of a state approval on the
applicant's application.
(3) If the Township or the reviewing board shall retain a different
professional in place of the professional originally responsible for
review of an application, the Township or the reviewing board, as
the case may be, shall be responsible for all time and expenses for
the new professional to become familiar with the application.
Neither the Township nor the reviewing board shall charge the
applicant's escrow deposit for such services.
(4) Neither the Township nor the reviewing board shall bill an
applicant or charge the applicant's escrow deposit for any
municipal clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses,
meeting room charges or other municipal costs and expenses,
except as provided for in this subsection, nor shall any professional
add any such charges to his or her bill.
H. Procedures for assessment of charges for technical review and
inspection fees.
§ 205-139 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-139
198:893
(1) General procedures.
(a) All technical review fee and inspection fee escrow deposits
shall be placed into an escrow account which shall be
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of
North Brunswick. The Chief Financial Officer shall make all
payments from said escrow account.
(b) All payments charged to an applicant's technical review fee
and inspection fee escrow deposit shall be issued pursuant to
vouchers from the professional performing professional
services in connection with the application. All vouchers shall
identify the professional performing the services, the dates
when services were performed, the hours spent to at least onefourth-
hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred.
(c) All outside professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief
Financial Officer on a monthly basis. A copy of the voucher
shall be sent to the applicant simultaneously. All in-house
professionals shall submit to the Chief Financial Officer, on a
monthly basis, a statement containing the same information as
the voucher of an outside professional. A copy of the statement
shall be simultaneously sent to the applicant.
(d) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the
applicant, on a monthly basis, a statement providing an
accounting of the applicant's technical review fee and
inspection fee deposits. The accounting shall include all
deposits made, interest earned, disbursements made and
cumulative deposit balance. Notwithstanding the foregoing to
the contrary, if monthly charges to an applicant's deposit are
$1,000 or less, such statement may be provided by the Chief
Financial Officer on a quarterly basis.
(2) Replenishing of deposit.
(a) If a technical review fee or inspection fee escrow deposit shall
be insufficient to enable the Township or the reviewing board
to perform the required application reviews, the Chief
Financial Officer shall notify the applicant (this notice is
referred to herein as an "insufficiency notice") of both the
insufficient deposit balance and the amount of additional funds
required, in the judgment of the Chief Financial Officer, to cure
the insufficiency. In order for work to continue on the
application, the applicant shall, within a reasonable time
period, post additional funds to the escrow account in an
amount to be agreed upon by the Township (acting through its
Chief Financial Officer) and the applicant.
(b) The determination of insufficiency shall be made by the Chief
Financial Officer in his or her reasonable discretion.
§ 205-139 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-139
198:894
Furthermore, as used herein, a "reasonable time period" for
the posting of additional funds to the escrow account shall be
no longer than 15 days after the date of the Chief Financial
Officer's insufficiency notice. The applicant shall be deemed to
agree to the terms of the insufficiency notice unless within 15
days after the date of such notice the applicant shall deliver to
the Chief Financial Officer a written notice of objection.
(c) If the applicant timely files such an objection, the applicant
shall have the right to pay the amount requested under protest
and the right to challenge the same in the Superior Court, Law
Division, in an action in lieu of prerogative writs filed within 45
days after the applicant received the Chief Financial Officer's
final accounting with respect to the applicant's technical
review fee deposit.
(d) If the applicant fails to timely pay (under protest or otherwise)
the amount requested, the Township, the reviewing board and
all professionals shall have the right to cease all further work
on the application immediately, and the reviewing board shall
have the right to deny, without prejudice, any pending
application because of the applicant's failure to post additional
technical review fees needed for the proper review of such
application. In no event shall any approved plans be signed or
delivered to the applicant nor shall any construction permits,
certificates of occupancy or other approvals or authorizations
be issued to an applicant when there exists any deficiency in
the applicant's technical review fee or inspection fee deposits.
(3) Final accounting and return of unused balance of deposit. After the
reviewing board has granted final approval and signed the
approved subdivision plat or site plan or otherwise taken final
action on the application or upon completion of the construction of
the improvements for which an inspection escrow has been posted,
the applicant shall provide written notice of the same, by certified
mail, returned receipt requested, or by personal delivery, to the
Chief Financial Officer, the reviewing board and all professionals
who have rendered services in connection with the application.
Within 30 days after receipt of such notice, each professional shall
submit a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer with a copy to the
applicant. The Chief Financial Officer shall render to the applicant
a final accounting within 45 days after receipt of all final bills and/
or statements. The Chief Financial Officer shall return to the
applicant with the final accounting any unused balance of the
deposit, including any interest earned thereon.
(4) Interest and administrative expenses.
(a) Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by an applicant with the Township for technical
review fee deposits, for inspection fees or to satisfy the
§ 205-139 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-139
198:895
§ 205-140. Interpretation of provisions.
In the application and interpretation of this chapter, all provisions hereof
shall be held to be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the Township of North Brunswick. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with the requirement of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
§ 205-141. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other persons interested as lessee, tenant or otherwise, in any
building, premises or land where such violation has been committed or shall
exist, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court before
requirement for any performance guaranty or the requirement
for any maintenance guaranty pursuant to this chapter, such
money, until repaid or applied for the purposes for which it
was deposited, including the applicant's portion of the interest
earned thereon, shall continue to be the property of the
applicant and shall be held in trust by the Township, except as
otherwise provided for in this section.
(b) The Township shall deposit such money in a banking institution
or savings and loan association located in the State of New
Jersey and insured by an agency of the federal government or
in any other fund or depository approved for such deposits by
the State of New Jersey. Such monies shall be maintained in an
account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by
such institution or depository on time or savings deposits.
(c) The Chief Financial Officer shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of the name and address of the institution or
depository in which such deposit is made and the amount of the
deposit. The Township shall not be required to refund an
amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed
$100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100 for
any year, that entire amount shall belong to the applicant and
shall be refunded to the applicant by the Township annually or
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for
which it was deposited, as the case may be. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary hereinabove, the Township may retain
for administrative expenses a sum equal to 33 1/3% of the
annual interest earned by such deposit. The amount so
retained shall be in lieu of all other administrative and
custodial expenses charged by the Township in connection
with the deposit.
§ 205-139 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-141
198:896
whom a conviction may be had. Each and every day that such violation
continues or exists shall be considered as a separate and specific violation
of this chapter and not as a continuing offense. In addition, the Township,
the Zoning Officer or any property owner or owners shall have such other
remedies as provided by law.
§ 205-142. Amendments.
All amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning Map which forms a part
hereof shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes, Title 40, Chapter 55, as amended and supplemented.
§ 205-143. Continuation of existing applications for development.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be continued, but any appeals arising from decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by this chapter.
§ 205-144. Filing of copy.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Township Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Township Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all
other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use.
§ 205-145. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency including the following:
A. "An Ordinance to Limit and Restrict to Specified Zones and to Regulate
Therein Buildings and Structures, According to Their Construction and
the Nature and Extent of Their Use and the Nature and Extent of the
Uses of the Land in the Township of North Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey, Including the Right to Regulate and Restrict the
Height, Number of Stories and Size of Buildings and Other Structures,
the Percentage of the Lot That May Be Occupied, the Size of Yards,
Courts and Other Open Spaces, the Density of Population and the
Location and Use and Extent of Use of Buildings and Structures and
Land for Trade, Industry, Residence or Other Purposes," and
amendments and supplements thereto.
B. "An Ordinance Establishing Rules, Regulations and Standards
Governing the Subdivision of Land Within the Township of North
Brunswick, Pursuant to the Authority Set Forth in Chapter 433 of the
Laws of 1953, and Amendments and Supplements Thereto, Setting
Forth the Procedure to be Followed by the Planning Board in Applying
and Administering These Rules, Regulations and Standards and
Providing Penalties for the Violation Thereof," adopted June 21, 1954,
and thereafter amended.
§ 205-141 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-145
198:897
C. "An Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick, Establishing a
Planning Board and a Zoning Board of Adjustment Pursuant to the
Provisions of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975, Providing
for the Powers of Said Boards, Fixing the Procedures Governing
Applications to Said Boards and Appeals Therefrom and Providing for
the Continuance of the Existing Ordinance."
§ 205-145 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-145
198:898
ARTICLE XXXVII
Stormwater Control for Nonresidential Major Development
[Added 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 06-05; amended 10-3-2006 by Ord. No.
06-25]
§ 205-146. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. This article is written in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:8. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques
shall be explored before relying on structural best management
practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with
nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 205-147.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of North Brunswick.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
§ 205-146 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-146
198:899
§ 205-147. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 205-146 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-147
198:900
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of North Brunswick, or political subdivision of
this state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
§ 205-147 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-147
198:901
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — The person or persons responsible for
maintenance of site-specific stormwater management measures.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
§ 205-147 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-147
198:902
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as “hydrophytic vegetation.”
§ 205-148. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 205-149. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
§ 205-147 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-148
198:903
§ 205-149. Requirements for major development.
Stormwater management requirements for major development are as
follows:
plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules. Note: Alternative standards shall provide at least
as much protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater
recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major
development projects as would be provided under the standards in
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 205-155.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are conditionally exempted
from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
§ 205-148 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-149
198:904
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
§ 205-149 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-149
198:905
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
§ 205-149 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-149
198:906
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
§ 205-149 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-149
198:907
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 205-152, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity and
peak flow rate impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 205-150, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
§ 205-149 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-149
198:908
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(c) Industrial stormwater exposed to source material. "Source
material" means any material(s) or machinery located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to
process, manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater
discharge to groundwater. Source materials include, but are
not limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
[1] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(d) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 205-150, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
§ 205-149 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-149
198:909
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 205-147 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and
consideration in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff rate and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 205-149 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-149
198:910
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 205-152, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 205-152. TSS reduction shall
be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A+B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
§ 205-149 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-149
198:911
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See § 205-151C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 205-152.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FWI.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
§ 205-149 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-149
198:912
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 205-149 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-149
198:913
§ 205-150. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 205-149 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-150
198:914
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 205-150 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-150
198:915
§ 205-151. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 205-153B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 205-153.
§ 205-150 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-151
198:916
§ 205-152. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 205-149 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 205-149 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 205-151 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-152
198:917
§ 205-153. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect the safety of the public
and maintenance personnel through the proper design and operation of
stormwater management basins. This section applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
§ 205-152 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-153
198:918
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 205-153 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-153
198:919
§ 205-154. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
§ 205-153 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-154
198:920
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this article.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, but in any case shall be
extended to include the proposed outfall into the receiving
water body. The base map shall be executed at a scale of one
inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour
intervals. The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following:
existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils,
erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into
or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions shall also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§§ 205-148 through 205-151 are being met. The focus of this
plan shall be to describe how the site is being developed to
§ 205-154 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-154
198:921
§ 205-155. Maintenance and repair.
meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the
source by land management and source controls whenever
possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in § 205-149 of
this article.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 205-155.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) when it can
be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
§ 205-154 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-155
198:922
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 205-146C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal and disposal;
the proposed disposal site for these materials; the method and
route of transport of the materials to point of disposal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement and any applicable qualifications to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
§ 205-155 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-155
198:923
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
D. Stormwater facility registration.
(1) Each stormwater management facility subject to Maintenance and
Plan Requirements of Subsections B(1) and (2) above shall register
said facility and plan with the Township Department of Public
Works, Stormwater Coordination Office. Registration shall be
renewed annually on the anniversary of the initial filing. The
registration shall provide current contact information regarding
the "person responsible for maintenance" of the facility as
described in Subsection B(2).
(2) Significant changes or revisions to the maintenance plan shall be
certified by a professional qualified to do so. The person
responsible for maintenance is required to provide notice of
Maintenance Plan revisions to the Township Stormwater
Coordination Office 30 days before alterations are implemented.
§ 205-155 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-155
198:924
§ 205-156. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day in which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation or offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Township of North Brunswick from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(3) An Annual Registration Fee of $200 shall be paid at the Township
Stormwater Coordination Office concurrently with the submission
of applicable facility registration forms.
§ 205-155 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-156
198:925

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Equipment
[Added 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 06-34]
§ 205-157. Findings.
§ 205-158. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA or ANTENNAS — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals, television signals, pagers and other communications signals. For
the purposes of this article, "cellular antennas," as referred to in the 1966
Federal Telecommunications Act, shall not be deemed a public utility.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure, other than a
telecommunications tower, which is attached to a building and on which one
or more antennas are located.
A. The federal government, through the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), has issued personal wireless telecommunications
licenses for personal telecommunications services and other wireless
technologies; and
B. The FCC requires license holders to provide coverage to areas where
personal wireless telecommunications licenses have been acquired and
this may require that such facilities be constructed in specified
locations and manners determined by engineering standards to achieve
such coverage; and
C. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA) preserves local
zoning authority to reasonably regulate personal wireless
telecommunications facilities (PWTFs); but the FTA mandates that
localities may not unreasonably discriminate among FCC license
holders and that localities cannot prohibit or adopt regulations which
have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless services, and the
FTA gives the FCC sole jurisdiction over radio frequency emissions of
PWTFs so long as PWTFs meet FCC standards; and
D. It is necessary to reasonably regulate PWTFs and associated personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities (PWTEFs) to
minimize potential aesthetic impacts; and
E. There is a public need for new provisions in the Township of North
Brunswick's Land Use Ordinance to address the site locations of
PWTFs, PWTEFs and antennas.
§ 205-157 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-158
198:927
BACKHAUL NETWORK — Lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites
to one or more telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
COLLOCATION — Use of a common PWTF or a common site by two or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than
one type of communications technology and/or placement of a PWTF on a
structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (PWTF) —
Facilities for the provision of wireless communications services, including,
but not limited to, antennas, antenna support structures,
telecommunications towers, and related facilities other than PWTEFs.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES (PWTEF) — Accessory facilities serving and subordinate in
area, extent and purpose to, and on the same lot as, a telecommunications
tower or antenna location. Such facilities include, but are not limited to,
transmission equipment, storage sheds, storage buildings, and security
fencing.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of North
Brunswick.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from a public thoroughfare, public lands or
buildings or navigable waterways.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas
for telephone, radio and similar communications purpose, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any supports
thereunto: freestanding structures on which one or more antennas are
located, including lattice towers, guyed towers, monopoles and similar
structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), which
includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services,
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operation or is
used exclusively for receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular
telephone services.
§ 205-159. Purpose and goals.
§ 205-158 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-159
198:928
§ 205-160. Overall objective.
The overall objective of this article is to allow the provision of personal
wireless communications services which have been determined by the
Telecommunications Act to be necessary and protected to provide full and
seamless communication services, while simultaneously limiting the
number of telecommunications PWTFs and PWTEFs to the fewest possible
as reasonably practicable and only in those locations which do not
negatively impact upon the prevailing visual character of the Township of
North Brunswick. Because the Telecommunications Act has recognized that
service carriers have the right to provide cellular communication service
within municipalities, it is also the objective of this article that many of
the different carriers locate their antennas on the same telecommunications
tower to limit the overall number of telecommunications towers within the
Township of North Brunswick to the extent reasonably practicable.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide sound land use policies,
procedures, regulations and specific zoning conditions for PWTFs and
PWTEFs to protect the Township of North Brunswick from the visual or
other adverse impacts of these facilities, and to safeguard the public
good, health, safety and welfare and preserve the intent and the
purposes of the Township of North Brunswick's Master Plan and Land
Use Ordinance while encouraging the unobtrusive development of
PWTFs and PWTEFs to provide comprehensive wireless
telecommunications services in the Township of North Brunswick to
benefit its residents and businesses. This article expresses a preference
that telecommunications providers locate antennas on existing
buildings and telecommunications towers, or that any PWTFs and
PWTEFs be constructed on municipal or other priority locations as set
forth herein; and, further, encourages collocation and site sharing of
new and existing PWTFs and PWTEFs. This article seeks to meet the
mandate of the Telecommunications Act of 1966, while simultaneously
seeking to limit the proliferation of telecommunications towers and
appurtenances.
B. It is understood by the Township of North Brunswick that the federal
government, through the FCC; issues licenses for personal wireless
communications and that the FCC requires license holders to provide
coverage within the areas so licensed.
C. It is also understood by the Township of North Brunswick that the FTA
expressly preserves the zoning authority of a municipality to regulate
the placement, construction and modification of PWTEFs subject to the
six limitations cited at § 332(c)(7)(B) of the FTA. Accordingly, the FTA
does not abrogate local zoning authority in favor of the commercial
desire to offer optimal service to all current and potential customers,
and the providers of the personal wireless services must bear the
burden of proving that any proposed service facility is the least
intrusive means of filling a significant gap in personal wireless
communications services in a given area.
§ 205-159 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-161
198:929
§ 205-161. Specific goals.
The specific goals of this article are:
§ 205-162. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to any telecommunications tower or the
installation of any antennas that are under 70 feet high and which are
owned and operated solely by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or which are used exclusively to receive transmissions; nor shall it
apply to any parabolic satellite antennas or nonwireless telephone services.
§ 205-163. Collocation policy.
A. To limit the impact of personal wireless communications antennas,
telecommunications towers and related facilities upon the residences
and streetscapes throughout the Township of North Brunswick.
B. To encourage the location of antennas upon, or within, existing
structures, including, but not limited to, existing steeples, cupolas,
industrial buildings, telecommunications towers, catenary support
towers and other towers and water standpipes.
C. To encourage the collocation of antennas on the fewest number of
existing structures within the Township of North Brunswick.
D. To encourage the communications carriers to configure their facilities
in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse impacts upon
affected properties, streetscapes and viewscapes through careful
design, site location, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques.
E. To encourage the use of alternative technologies which do not require
the use of telecommunications towers or require telecommunications
towers at relatively lesser heights.
F. To enhance the ability of the carriers of personal wireless
communications services who adhere to the letter and intent of this
article to provide such services quickly, effectively and efficiently.
G. To comply with the mandate of the FTA, 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7), which
preserves local government authority to enforce zoning requirements
that protect public safety, public and private property and community
aesthetics.
A. The Township Engineer shall maintain an inventory of existing PWTF
and PWTEF locations within or near the Township of North Brunswick.
B. An applicant proposing a PWTF/PWTEF at a new location shall
demonstrate that it made its best business efforts to find a collocation
site acceptable to Township engineering standards and that none was
available, or practicable or economically feasible.
§ 205-161 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-163
198:930
C. An applicant proposing a PWTF/PWTEF at a new location, who has
demonstrated its inability to collocate pursuant to Subsection B herein,
shall provide a letter of intent, in a form to be reviewed and approved
by the Township Planning Board Attorney or Zoning Board of
Adjustment Attorney, as applicable, which warrants and represents that
applicant shall share the use of its PWTFs/PWTEFs with any other
approved cellular communication services providers at fair market
value. Such collocation requirement shall be a material condition of
approval.
D. Each application for a PWTF/PWTEF shall be accompanied by a plan
which shall reference all existing PWTF/PWTEF locations in the
applicant's Township of North Brunswick inventory, any such facilities
in the abutting towns which provide service to areas within the
Township of North Brunswick and any anticipated changes proposed
within the following twelve-month period, including plans for new
locations and the discontinuance or relocation of existing facilities.
E. Each application shall include a site location alternative analysis
describing the location of other sites considered, the availability of
those sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
providers' service or engineering needs, and the reason why the subject
site was chosen. The analysis shall address the following issues:
(1) How the proposed location of the PWTF/PWTEF relates to the
objective of providing full wireless communication services within
the Township of North Brunswick at the time full service is
provided by the applicant throughout the Township of North
Brunswick.
(2) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF/PWTEF relates
to the location of any existing antennas within and near the
Township of North Brunswick.
(3) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF/PWTEF relates
to the anticipated need for additional antennas within and near the
Township of North Brunswick by the applicant and by other
providers of wireless communication services within the Township
of North Brunswick.
(4) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF/PWTEF relates
to the objective of collocating the antennas of many different
providers of wireless communication services on the same PWTF;
and
(5) How its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the
needs of all other providers of wireless communication services
within the Township of North Brunswick.
F. The Planning Board, or Board of Adjustment, may retain technical
consultants as it deems necessary to provide assistance in the review of
the site location alternatives analysis. The applicant and/or service
§ 205-163 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-163
198:931
§ 205-164. Priority locations; permitted uses and conditional uses;
prohibited locations.
The Township has allowed for the erection of antennas and appurtenances
upon preexisting structures and for the construction of PWTFs and PWTEFs
in priority locations as follows:
provider shall bear the reasonable cost associated with such
consultation, which cost shall be deposited in accordance with the
Township of North Brunswick's escrow provisions.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) PWTFs and PWTEFs are permitted uses if they collocate and install
antennas and appurtenances upon the following existing
structures:
(a) Preexisting telecommunications towers;
(b) Preexisting public utility transmissions towers which exceed
100 feet in height; and
(c) Preexisting water towers in excess of 100 feet.
(2) Any wireless communications provider wishing to install antennas
and appurtenances as permitted uses shall be required to obtain
site plan approval from the Planning Board of the Township of
North Brunswick, pursuant to the conditions set forth in § 205-165
hereinbelow.
B. Conditional uses at priority locations:
(1) Wireless communications providers unable to collocate antennas as
permitted uses as designated hereinabove may make application to
the Planning Board of the Township of North Brunswick for site
plan approval to construct PWTFs and PWTEFs as conditional uses
on the following priority locations, ranked in descending priority
order:
(a) Lands owned by the Township of North Brunswick or lands
owned by Township of North Brunswick Volunteer Emergency
Services, i.e., the Firehouse and First Aid and Rescue Squad;
(b) ERR Zone (Education-Recreation-Research District Zone);
(c) I-1, I-2 Zones (Industrial District Zones) and O-R Zone (Office
Research District Zone);
(d) C-2 Zone (General Commercial District Zone); and
(e) Nonresidential element of a mixed-use zone district, e.g., PUD,
PUD-1, PUD-2, TMU Zones.
§ 205-163 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-164
198:932
§ 205-165. Development standards for permitted use locations.
§ 205-166. Development standards for conditional uses at priority
locations; additional submission requirements.
(2) Any applicant desiring to place PWTFs and PWTEFs as a
conditional use upon lands designated in Subsection B hereinabove
must demonstrate to the Planning Board why the applicant was
unable to locate the PWTFs and PWTEFs as either permitted uses
or upon the preferred highest priority locations.
C. No construction permitted. There shall be no construction or placement
of PWTFs or PWTEFs within the following zones:
(1) Any residential zone; and
(2) G-O Zone (General Office District Zone) or C-1 Zone (Neighborhood
Commercial District Zone).
A. The location of personal wireless communication antennas on or within
permitted use areas as set forth in § 205-164A of this article shall be
considered a permitted use and shall require site plan review and
approval of an application submitted to the Planning Board of the
Township of North Brunswick in accordance with this article.
B. In addition to the information customarily required for site plans as
identified on the Township's site plan application checklist, the
applicant shall provide the following information to the Planning Board
of the Township of North Brunswick:
(1) Any proposed structural modification to the existing
telecommunications tower, tank, cupola, i.e., identified structure,
that is necessary to accommodate the proposed antennas;
(2) The proposed location and landscape screening of any shelters
enclosing the related electronic equipment;
(3) Any other construction that may be proposed or required regarding
the installation of the proposed antennas; and
(4) The height of any proposed antenna attached to an existing
structure, provided that no antennas shall extend higher than 10
feet above the height of the existing structure.
A. Any proposed telecommunications tower, antennas and related
equipment for priority locations shall require both conditional use
approval in accordance with § 205-164B of this article and site plan
approval as set forth herein.
B. The following information shall be submitted for conditional use
approval and site plan approval and shall incorporate the specific
conditions, standards and limitations for PWTFs and PWTEFs in priority
locations within the Township of North Brunswick:
§ 205-164 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-166
198:933
§ 205-167. Overall comprehensive plan.
(1) In order to be determined complete for site plan approval, the
initially submitted application shall include all of the applicable
documentation and items of information identified on the
Township's site plan application checklists or request variances or
waivers therefrom.
(2) In order to be determined complete, the application shall include
an overall comprehensive plan in accordance with § 205-167 of this
article set forth hereinbelow.
(3) In order to be determined complete, the plan shall indicate
conformance with all of the area, height and setback standards set
forth in § 205-168 hereinbelow of this article or request variances
or waivers therefrom.
(4) In order to be determined complete, the plan shall indicate
conformance with each of the site design standards set forth in
§ 205-169 of this article hereinbelow or request variances and
waivers therefrom.
(5) In order to be determined complete, the plan shall indicate
conformance with each of the conditional use standards set forth in
§ 205-170 of this article hereinbelow or request variances and
waivers therefrom.
(6) A visual sight distance analysis shall be prepared by the applicant
and submitted in advance to the appropriate land use agency and
at the public hearing graphically simulating the appearance of the
proposed telecommunications tower, with at least three antenna
arrays attached thereto and from at least 15 locations around and
within one mile of any proposed telecommunications tower where
the telecommunications tower will be the most visible.
(7) The additional site plan submission requirements as set forth in
§ 205-171 of this article hereinbelow.
A. In order to effectuate the purposes, objectives and goals of this article,
any applicant for approval to erect a new telecommunications tower
and appurtenances, i.e., PWTF and PWTEF, for wireless
communications shall provide threshold evidence that the proposed
location of the telecommunications tower and antennas, i.e., PWTF, has
been planned to result in the fewest number of telecommunications
towers or PWTFs within and around the Township of North Brunswick
at the time full service is provided by the applicant.
B. The applicant shall provide an overall comprehensive plan indicating
how it intends to provide full service within and around the Township of
North Brunswick and, to the greatest extent possible, shall indicate
how its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the needs of
§ 205-166 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-167
198:934
§ 205-168. Area, height and setback standards.
all other providers of wireless communication services within and
around the Township.
C. The overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the following and this
information shall be provided at the time of the initial submission of the
application:
(1) The mapped location and written description of all existing and
approved supporting telecommunications towers for all providers
of wireless communication services within one mile of the subject
site, both within and outside the Township of North Brunswick;
(2) The mapped location and written description of all existing or
approved water towers or water standpipes and existing public
utility transmission towers within one mile of the subject site, both
within and outside the Township of North Brunswick;
(3) An explanation of why the proposed antennas cannot be located as
a permitted use pursuant to § 205-164A, or, in the alternative, an
explanation as to why the proposed PWTF and PWTEF cannot be
located within the preferred priority location of higher rank as set
forth in § 205-164B.
(4) An analysis setting forth how the projected location of the proposed
antennas specifically relates to the anticipated need for additional
antennas and supporting structures within and near the Township
of North Brunswick by the applicant and by other providers of
wireless communication services within the Township;
(5) An analysis setting forth how the projected location of the proposed
PWTF and PWTEF specifically relates to the objective of collocating
the antennas of many different providers of wireless
communication services on a single supporting structure; and
(6) An analysis setting forth how the projected location of the proposed
PWTF and PWTEF specifically relates to the overall objective of
providing adequate wireless communication services within the
Township of North Brunswick while, at the same time, limiting the
number of telecommunications towers to the fewest amount
possible, including alternative technologies which do not require
the use of telecommunications towers or require
telecommunications towers of a lesser height.
A. Height standards. PWTFs shall not exceed 150 feet in height. All PWTFs
shall be designed and constructed so that the foundation and lower
structural elements can accommodate extensions for a PWTF of up to
150 feet. PWTFs must be constructed to provide that the height is no
greater than that required to achieve service area requirements and
potential collocation and to comply with the additional setback
§ 205-167 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-168
198:935
§ 205-169. Site design standards.
The following design standards shall apply to PWTFs and PWTEFs installed
or constructed pursuant to the terms of this article:
requirements contained in Subsection B. PWTEFs are limited to 15 feet
in height.
B. All PWTFs located as permitted uses and/or within priority locations
shall be set back a distance equal to 50% of the height of the
telecommunications tower from any adjoining lot line. The placement of
all PWTFs in areas other than as permitted uses or within priority
locations shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district in which they are located, provided that the
prevailing setback in the applicable zone be increased by one foot for
every one foot of telecommunications tower height which is in excess of
the height permitted according to the applicable zone.
C. PWTEFs shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory
structures pursuant to the zone in which said PWTEFs are located.
D. If PWTEFs are located on the roof of a building, the area of the PWTEFs
and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 25% of
the roof area.
A. Collocation. Land Use Ordinance limitations on the number of
structures on a lot shall not apply when PWTFs and PWTEFs are located
on a lot with buildings or structures already on it.
B. Shelters and equipment sheds. Individual shelters for the required
electronic equipment related to wireless communications antennas
shall be permitted, provided that:
(1) Any proposed shelter enclosing required electronic equipment
shall not be more than 15 feet in height nor more than 250 square
feet in area, and only one such shelter or equipment shed shall be
permitted for each provider of wireless communication services
located on a site;
(2) No electronic equipment shall interfere with any public safety
communications;
(3) The building shall possess one light at the entrance to the building,
provided that said light is attached to the building, is focused
downward and is switched so that the light is turned on only when
workers are at the building.
C. Fencing and other safety devices. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be
surrounded by a security feature, such as a fence. All
telecommunications towers shall be designed with anti-climbing
devices in order to prevent unauthorized access. Additional safety
§ 205-168 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-169
198:936
devices shall be permitted or required, as needed, and as approved by
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
D. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the
security fence to provide a visual screen and buffer for adjoining private
properties and the public right-of-way. Required front yard setback
areas shall be landscaped. All PWTEFs shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge eight feet to 10 feet in height at planting time and a
solid fence eight feet in height in order to effectively screen the view of
the equipment compound during all four seasons of the year. The
landscaping plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect,
who shall present testimony to the Planning Board regarding the
adequacy of the plan to screen the equipment compound from view and
to enhance the appearance of the building. Any newly planted
evergreen trees shall be at least eight feet high at time of planting.
E. Signs. Signs shall not be permitted, except for signs displaying owner
contact information, warnings, equipment information, and safety
instructions. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. No
commercial advertising shall be permitted on any PWTF or PWTEF.
F. Color. PWTFs shall be of a color appropriate to the telecommunications
tower's locational context and to make it as unobtrusive as possible,
unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
G. Activity and access. All equipment shall be designed and automated to
the greatest extent possible in order to reduce the need for on-site
maintenance and thereby to minimize the need for vehicular trips to
and from the site. Access shall be from established site access points
whenever possible. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as
needed and as approved by the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment.
H. Dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be colored, camouflaged or
screened to make them as unobtrusive as possible, and in no case shall
the diameter of a dish antenna exceed six feet.
I. Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
(1) PWTEFs enclosing electronic equipment may have security and
safety lighting at the entrance, provided that the light is attached
to the facility, is focused downward and is on timing devices and/or
sensors so that the light is turned off when not needed for safety or
security purposes; and
(2) No lighting is permitted on a PWTF except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties.
§ 205-169 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-169
198:937
§ 205-170. Conditional use standards.
In applying these standards, locations in a higher priority location category,
pursuant to § 205-164B descending rank, shall be deemed more acceptable
than lower priority sites.
J. Monopole. Any proposed new telecommunications tower shall be a
monopole. Such telecommunications towers may employ camouflage
technology.
K. Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in excess
of the limits set by the local noise ordinance, except for in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator.
L. Radio frequency emissions. The FTA gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of
the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emission, and PWTFs
which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the
basis of RF impacts. Applicants shall provide current FCC information
concerning PWTFs and radio frequency emission standards. PWTFs
shall be required to provide information on the projected power density
of the proposed facility and how this meets the FCC standards.
M. Structural integrity. PWTFs must be constructed to the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/
TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent),
as it may be updated or amended.
N. Maintenance. PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their continued
structural integrity. The owner of the PWTF shall also perform such
other maintenance of the structure and of the site so as to assure that it
does not create a visual nuisance.
A. Height standards. PWTFs shall not exceed 150 feet in height. All PWTFs
shall be designed and constructed so that the foundation and lower
structural elements can accommodate extensions for a PWTF of up to
150 feet. PWTFs must be constructed to provide that the height is no
greater than required to achieve service area requirements and
potential collocation and to comply with the additional setback
requirements contained in § 205-168B. PWTEFs are limited to 15 feet in
height.
B. All PWTFs located as permitted uses and/or within priority locations
shall be set back a distance equal to 50% of the height of the
telecommunications tower from any adjoining lot line. The placement of
all PWTFs in areas other than as permitted uses or within priority
locations shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district in which they are located, provided that the
prevailing setback in the applicable zone be increased by one foot for
every one foot of telecommunications tower height which is in excess of
the height permitted according to the applicable zone.
§ 205-169 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-170
198:938
§ 205-171. Additional site plan submission requirements.
In addition to the applicable documentation and items of information
required for site plan approval, the following additional documentation and
items of information are required to be submitted to the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment for review and approval as part of the site plan
submission:
C. Any proposed new telecommunications tower shall be a monopole and
may employ camouflage technology.
D. The applicant shall provide a letter of intent, in a form to be reviewed
and approved by the Township Planning Board Attorney or Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, as applicable, which warrants and
represents that the applicant shall share the use of its PWTFs/PWTEFs
with any other approved cellular communication services providers at
fair market value. Such collocation requirement shall be a material
condition of approval.
E. PWTEFs should be located to avoid being visually solitary or prominent
when viewed from residential areas and the public ways. The facility
should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover, topographic features and/
or other structures to the maximum extent feasible and in accordance
with the landscaping requirements of § 205-168B.
F. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be placed to ensure that historically
significant viewscapes, streetscapes, and landscapes are protected. The
views of and vistas from architecturally and/or significant structures
should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of
telecommunications facilities.
A. Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the capacity of any
proposed PWTF for the number and type of antennas.
B. Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed PWTF will have
sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antennas and the
anticipated future collocated antennas and that the structural
standards developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunications Industry Association
(TIA) have been met.
C. A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is reviewed and
approved by the Township Attorney, indicating that the applicant will
share the use of any PWTF with other approved providers of wireless
communication services.
D. A letter from applicant agreeing that any PWTF or PWTEF not used for
its intended and approved purpose for a period of six months shall be
deemed "no longer operative" and shall be removed by the responsible
party within 60 days thereof.
§ 205-170 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-171
198:939
§ 205-172. Removal of abandoned PWTFs and PWTEFs.
§ 205-173. Nonconforming PWTFs.
PWTFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this article, which do not
comply with the requirements of this article (nonconforming PWTFs), are
subject to the following provisions:
E. A site location alternative analysis describing the location of other sites
considered, the availability of those sites, the extent to which other
sites do or do not meet the providers' service or engineering needs, and
the reason why the subject site was chosen, pursuant to the
requirements set forth in § 205-63E.
A. Any PWTF or PWTEF that is not operated for a continuous period of six
months shall be deemed abandoned or "not in use." If there are two or
more users of a single PWTF or PWTEF, then the abandonment shall not
become effective until all users cease using the PWTF or PWTEF for a
continuous period of six months. The owner(s) of such PWTF or PWTEF
shall remove same within 60 days of notice from the Zoning Officer that
the PWTF or PWTEF is abandoned. If such PWTF or PWTEF is not
removed within said 60 days, the municipality may remove such PWTF
or PWTEF at the owner's expense. If the facility is to be retained, the
provider(s) shall establish that the facility will be reused within one
year of such discontinuance. If a facility is not reused within one year, a
demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility removed. At the
discretion of the Zoning Officer, upon good cause shown, the six-month
reuse period may be extended for a period not to exceed one additional
year.
B. The applicant (and the landowner in the instance of a leased property)
shall provide a performance bond and/or other assurances satisfactory
to and in a form to be approved by the Township Attorney that will
cause the antennas, any supporting telecommunications tower, the
electronic equipment cabinets and building enclosing the electronic
equipment shelters and all other ancillary related improvements
related to the land to be removed, at no cost to the Township, when the
antennas are no longer operative.
A. Nonconforming PWTFs may continue in use for the purpose now used,
but may not be expanded without complying with this article.
B. Nonconforming PWTFs which are partially damaged or destroyed, i.e.,
less than 50%, due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
to their former use, location and physical dimensions subject to
obtaining a building permit therefor, but without otherwise complying
with this article. If this destruction is greater than partial, i.e., more
than 50%, then repair or restoration will require compliance with this
article.
§ 205-171 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-173
198:940
§ 205-174. Other requirements.
All other applicable requirements of this article not contrary to the
conditions, standards and limitations specified herein shall be met, but
waivers and/or variances of such other applicable requirements may be
granted at the discretion of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 205-175. Technical review.
In addition to its normal professional staff, given the technical and
specialized nature of the testimony be provided by the applicant's radio
frequency expert(s), the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
may, at applicant's sole cost and expense, hire its own radio frequency
expert to review and comment on testimony presented by the applicant. The
Planning Board, or Zoning Board of Adjustment, may employ experts with
specialized areas of expertise if deemed necessary, the cost of which shall
be at the applicant's expense.
C. The owner of any nonconforming PWTF may repair, rebuild and/or
upgrade (but not expand) such PWTF or increase its height or reduce
its setbacks) in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility,
to allow the facility to accommodate collocated antennas or facilities, to
upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or
communications standards without having to conform to the provisions
of this article.
§ 205-173 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-175
198:941

ARTICLE XXXIX
Steep Slopes
[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-18]
§ 205-176. Scope and purpose.
§ 205-177. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to new development or land disturbance on
a steep slope within the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 205-178. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements on
areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as measured over
any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two feet or less.
§ 205-179. Designation of areas.
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
A. The purpose of this article is to regulate the intensity of use in areas of
steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water and to maintain
the natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
B. Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes
from stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of
waterbodies with the associated degradation of water quality and loss
of aquatic life support. Related effects include soil loss, changes in
natural topography and drainage patterns, increased flooding potential,
further fragmentation of forest and habitat areas, and compromised
aesthetic values. It has become widely recognized that disturbance of
steep slopes should be restricted or prevented based on the impact
disturbance of steep slopes can have on water quality and quantity, and
the environmental integrity of landscapes.
§ 205-176 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-179
198:943
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot rise
over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a one-andone-
half-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent
slope; a two-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a twentypercent
slope.
§ 205-180. Steep slope limits.
For steep slopes any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
§ 205-181. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces.
B. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare,
such as necessary linear development with no feasible alternative; to
provide an environmental benefit, such as remediation of a
contaminated site; or, to prevent an extraordinary and exceptional
situation uniquely affecting a specific property that would create a
hardship affecting the property, preventing a minimum economically
viable use of the affected property based upon reasonable investment,
provided that the hardship was not created by the property owner, for
example, redevelopment, within the footprint of existing impervious
cover should be allowed to support efforts to revitalize development
that has fallen into disrepair.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not located in
areas with a twenty-percent or greater slope.
A. A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of
the Township of North Brunswick, of any person or entity believed to be
in violation hereof. If upon inspection, a condition which is in violation
of this article is discovered, a civil action in the Special Civil Part of the
Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is
injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the
Special Civil Part, may be commenced by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
preclude the right of the Township of North Brunswick, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to
this article. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains,
or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not
§ 205-179 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-181
198:944
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day in which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation or offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Township of North Brunswick from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 205-181 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-181
198:945

ARTICLE XL
Riparian Zones
[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-17]
§ 205-182. Intent and purpose.
A. The governing body of the Township of North Brunswick finds that
riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes, or other surface water bodies
that are adequately vegetated provide an important environmental
protection and water resource management benefit. It is necessary to
protect and maintain the beneficial character of riparian areas by
implementing specifications for the establishment, protection, and
maintenance of vegetation along the surface water bodies within the
jurisdiction of the Township of North Brunswick, consistent with the
interest of landowners in making reasonable economic use of parcels of
land that include such designated areas. The purpose of this article is to
designate riparian zones, and to provide for land use regulation therein
in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other surface water bodies of
the Township of North Brunswick and to comply with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(G)3 which requires municipalities to adopt regulations to
protect the water quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other
significant water resources within the Township of North Brunswick; to
protect the riparian and aquatic ecosystems of the Township of North
Brunswick; to provide for the environmentally sound use of the land
resources of the Township of North Brunswick, and to complement
existing state, regional, county, and municipal stream corridor
protection and management regulations and initiatives.
B. The specific purpose and intent of this article is to:
(1) Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the water resources of the Township of North
Brunswick;
(2) Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as well
as biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification,
which occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed through
vegetated buffers as stable, distributed flow prior to reaching
receiving waters;
(3) Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
(4) Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves and
twigs) and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that provide food
and habitat for aquatic organisms (insects, amphibians,
crustaceans, and small fish), which are essential to maintain the
food chain;
§ 205-182 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-182
198:947
§ 205-183. Statutory authority.
The Township of North Brunswick is empowered to regulate land uses
under the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate
land use in order to protect public health, safety and welfare by protecting
and maintaining native vegetation in riparian areas. The Township of North
Brunswick is also empowered to adopt and implement this article under
provisions provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of
New Jersey:
§ 205-184. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acidproducing
soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment or Construction Office with all of the powers delegated,
assigned, or assumed by them according to statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
(5) Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms;
(6) Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
(7) Control downstream flooding; and
(8) Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources, e.g., headwater areas, ground water recharge zones,
floodways, floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, and
prime wildlife habitats.
A. Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
B. Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
C. Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23 et seq.
D. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
E. Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 205-182 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-184
198:948
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this article, and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated riparian zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS OR C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
CATEGORY TWO WATERS OR C2 WATERS — Those waters not designated
as Outstanding Natural Resource waters or Category One waters in the
Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B, for purposes of
implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in those standards.
FLOODWAY — Shall have the meaning ascribed to this term by the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and regulations
promulgated there under published at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq., and any
supplementary or successor legislation and regulations from time to time
enacted or promulgated.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys.
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys, that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water Resource
Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes, ponds,
§ 205-184 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-184
198:949
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan approved by the Engineer
of the Township of North Brunswick. The plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, professional engineer or other qualified professional,
and shall evaluate the effects of any proposed activity/uses on any riparian
zone. The plan shall identify existing conditions, all proposed activities, and
all proposed management techniques, including any measures necessary to
offset disturbances to any affected riparian zone.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA OR SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY OR BODIES — Any perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any
regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-2.2, or state open waters identified in a Letter of Interpretation issued
under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land
Use Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 205-185. Establishment of riparian zones.
A. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected
from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed. This includes Special
Water Resource Protection Areas or SWRPAs as defined herein and
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys
within the associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
§ 205-184 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-185
198:950
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the surface water body;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the surface water body; and
(d) Any segment of a surface water body flowing through an area
that contains acid-producing soils.
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high waterline; and
(4) Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a definable channel, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline.
C. Where slopes (in excess of 15%) are located within the designated
widths, the riparian zone shall be extended to include the entire
distance of this sloped area to a maximum of 300 feet.
D. For areas adjacent to surface water bodies for which the floodway has
been delineated per the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-3 or the state's adopted floodway delineations, the riparian zone
shall cover the entire floodway area, or the area described in
§ 205-185A(1) or (2), Establishment of riparian zones, above, whichever
area has the greatest extent. Requests for alterations to the adopted
delineations can be provided to the New Jersey Department of
§ 205-185 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-185
198:951
Environmental Protection for consideration if site specific information
is available.
E. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning districts. The
provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full force except
where the provisions of the riparian zone differ from the provisions of
the underlying district, in which case the provision that is more
restrictive shall apply. These provisions apply to land disturbances
resulting from or related to any activity or use requiring application for
any of the following permits or approvals:
(1) Building permit.
(2) Zoning variance.
(3) Special exception.
(4) Conditional use.
(5) Subdivision/land development approval.
F. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to the Township of North
Brunswick in conjunction with an application for a construction permit,
subdivision, land development, or other improvement that requires plan
submissions or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to
review and approval by the Department of Community Development,
the Municipal Engineer, governing body, or any appointed
representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
G. Exemptions. Instead of the riparian zone protection requirements
above, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with one of the
following:
(1) The proposed project or activity is not in the riparian zone
established at § 205-185, Establishment of riparian zones, above;
(2) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route. If the riparian zone
is associated with Category One waters, the linear development
must also meet the requirements for Special Water Resource
Protection Areas under the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h);
(3) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in accordance with a
stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or
project approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
(4) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary to provide
for public pedestrian access or water dependent recreation that
§ 205-185 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-185
198:952
§ 205-186. Permitted uses.
meets the requirements of the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:7E;
(5) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or Federal oversight
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq. or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 9601 et seq.;
(6) The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does not
exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces.
(7) The proposed disturbance would prevent extraordinary hardship
on the property owner peculiar to the property; or prevent
extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not created by
the property owner, that would not permit a minimum economically
viable use of the property based upon reasonable investment; and/
or
(8) Demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed development
and topography that new disturbance is not located in areas with a
twenty-percent or greater slope, except as allowed under
§ 205-185G(6) and (7) above.
A. For riparian zones in Category One waters (C1 waters), permitted uses
are governed by the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13,
unless otherwise exempt.
B. Any other riparian zone area shall remain in a natural condition or, if in
a disturbed condition, including agricultural activities, at the time of
adoption of this article may be restored to a natural condition. There
shall be no clearing or cutting of trees and brush, except for removal of
dead trees and vegetation and pruning for reasons of public safety or
for the replacement of invasive species with indigenous species. There
shall be no altering of watercourses, dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill,
vegetative or other debris, regrading or construction. The following
uses are permitted either by right or after review and approval by the
municipality in riparian zones. No new construction, development, use,
activity, encroachment, or structure shall take place in a riparian zone,
except as specifically authorized in this section. The following uses shall
be permitted within a riparian zone:
(1) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone, provided near
§ 205-185 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-186
198:953
§ 205-187. Performance standards.
stream vegetation is preserved. These uses do not require approval
by the Zoning Officer or compliance with an approved riparian
zone management plan. Such uses include wildlife sanctuaries,
nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas, game farms, fish
hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated for the protection and
propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures. Such uses also
include passive recreation areas of public and private parklands,
including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, provided that
said trails have been stabilized with pervious materials.
(2) Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer, to
the extent required by applicable law, rule or regulation.
(3) Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails, roads,
railroads, stormwater lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines and
public utility transmission lines, provided that the land disturbance
is the minimum required to accomplish the permitted use, subject
to approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, provided that any
applicable state permits are acquired, and provided that any
disturbance is offset by buffer improvements in compliance with an
approved riparian zone management plan and that the area of the
crossing is stabilized against significant erosion due to its use as a
crossing.
(4) Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conform
to the guidelines of an approved riparian zone management plan,
or wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, subject to
approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and subject to
compliance with an approved riparian zone management plan.
A. All encroachments proposed into riparian zones in C1 waters shall
comply with the requirements of the Stormwater Management Rule at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, and shall be subject to review and approval by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
B. For all other riparian zones, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be
designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the riparian zone to
accommodate primary structures, any normal accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
(2) Portions of lots within the riparian zone must be permanently
restricted by deed or conservation easement held by the Township
of North Brunswick, its agent, or another public or private land
conservation organization which has the ability to provide
adequate protection to prevent adverse impacts within the riparian
§ 205-186 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-187
198:954
zone. A complete copy of the recorded conservation restriction
that clearly identifies the deed book and pages where it has been
recorded in the office of the clerk of the applicable county or the
registrar of deeds and mortgages of the applicable county must be
submitted to the municipality. The applicant shall not commence
with the project or activity prior to making this submittal and
receiving actual approval of the plan modification and receipt of
any applicable permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. The recorded conservation restriction
shall be in the form approved by the municipality and shall run
with the land and be binding upon the property owner and the
successors in interest in the property or in any part thereof. The
conservation restriction may include language reserving the right
to make de minims changes to accommodate necessary regulatory
approvals upon the written consent of the municipality, provided
such changes are otherwise consistent with the purpose and intent
of the conservation restriction. The recorded conservation
restriction shall, at a minimum, include:
(a) A written narrative of the authorized regulated activity, date of
issuance, and date of expiration, and the conservation
restriction that, in addition, includes all of the prohibitions set
forth at N.J.S.A. 13:8B-2b(1) through (7);
(b) Survey plans for the property as a whole and, where
applicable, for any additional properties subject to the
conservation restrictions. Such survey plans shall be submitted
on the surveyor's letterhead, signed and sealed by the
surveyor, and shall include metes and bounds descriptions of
the property, the site, and the areas subject to the conservation
restriction in New Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North
American Datum 1983, and shall depict the boundaries of the
site and all areas subject to the conservation restriction as
marked with flags or stakes onsite. All such survey plans shall
be submitted on paper and in a digital CAD or GIS file on media
and in a format defined by the municipality. The flags or stakes
shall be numbered and identified on the survey plan; and
(c) A copy or copies of deeds for the property as a whole that
indicate the deed book and pages where it has been recorded
in the office of the clerk of the applicable county or the
registrar of deeds and mortgages of the applicable county.
(3) Any lands proposed for development which include all or a portion
of a riparian zone shall as a condition of any major subdivision or
major site plan approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation
of any portions of the riparian zone which are not vegetated at the
time of the application or which were disturbed by prior land uses,
including for agricultural use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize
native and noninvasive tree and plant species to the maximum
extent practicable in accordance with an approved riparian zone
§ 205-187 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-187
198:955
§ 205-188. Nonconforming structures and uses.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the riparian zone are
subject to the following requirements:
management plan, described in § 205-191, Riparian zone
management plan.
(4) For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this
article, but for which a building permit or a preliminary site plan
approval has not been obtained or is no longer valid, the required
minimum front, side, and rear setbacks may extend into the
riparian zone, provided that a deed restriction and/or conservation
easement is applied which prohibits clearing or construction in the
riparian zone.
(5) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow through
a riparian zone and shall comply with the standard for off-site
stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (see N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.)
(6) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a riparian
zone cannot comply with the standard for off-site stability cited in
§ 205-187B(5), Performance, standards, then the proposed
stabilization measures must meet the requirements of the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et seq., and
have an approved flood hazard area permit.
A. Legally existing but nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued.
B. Any proposed enlargement or expansion of the building footprint within
the riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply with the standards in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all other riparian zones:
(1) Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred and shall be in
conformance with the Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8,
and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
(2) Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the riparian
zone as a result of encroachments where previous development or
disturbances have occurred.
(3) Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time within
one year from such discontinuance but not thereafter when
showing clear indications of abandonment. No change or
resumption shall be permitted that is more detrimental to the
§ 205-187 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-188
198:956
§ 205-189. Prohibited uses.
§ 205-190. Activities permitted in the case of no reasonable or
prudent alternative or extreme hardship.
riparian zone, as measured against the intent and purpose under
§ 205-182, Intent and purpose, than the existing or former
nonconforming use. This one-year time frame shall not apply to
agricultural uses that are following prescribed best management
practices for crop rotation. However, resumption of agricultural
uses must be strictly confined to the extent of disturbance existing
at the time of adoption of this article.
A. Any use within a riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply with the
standards in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h)
and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
B. For other riparian zones, any use or activity not specifically authorized
in § 205-186, Permitted uses, or § 205-188, Nonconforming structures
and uses, shall be prohibited within the riparian zone. By way of
example, the following activities and facilities are prohibited:
(1) Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation
removal for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization or
restoration projects that require vegetation removal or grading
prior to implementation.
(2) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
(3) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of
the Soil Conservation District.
(4) Roads or driveways, except where permitted in compliance with
§ 205-186, Permitted uses.
(5) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as permitted by
this article.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Any type of permanent structure, except structures needed for a
use permitted by § 205-186, Permitted uses.
(8) New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The expansion and
replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal system areas
for existing uses is permitted.
(9) Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise permitted
pursuant to this article.
§ 205-188 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-190
198:957
A. For riparian zones in C1 waters, requests for exemptions must be
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
as per the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
B. For other riparian zones, hardship variances may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in cases of a preexisting lot (existing at the
time of adoption of this article) when there is insufficient room outside
the riparian zone for uses permitted by the underlying zoning and there
is no other reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in the
riparian zone, including obtaining variances from setback or other
requirements that would allow conformance with the riparian zone
requirements, and provided the following demonstrations are made:
(1) An applicant shall be deemed to have established the existence of
an extreme economic hardship, if the subject property is not
capable of yielding a reasonable economic return if its present use
is continued or if it is developed in accordance with provisions of
this article, and that this inability to yield a reasonable economic
return results from unique circumstances peculiar to the subject
property which:
(a) Do not apply to or affect other property in the immediate
vicinity;
(b) Relate to or arise out of the characteristics of the subject
property because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the property involved,
rather than the personal situations of the applicant; and are
not the result of any action or inaction by the applicant or the
owner or his predecessors in title.
(c) The necessity of acquiring additional land to locate
development outside the riparian zone shall not be considered
an economic hardship unless the applicant can demonstrate
that there is no adjacent land that is reasonably available or
could be obtained, utilized, expanded or managed in order to
fulfill the basic purpose of the proposed activity.
(2) An applicant shall be deemed to have established compelling public
need if the applicant demonstrates, based on specific facts that one
of the following applies:
(a) The proposed project will serve an essential public health or
safety need;
(b) The proposed use is required to serve an existing public health
or safety need; or
(c) There is no alternative available to meet the established public
health or safety need.
§ 205-190 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-190
198:958
§ 205-191. Riparian zone management plan.
(3) A variance can only be granted if it is shown that the activity is in
conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations, including but not limited to the Stormwater
Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and that the exception granted is
the minimum relief necessary to relieve the hardship.
(4) If such an exception or variance is granted, the applicant shall
rehabilitate an environmentally degraded riparian zone area within
or adjacent to the same site, and at least equivalent in size to the
riparian zone reduction permitted, or, if not possible, rehabilitate
or expand a riparian zone area at least equivalent in size within a
nearby site and, if available, within the same watershed.
Rehabilitation shall include reforestation, stream bank stabilization
and removal of debris, in accordance with a riparian zone
management plan, as described in § 205-191, Riparian zone
management plan, below.
A. Within any riparian zone, no construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of such
development are accompanied by preparation, approval, and
implementation of a riparian zone management plan.
B. Plan contents.
(1) The landowner, applicant, or developer shall submit to the
Department of Community Development, or its appointed
representative including the Township Engineer, a riparian zone
management plan prepared by an environmental professional,
professional engineer or other qualified professional which fully
evaluates the effects of any proposed uses on the riparian zone. The
riparian zone management plan shall identify the existing
conditions including:
(a) Existing vegetation.
(b) Field-delineated surface water bodies.
(c) Field-delineated wetlands.
(d) The one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) Flood Hazard Areas, including floodway and flood fringe areas,
as delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(f) Soil classifications as found on soil surveys.
(g) Existing subdrainage areas of site with HUC (Hydrologic Unit
Code) 14 designations.
§ 205-190 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-191
198:959
(h) Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of
slopes less than 15%; above 15% but less than 20%; and steep
slopes greater than 20%.
(2) The proposed plan shall describe all proposed uses/activities, and
fully evaluate the effects of all proposed uses/activities in a riparian
zone, and all proposed management techniques, including
proposed vegetation and any other measures necessary to offset
disturbances to the riparian zone. A discussion of activities
proposed as well as management techniques proposed to offset
disturbances and/or enhance the site to improve the riparian zone's
ability to function effectively as a riparian zone shall also be
included with the riparian zone management plan submittal to the
Township of North Brunswick.
C. The Plan shall be reviewed and subject to approval by the Engineer of
the Township of North Brunswick, in consultation with the
Environmental Commission, as part of the subdivision and land
development process. If the plan submission is not otherwise associated
with a Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment application then
an escrow amount must be established in an amount recommended by
the Engineer and approved by the Department of Community
Development.
D. The riparian zone management plan must include management
provisions in narrative and/or graphic form specifying:
(1) The manner in which the area within the riparian zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
(2) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the riparian
zone, as applicable.
(3) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to be
necessary, in order to maintain and manage the riparian zone.
(4) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground cover,
understory shrubs, and trees that when fully mature, will form an
overhead canopy. Vegetation selected must be native, noninvasive
species, and consistent with the soil, slope and moisture conditions
of the site. The revegetation plan shall be prepared by a qualified
environmental professional, landscape architect, or professional
engineer, and shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer of the
Township of North Brunswick, in consultation with the
Environmental Commission. Dominant vegetation in the riparian
zone management plan shall consist of plant species that are suited
to the riparian zone environment. The Engineer of the Township of
North Brunswick may require species suitability to be verified by
qualified experts from the Soil Conservation District, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, New Jersey Department of
§ 205-191 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-191
198:960
§ 205-192. Boundary interpretation; appeals procedures.
Environmental Protection, United States Fish and Wildlife Service
and/or state or federal forest agencies.
E. A riparian zone management plan is not required where the riparian
zone is not being disturbed and conservation easements/deed
restrictions are applied to ensure there will be no future clearing or
disturbance of the riparian zone.
F. Performance of the riparian zone management plan shall be guaranteed
for two years by a surety, such as a bond, cash or letter of credit, in an
amount determined by the Municipal Engineer, and which shall be
provided to the Township of North Brunswick prior to the Township of
North Brunswick issuing any permits or approving any uses relating to
the applicable use or activity.
A. When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of a riparian
zone, or the defined bank-full flow or level, the landowner or applicant
shall submit evidence to Department of Community Development or its
appointed representative, including the Township Engineer, that
describes the riparian zone, presents the landowner or applicant's
proposed riparian zone delineation, and presents all justification for the
proposed boundary change, including but not limited to, a verification
issued under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-6, or an approval from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to encroach within the Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) of a C1 water pursuant to the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h)lii.
B. Within 45 days of a complete submission of materials pursuant to
§ 205-192, Boundary interpretation; appeals procedures, above, the
appointed representative of the Department of Community
Development shall evaluate all material submitted and shall make a
written determination, a copy of which shall be submitted to the
Department of Community Development, the Township Engineer, the
Zoning Officer and the landowner or applicant. Failure to act within the
forty-five-day period shall not be interpreted to be an approval of the
proposed boundary change.
C. Any party aggrieved by any such determination or other decision or
determination under may appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
under the provisions of this article. The party contesting the location of
the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any
such appeal.
D. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment under this article may appeal to the Township
Council of the Township of North Brunswick. The party contesting the
determination or decision shall have the burden of proof in case of any
such appeal.
§ 205-191 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 205-193
198:961
§ 205-193. Inspections.
§ 205-194. Enforcement.
A. Lands within or adjacent to an identified riparian zone shall be
inspected by the appointed representative of the Department of
Community Development, which may include the Municipal Engineer or
other Township officials, when:
(1) A subdivision or land development plan or application is submitted.
(2) A building permit is requested.
(3) A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is proposed.
(4) A discontinued nonconforming use is resumed more than a year
later, as described in § 205-188, Nonconforming structures and
uses.
B. The riparian zone may also be inspected periodically by representatives
from the Township of North Brunswick if excessive or potentially
problematic erosion is present, other problems are discovered, or at
any time when the presence of an unauthorized activity or structure is
brought to the attention of municipal officials or when the downstream
surface waters are indicating reduction in quality.
A. A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of
the Township of North Brunswick, of any person or entity believed to be
in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation
of this article is discovered, a civil action in the Special Civil Part of the
Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is
injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the
Special Civil Part, may be commenced by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
preclude the right of the Township of North Brunswick, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to
this article. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 205-193 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 205-194
198:962
Chapter 212
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 116.
Barbershops and beauty parlors — See Ch.
123.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 143.
Coin-operated dry-cleaning
establishments — See Ch. 157.
Exhibitions, shows, theatrical places — See
Ch. 168.
Hawking and peddling — See Ch. 188.
Meat packaging and labeling — See Ch. 222.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 311.
Coin-operated vending machines — See Ch.
342.
Wreckers — See Ch. 356.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 416.
§ 212-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "General Licensing
Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick."
§ 212-2. Scope. [Amended 7-21-1958]
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other ordinances except those
specifically repealed. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction or
license fee upon persons, premises or personal property than is imposed or
required by such existing provisions of other ordinances, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
§ 212-3. Definitions.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
BUSINESS — Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, commercial
enterprises and establishments and all other kinds of commercial
activities, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and
appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private
profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises of the
Township or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. All professions
§ 205-194 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 212-3
198:963
§ 212-4. License required; consistency with business description on
application. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to conduct or
carry on a business or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises,
machine or device in whole or in part for which a license is required by
licensed by the State of New Jersey are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.[Amended 7-21-1958; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14]
INSIGNIA or INSIGNE — Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any
other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection
with any license fee.
LICENSE or LICENSEE — As used generally herein, includes
respectively the words "permit" or "permittee" or the holder for any
use or period of time of any similar privilege wherever relevant to any
provision of this chapter or other ordinances.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Township of
North Brunswick.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitalia, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
part of the nipple and areola; the exposure of any device, costume or
covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic
hair, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any
device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female
breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of
nipples and/or areola.[Added 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6]
PERSON — Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures or corporations, or any officers, agents, employees, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity
acting either for himself or for any other person under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES — Includes all the structures, places and also the equipment
and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise
used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
READILY PERISHABLE FOODS — Any food or beverage or ingredients
consisting in whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat,
fish, poultry or other food capable of supporting rapid and progressive
growth of microorganisms which can cause food infections or food
intoxication. However, products in hermetically sealed containers
processed by heat to prevent spoilage, and dehydrated, dry or
powdered products so low in moisture content as to preclude
development of microorganisms, are excluded from the terms of this
definition.[Added 7-21-1958]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Brunswick.
§ 212-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 212-4
198:964
any ordinance of this Township without a license having first been procured
therefor and kept in effect at all such times as required by this chapter or
other ordinance of this Township heretofore or hereafter adopted. It shall
also be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct
or carry on a business in this Township in a manner differing from any
description of the business operation contained on the previously submitted
license application or not consistent with the certification contained on the
application for said business license.
§ 212-5. Application for license; change in nature of business;
nudity. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6]
Application for license hereunder, both new and renewal, shall be made to
the Township Clerk of the Township, and such license shall be issued by the
Township Clerk. The change in the nature of the business conducted shall
trigger the requirement of an application for a new license. All applicants
for a license under this chapter shall be required to execute the following
certification contained on the license application form: "The applicant for
this license hereby certifies that the business operation described herein for
which a license is applied for shall not permit any person actually present
in the business premises to appear in a state of nudity."
§ 212-6. License fees; licensed uses. [Amended 7-21-1958;
2-6-1961; 5-1-1972; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14; 6-16-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-12; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-30]
A. Term of license. License and/or permit fees shall become payable to the
Township Clerk at the Municipal Building the first day of August in each
year, and all such licenses and/or permits shall expire on the last day of
July the following year, unless otherwise specifically designated on the
license or permit for a shorter term.
B. License/permit fees. All businesses, except those specifically
enumerated below, shall pay a nonrefundable basic annual license
application fee of $50. In addition, all retail operations, entertainment
and recreational uses and food establishments which exceed 2,000
square feet in floor area devoted to customer use shall pay an additional
license fee of $0.06 for each square foot in excess of 2,000 square feet
which is devoted to customer use. Areas devoted to customer use shall
include, but not be limited to, sales floor space, display areas, checkout
areas, seating and waiting areas and activity participation areas. Those
businesses enumerated below shall pay an annual application and
license fee for licenses or permits in accordance with the fee specified
herein, the first $50 of which shall be nonrefundable: [Amended
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11; 3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01]
§ 212-4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 212-6
198:965
Business Description
Basic Annual
License/Permit Fee
All businesses not classified or enumerated $50
Alcoholic beverage sales (including
restaurant/bars)
$500
Automobile sales $250
Bowling alleys $250
Gasoline/service/repair stations $250
Hotels $250
Massage, bodywork and somatic therapies $500
Movie theaters $250
Mobile foods service (ice cream, hot dog
trucks, including stands and/or wagons)
$150
Limousine services $50
Individual limousines (per vehicle) $10
Taxicab services (owners) $50
Seasonal sales (farm products, trees, wreaths,
etc.)
$25
Sidewalk and tent sales $25
Restaurants and food sales $250
Warehouse/distribution facilities $250
C. Limousine services. [Amended 3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01]
(1) All limousine services that have their principal offices located
within the Township of North Brunswick shall apply to the
Township Clerk’s office for a license to operate in the Township of
North Brunswick. Each limousine service shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-17: 1) file a copy of the required insurance policy with the
Township Clerk; 2) pay a fee of $50 for the limousine business; and
3) pay an additional $10 for each limousine covered under the
required insurance policy, whereupon the Township Clerk shall
issue, in duplicate, a license to operate to the owner of the
limousine service, showing that the owner of the limousine service
has complied with the terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
(2) The license issued by the Township Clerk shall recite the name of
the insurance company, the number and date of the expiration of
the policy, a description of every limousine insured under said
policy, and the registration number of each covered limousine.
(3) Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this chapter to the
contrary, no person lawfully engaged in limousine service on an
intrastate basis between or among political subdivisions within the
§ 212-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 212-6
198:966
State of New Jersey need obtain a license pursuant to this chapter
unless the owner maintains his or her principal place of business
within the Township.
D. Farm produce sales. The sale of farm produce from the premises upon
which it is grown or produced shall be exempt from applying for a
license under this chapter if such sales are made from a store or stand
having less than 200 square feet.
E. Multiple licensing. It shall be and is hereby declared to be the intent of
this chapter that each and every person conducting or carrying on a
business located in the Township or within the jurisdiction of the
Township shall have one license only under this chapter, with the
exception of those businesses which have mechanical amusement
devices or vending machines that sell tobacco products. In these cases
licenses shall be required for the machines in addition to the business
license. It is the further intent of this chapter that the license to be
issued for any business shall be for the principal classification or
business as designated in this section heretofore; however, whenever
any such business may be classified in or subject to two or more
principal classifications, in that event the person conducting said
business shall be licensed for the classification having the higher
license fee.
F. Vending machines. Any person who wishes to have a vending machine
located at his or her place of business located in the Township or within
the jurisdiction of the Township shall obtain a business license and, in
addition, pay a license fee of $50 per annum for each business location
where machines are located, regardless of the number of machines at
each location. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for
sale purposes or coin-operated vending machines of any type beyond
two feet from the structure in which such business activity is carried
out. All businesses operating such vending machines shall post the
business license issued by the Township for each and every such
vending machine in a prominent place at the place of business.
G. Mechanical amusement devices. Any person who wishes to have a
mechanical amusement device located at his or her place of business
located in the Township or within the jurisdiction of the Township shall
obtain a business license and, in addition, pay an initial license fee of
$150 for each new machine and a renewal fee of $100 per annum for
each year thereafter. All businesses operating such mechanical
amusement devices shall post the business license issued by the
Township for each and every such mechanical amusement device in a
prominent place at the place of business.
H. Sidewalk and tent sales. Any person who wishes to have a sidewalk or
tent sale located at his or her place of business located in the Township
or within the jurisdiction of the Township shall obtain a permit therefor
as a temporary use. Such permit for a sidewalk or tent sale shall be
effective for no more than four consecutive days and may not be issued
§ 212-6 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 212-6
198:967
§ 212-7. Application of regulations.
to any one business more than five times in any one calendar year.
Sidewalk and/or tent sales may not commence earlier than 9:00 am.
or continue past sundown. Sidewalk and/or tent sales shall be limited
to goods directly related to and sold on a regular basis by the said
business. Any and all goods displayed in outdoor, sidewalk or tent
displays must be goods that are normally sold at the licensed premises
on a day-to-day basis. Any sale of cut flowers by sidewalk and/or tent
sale may not be undertaken unless the sale of cut flowers is an item for
sale normally sold at the licensed premises on a day-to-day basis and
shall not include live, potted or hanging plants or landscape materials.
Any sale of live, potted or hanging plants or landscape materials by
sidewalk and/or tent sale may not be undertaken unless the sale of
such live, potted or hanging plants or landscape materials are items
for sale normally sold at the licensed premises on a day-to-day basis.
All sidewalk sales must be set up and maintained so that a width of at
least four feet of undisturbed sidewalk area is maintained and that such
sidewalk sale poses no danger to life, health or safety. All items for such
sidewalk sale must be cleared and placed within the place of business
at the close of each business day; there shall be no obstructions left on
the sidewalk at night. Tent sales may not be placed in a parking lot that
would result in a loss of parking spaces or which would interfere with
site circulation or create a danger to life, health or safety.
I. Seasonal sales. Except as set forth in § 212-6D hereinabove, sales of
items such as plants, Christmas trees, cut trees, wreaths, farm
products, pumpkins and cornstalks which take place on a seasonal basis
shall be permitted upon application for a permit therefor. Such permit
shall be effective for a period of six months. Seasonal sales may not be
held in any public right-of-way and must be set up so that such displays
do not result in a loss of parking spaces for more than six weeks, subject
to the review and approval of the Zoning Officer, or interfere with site
circulation or create a danger to life, health or safety.
J. Exemptions. Nonprofit and charitable organizations are exempt from
applying for a license or permit under this chapter, provided that any
such organization abides by all other regulations promulgated
hereunder.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be in
business and thus subject to the requirements of § 212-4 when he does
one act of:
(1) Selling any goods or service;
(2) Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale; or
(3) Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the Township for
business purposes.
§ 212-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 212-7
198:968
§ 212-8. Contents of license.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
§ 212-9. Duties of licensee.
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
Canvassers, solicitors, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants
and itinerant vendors, as defined in the ordinances of the
Township of North Brunswick, shall, however, be governed by
provisions of the ordinances heretofore adopted by the Township
of North Brunswick providing for the regulating and licensing of
such business activities.173 [Amended 7-21-1958]
B. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing
business in this Township shall be personally responsible for the
compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent
under this chapter.
C. No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the
Township of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from
such person at his regular place of business outside the Township
where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions
of this chapter.
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which said business
is to be conducted.
B. The kind and address of each business so licensed.
C. The amount of license fee therefor.
D. The date of expiration thereof.
A. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business by public authorities
so authorized by law.
B. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
C. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions
which do or may affect public health, morals or welfare.
D. Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times.
E. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection with a licensed motor
vehicle on the inside of the windshield of the vehicle or as may be
otherwise prescribed by law.
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Canvassing and Soliciting, and Ch. 188, Hawking and
Peddling.
§ 212-7 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 212-9
198:969
§ 212-10. Purpose of fees. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14]
The fees herein imposed for such licenses are imposed for administration,
revenue, regulation and control.
§ 212-11. License nontransferable; duplicates. [Amended 9-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-14]
§ 212-12. Refund.
No refund shall be made of any license fee paid on account of a cessation of
a business after such license shall have been issued.
§ 212-13. Enforcement. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-30]
The Director of the Department of Community Development, his designee
and/or the Township Police Department are hereby authorized and directed
to execute and enforce all of the terms and regulations promulgated by this
chapter.
§ 212-14. Violations and penalties; notice of violation; revocation of
license. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6; 5-15-2000
by Ord. No. 00-10; 9-15-2003 by Ord. No. 03-33; 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-30; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
Upon a determination by the Township that any person has violated or failed
to comply with the provisions of the chapter, the Township shall immediately
issue a notice of violation to any such person, applicant, licensee or
permitee, affording the individual an opportunity to cure the violation
within 72 hours. In the case of a licensee or permittee who has failed to
apply for and pay for renewal of a license or permit within 30 days of its
renewal date, in addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to this section,
the licensee or permitee shall be required to pay a late fee, in addition to
the license or permit fee, which late fee shall be calculated in an amount
equal to 50% of the cost of the license or permit fee. If the individual,
applicant, licensee or permitee fails to cure the violation, the Township shall
immediately issue a cease and desist order, including a revocation of license
F. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection therewith upon the
outside of any vending machine or device so that it may be seen at all
times.
A. At no time shall a license issued under this chapter be transferrable.
B. In the event that a licensee shall lose or destroy a license or the same
shall have been lost or destroyed, said licensee, upon application to the
Township Clerk, shall be issued a duplicate license in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Township Clerk shall collect a duplicate license fee of $5 prior to
the issuance of any duplicate license to a licensee.
§ 212-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 212-14
198:970
or permit where applicable to the subject premises. Any person violating
or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation of such
violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 212-15. Businesses that allow nudity. [Added 4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-6]
Any business currently licensed under Chapter 212 that permits any person
actually present in the business premises to appear in a state of nudity shall
not conduct business activities or otherwise operate after the effective date
of this section unless it has applied for and received a license issued after
the effective date of this section.
Chapter 213
LIMOUSINES
§ 213-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "License to Operate a
Limousine Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick."
§ 213-2. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other ordinances, including
the General Licensing Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick,
except those specifically repealed. Where this chapter imposes a licensing
fee upon a business that is required to obtain a license and pay a fee under
the provision of any other ordinance, the provisions of both ordinances shall
apply.
§ 213-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" means always mandatory and not
merely directory.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given
herein:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
§ 212-14 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 213-3
198:971
§ 213-4. License to operate required.
No person shall operate a limousine service in any street in this township
without a license to operate issued by a municipality in which the owner has
his principal place of business and without otherwise complying with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq.
§ 213-5. Issuance of license to operate. [Amended 3-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-02]
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating
capacity in no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the
driver, provided that such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity
in excess of four passengers, not including the driver, beyond the
maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not including the
driver, at the time of manufacture. Not included in this definition are
taxicabs, hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting school
children or teachers, or autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Department of Transportation, or interstate auto buses required
by federal or state law or regulations of the Department of
Transportation carrying insurance against loss from liability imposed
by law on account of bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers for hire
by limousines.
PERSON — Any individual copartnership, association, corporation or
joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by
any court whatsoever.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Brunswick.
A. All limousine services that have their principal offices located within the
Township of North Brunswick shall apply to the Township Clerk’s office
for a license to operate in the Township of North Brunswick. Each
limousine service shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-17: 1) file a copy of
the required insurance policy with the Township Clerk; 2) pay a fee of
$50 for the limousine business; and 3) pay an additional $10 for each
limousine covered under the required insurance policy; whereupon the
Township Clerk shall issue, in duplicate, a license to operate to the
owner of the limousine service, showing that the owner of the limousine
service has complied with the terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
B. The license issued by the Township Clerk shall recite the name of the
insurance company, the number and date of the expiration of the policy,
a description of every limousine insured under said policy, and the
registration number of each covered limousine.
§ 213-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 213-5
198:972
§ 213-6. Refund.
No refund shall be made of any license fee paid because of a cessation of a
business alter such license has been issued.174
Chapter 216
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 135. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 184.
§ 216-1. Definitions.
Certain words, as used in this chapter are defined as follows:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or
construction material, but does not include the waste of the preliminary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 9-6-1988]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Added 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
PARK — A park, reservation, recreation center or any other area in the
township owned and used by the township and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
C. The licensure provisions contained in this section are also set forth in
§ 212-16, entitled, "License fees; licensed uses," of the Township Code.
D. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this chapter to the
contrary, no person lawfully engaged in limousine service on an
intrastate basis between or among political subdivisions within the
State of New Jersey need obtain a license pursuant to this chapter
unless the owner maintains his or her principal place of business within
the Township.
174. Editor's Note: Former § 213-7, Other licensing ordinances, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-02.
§ 213-5 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 216-1
198:973
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
used either wholly or in any part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, parking areas
open to the public, alleys and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and public buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, dismantled vehicles, other abandoned personal property and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets, pamphlets,
wrappers, handbills, newspapers and all and any other printed material,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, building
materials and other like materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Brunswick.
§ 216-2. Littering prohibited. [Amended 9-6-1988; 10-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-21]
§ 216-3. Manner of placement in receptacles. [Amended 9-6-1988]
Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be required at the following
public places: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially
zoned areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear quarter
mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public, including
schools, government buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drivein
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; boat-launching areas; and at special events to which the
public is invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
§ 216-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 216-4
198:974
§ 216-4. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream
or any other body of water within the township.
§ 216-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any public place or private property within the township.
§ 216-6. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection. Such owner or person in control of private
property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
§ 216-7. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the township
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 216-8. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the township, whether or not owned by such person.
§ 216-9. Sweeping litter into gutters and streets. [Amended
10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter or street within the
Township any accumulation of litter. Nothing herein recited, however, shall
prevent the disposal of leaves, except that in no instance shall leaves be
placed on any streets, gutters or public right-of-way within the Township,
except in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 184, Solid Waste, §
184-5, Collection procedures and policies, Subsection F, Leaves, of the Code
of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 216-10. Responsibility for keeping premises litter free.
Persons owning or occupying a place of business or a place of residence
shall keep the sidewalks, entrance walks and parking areas in front of or
upon their premises free of litter.
§ 216-4 HOUSING PRESERVATION AND § 216-11
198:975
§ 216-11. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
township, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 216-11.1. Storage of tires and inoperable or unregistered
vehicles. [Added 9-6-1988]
§ 216-12. Enforcement. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-29]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Township of North Brunswick Police Department, the Department of Public
Works and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services.
All three Township departments are charged with the duty to enforce this
chapter and, to that end, to make and sign complaints for violations in the
Municipal Court of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 216-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $200 or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 219
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 238.
§ 219-1. Loafing and loitering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loaf, loiter, wander or idle in, upon
or about any of the following places in the township without any legitimate
business purpose:
A. The storage of tires in areas zoned residential shall be prohibited
except that tires may be stored in a fully enclosed building or structure,
except on days designated for the collection of tires.
B. The keeping of inoperable or unregistered vehicles on streets, vacant
lots and residential lawns shall be prohibited.
A. Any street, alley, highway, square, park or thoroughfare;
§ 216-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 219-1
219:976
§ 219-2. Proof of refusal to move. [Amended 2-17-1964]
In determining a charge of loafing, loitering, wandering or idling against a
person, it shall be necessary to prove that such person had refused to move
on after being ordered so to do by police authority.
§ 219-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 220
MARRIAGES AND CIVIL UNIONS
§ 220-1. Performance by Mayor.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 37:1-13, the Mayor may perform marriages and civil
unions between such persons as may lawfully enter into the matrimonial
relation or civil union.
§ 220-2. Fees.
Fees for marriages and civil unions performed by the Mayor:
B. Any public grounds or building, railroad or bus station, airport,
poolroom, bowling alley, theater or taxicab stand;
C. Restaurant, cafe, lunchstand, liquor store, tavern, inn, hotel or tourist
cabin;
D. Disorderly houses, gambling houses, assignation houses or places
where intoxicating liquors are known or commonly reputed to be sold;
or to so conduct oneself, individually or in concert with others, in the
use of or upon or in any of the aforementioned places, as to interfere
with the free and uninterrupted use of such places by others lawfully
there.
A. During business hours within the community: $50.
B. Outside business hours within the community: $75.
C. During business hours outside the community: $100.
D. Outside business hours outside the community: $150.
§ 219-1 MARRIAGES AND CIVIL UNIONS § 220-3
220:977
§ 220-3. Availability of Mayor.
Any marriages or civil unions to be performed by the Mayor are and shall
be subject to the Mayor's availability and schedule.
§ 220-4. Reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses; mileage rate.
The Mayor may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by his
performance of marriages and civil unions. Fees for mileage shall be set
at $0.37 per mile. All other costs which are direct cost reimbursement
shall be documented by receipts. Such fees shall be made payable to the
municipality, collected by the Mayor, and deposited in the municipal current
fund. Reimbursement shall be made by the submission of a voucher with
the appropriate documentation, authorization and expenditure from the
appropriate municipal budget line item.
Chapter 221
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 212.
§ 221-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Systems of activity
of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding, applying
pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by manual
technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating skills to
assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic massage, bodywork or
somatic principles. Such applications may include, but are not limited to,
the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy, the use of moist
hot and cold external applications, external application of herbal or topical
preparations not classified as prescription drugs, movement and neural
myofascial education and education in self-care and stress management.
Massage bodywork and somatic therapies do not include the diagnosis or
treatment of illness, disease, impairment or disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person, male or
female, who administers massage, bodywork anchor somatic therapies for
any form of consideration who is certified by the State of New Jersey.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment or operation wherein massage, bodywork or somatic
therapies are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such
therapies are administered for any form of consideration.
§ 220-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-2
221:978
§ 221-2. Permits required.
§ 221-3. Application fee for message, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment.
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment or out-call massage, bodywork
or somatic therapy service shall file an application with the Township Clerk
upon forms provided by said Clerk and pay an annual fee of $500.
§ 221-4. Application for massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment permit.
Any person desiring a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy business
permit shall file a written application with the Township Clerk on a form
to be furnished by the Township Clerk. The applicant shall accompany the
application with a tender of the correct fee as hereinafter provided and
shall, in addition, furnish the following:
A. Business permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate
any establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of North
Brunswick in Middlesex County as or for a massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy establishment unless or until there has first been
obtained a permit for such establishment or premises from the Clerk of
the Township of North Brunswick in accordance with the terms and
provisions in this chapter.
B. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapist permit required. No person
shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage, bodywork
and somatic therapist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a
valid and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's permit
issued to him or her by the Township of North Brunswick pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply, however,
to any massage or related therapies as described herein which are
given by therapists in the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or
physical therapist, or in a regularly established medical center, hospital
or sanatorium having a staff which includes licensed physicians,
chiropractors and/or physical therapists.
D. Recognition of permits issued by other municipalities. The Township of
North Brunswick may, in its discretion, recognize permits issued by
other municipalities of the State of New Jersey, provided that the
ordinances of the said municipality which issued such permit establish
the same or more restrictive provisions as this chapter and that the
municipality reciprocates by recognizing permits issued by the
Township of North Brunswick.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
§ 221-2 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 221-4
221:979
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists and employees in the business and
the name and residence address of the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business.
E. A copy of each massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapists' valid
state certificate or license issued pursuant to the Massage, Bodywork
and Somatic Therapist Certification Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual: concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation: concerning the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number;
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant;
(3) Written proof of age;
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes;
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size;
(6) The massage therapy or similar business history and experience,
including but not limited to whether or not such person has
previously operated in this or another township, city, borough or
state under a license or permit or has had such license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation; and
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a fingerprint and criminal
background check by the Police Department.
G. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will
serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
§ 221-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-4
221:980
§ 221-5. Building requirements; inspections.
§ 221-6. Application for massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's
permit; requirements.
H. A copy of a zoning permit of change of tenant occupancy issued by the
Zoning Officer of the Township of North Brunswick specifically for such
establishment, or a certificate of compliance with the conditions set
forth by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township of North Brunswick specifically for such establishment,
signed by the applicable Board Secretary. In cases where a construction
and/or building subcode permit is required, the establishment permit
under this ordinance will not become final until a certificate of
occupancy is issued by the Construction Official of the Township of
North Brunswick specifically for such establishment.
A. The Township Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment permit, shall refer the
application to the Department of Community Affairs, the Construction
Official, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the Health
Department and the Planning Department, which departments shall
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage
establishment and shall make written recommendations to the
Township Clerk concerning compliance with the codes that they
administer.
B. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a permit or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless an inspection by the Health Officer, Building Inspector
and Fire Inspector reveals that the establishment complies with the
minimum requirements of the building and health codes for businesses
operating in the Township of North Brunswick.
A. To be eligible for a permit as a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapist, an applicant shall submit satisfactory evidence of a valid
certificate of license issued pursuant to the Massage, Bodywork and
Somatic Therapist Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
B. The following information concerning the applicant will also be
required:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number;
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant;
(3) Written proof of age;
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes;
§ 221-4 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 221-6
221:981
§ 221-7. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapist permit fee.
§ 221-8. Display of permits.
The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall display its
permit and that of each and every massage, bodywork and somatic therapist
employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the
premises of the establishment.
§ 221-9. Operating requirements.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size;
(6) The massage therapy or similar business history and experience,
including but not limited to whether or not such person has
previously operated in this or another township, city, borough or
state under a license or permit or has had such license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation;
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a fingerprint and criminal
background check by the Police Department;
(8) The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county
who will serve as character references. These references must be
persons other than relatives and business associates.
A. The applicant for a massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's license
shall pay an annual permit fee of $100, which permit fee shall become
due on the first day of January each year.
B. An applicant who is the sole owner of an establishment who obtains a
permit under this chapter shall be exempted from payment of the
therapist fee established under this chapter. The intent of this
subsection is that a sole proprietor who obtains an establishment and a
therapist permit shall pay only the establishment fee. This exemption
shall be for one therapist fee only. If there are more than one owner/
therapist with any given establishment, all other therapists shall pay
the therapist permit fee.
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
§ 221-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-9
221:982
§ 221-10. Inspections.
The Township Clerk and/or the Department of Health and/or the
Department of Community Affairs or their designees shall, from time to
time, at least twice a year, either on an announced or noticed basis or on
an unannounced or unnoticed basis, make an inspection of each massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment granted a permit under the
provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the
provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such inspections shall be made
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork or somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises, and each dressing
room shall contain a tub or shower in good working order. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and be self-closing.
D. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity,
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
E. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon or touch with any part of
his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or
genital area of any other person.
G. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or operator shall
perform or offer to perform any act which would require the touching of
the patron's sexual or genital area.
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet- and dry-heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
I. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean, closed
containers or cabinets.
J. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
K. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before
administering a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to each patron.
§ 221-9 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 221-10
221:983
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any
permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or
to hinder such officer in any manner.
§ 221-11. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters, nor shall any person sleep in such massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 221-12. Prohibited acts.
§ 221-13. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly
but not exclusive of laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy, relating to the commission of adultery, and
proscribing fornication; nor shall any owner or manager tolerate in his
or her establishment any activity or behavior which violates this
chapter.
B. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes shall devolve upon the owner or manager of such club; it being
specifically declared that, following such a conviction of an employee,
the owner or manager of the club shall be prosecuted as an accessory to
such a violation and the required permits will be automatically revoked.
A. Any permit authorized by this chapter may be denied, suspended or
revoked by the Director of Public Safety after notice and a hearing for
any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the permit;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the permitted business within the Township;
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty;
§ 221-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 221-13
221:984
§ 221-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine
not exceeding $1,250 or both, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 222
MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 416.
§ 222-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
FOOD DEALER — Includes every person, firm or corporation, or his, her, its
or their agents, servants or employees, engaged in the business of selling or
offering or exposing for sale food at retail for human consumption either on
or off the premises where sold.
§ 222-2. Colorless and transparent packaging required.
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer in the Township of North Brunswick,
as defined in § 222-1 of this chapter, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at
retail, any sealed, prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh cut meat
or frozen meat unless the packaging thereof is colorless and transparent on
all sides, exclusive of labeling, which labeling shall occupy not more than
10% of one side of said package, or which fresh cut meat or frozen meat is
layered or shingled, making the entire contents of said package not wholly
visible. This section shall not apply to meat commonly designated or known
as "chopped meat" or "ground meat."
(5) Conducting the permitted business in the Township in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a danger to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public;
B. Notice of the hearing for the denial, suspension or revocation of a
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
therefor and the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall
be given personally or mailed to the permittee at the address provided
on the application or permit at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing. The Township Business Administrator shall serve as
hearing officer for any hearing pursuant to this subsection.
§ 221-13 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 222-3
222:985
§ 222-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation, or his, her, its or their agents, servants or
employees, found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be liable to forfeit and pay a penalty in the sum of not more than $500
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each such
violation.
Chapter 227
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 173.
§ 222-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 222-3
222:986
ARTICLE I
Parking for the Handicapped
[Adopted 10-19-1981]
§ 227-1. Statutory authorization.
Designation of parking stalls for handicapped drivers in each of the parking
lots listed below is hereby made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1 and
40:48-2.46.
§ 227-2. Parking restricted; violations and penalties. [Amended
5-1-1989; 7-1-1991; 8-2-1993; 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-36]
§ 227-3. Location to building; sketch plan.
Designated parking spaces for handicapped drivers shall be provided as
close as possible to the route of travel to the accessible principal entrance
or entrances to the building. The owners of premises required to provide
handicapped parking spaces as specified herein shall submit a sketch plan
indicating the location of such spaces and the distance to principal entrance
or entrances to the building to the Department of Planning and
Development within 30 days from the effective date of this article. The
sketch plan shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Development
and the Bureau of Traffic Safety prior to the installation of any handicapped
spaces on any premises listed below. Any owner failing to submit the
required sketch plan within the prescribed time shall be subject to penalties
in accordance with § 227-4 of this article.
§ 227-4. Conformance; fine.
The signing and pavement marking of handicapped parking stalls shall
conform to the specifications as prescribed by the New Jersey Department
of Transportation and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
shall be provided within 60 days from the date approval is obtained from
the Director of Planning and Development and the Bureau of Traffic Safety.
Any owner of premises required to provide parking stalls for handicapped
drivers who shall fail to provide such stalls shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 or 90 days in jail, or both.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any of the designated handicapped
parking stalls in locations established herein, unless such person is a
physically handicapped individual.
B. Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of
$250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in such
form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 227-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-5
222:987
§ 227-5. Depressed curbing; ramps.
The owners of premises required to provide handicapped parking spaces
shall also be required to install depressed curbing and/or ramps from
parking lots to walkways leading to the principal entrance or entrances
of the building. The location of the depressed curbing and/or ramps to be
provided shall be shown on the sketch plan submittal required in § 227-3
of this article. The installation of ramps and depressed curbing shall be
provided within the specified time for the installation of the required
handicapped parking spaces as indicated in § 227-4 of this article. Failure
to comply with this section shall constitute a violation for which an offender
shall be subject to penalties in accordance with § 227-4 of this article.
§ 227-6. Enforcement. [Amended 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-36]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Deportment of
the Township of North Brunswick or the Fire Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 227-7. Maintenance of markings.
All signing, pavement markings, depressed curbing and/or ramps shall be
maintained in good and proper condition, including but not limited to the
condition of required markings and signs which should remain distinctly
visible at all times. Any owner of premises required to provide handicapped
parking stalls who shall fail to maintain such stalls in proper condition shall
be subject to penalties in accordance with § 227-4 of this article.
§ 227-8. Designation of stalls. [Amended 1-15-1990]
Designation of parking stalls for handicapped drivers shall be as follows:
Location
Number of
Stalls
A&P
U.S. Route 1, Block 140, Lot 59
8
Babbage Park
Edison Avenue
North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902
Block 183, Lot 1; Block 183, Lot 29; Block 184, Lot 1;
Block 187, Lot 1 [Added 7-1-1991]
4
Brunswick Shopping Center
Milltown Road, Block 245, Lot 3
8
§ 227-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-8
222:988
Location
Number of
Stalls
Burger King Restaurant
975 Livingston Avenue
Block 97, Lot 2
1
Carolier Lanes
770-786 Route 1
Block 259, Lot 9
2
Carolier Office Building
850 Route 1, Block 259, Lot 8
2
Carolier Shopping Center
770-786 Route 1
Block 259, Lot 9
2
Fredda Professional Building
1648 Route 130
Block 278, Lot 5
1
Grossman Office Building
2864 Route 27
Block 1, Lot 4
1
The Hearth Restaurant
296-B Route 130
Block 225, Lot 14
1
1368 How Lane
Block 36, Lot 1
1
Jen-Den Office Building
1254 Route 27
Block 30, Lot 5-1 (additional, Lot 6)
1
Krauzer's Food Store
Farrington Pharmacy
1825 Route 130
1
Krauzer's Food Store
1864 Route 1, Block 143, Lot 2
1
§ 227-8 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-8
222:989
Location
Number of
Stalls
Lion Plaz
1626 Route 130, Block 278, Lot 7
2
Maple Mead Plaza
1880-1900 Route 130
Block 228, Lot 1
2
Middlesex Diner
U.S. Route 1, Block 58, Lot 140
2
National Westminster Bank
Finnegan's Lane
Block 1, Lot 2-1
1
National Westminster Bank
575 Milltown Road
Block 203, Lot 4
1
New Brunswick Savings
775 Georges Road
Block 213, Lot 19
1
New Brunswick Savings Bank
1550 Route 130
Block 277, Lot 1
2
North Village Office Building
825 Georges Road
Block 213, Lot 20.01
2
Professional Sports Care New Brunswick
125 North Center Drive [Added 8-2-1993]
1
Pub Restaurant
1864 Route 1 Block 143, Lots 2 and 3
1
Quality Inn
U.S. Route 1, Block 140, Lot 61
2
Rabinowitz Office Building
1040 Orchard Street Block 84, Lot 7
1
§ 227-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-8
222:990
Location
Number of
Stalls
Rosenzweig Office Building
1835 Route 130 Block 221, Lot 32.02
1
Rusty Nail Restaurant
1609 Route 1, Block 235, Lot 3.01
2
Sabella Park
Cozzens Lane
North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902
Block 17, Lot 157 [Added 7-1-1991]
4
Sir John's Restaurant
230 Washington Place
Block 227, Lot 31
1
Township of North Brunswick Senior Citizens Center
15 Linwood Place
North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902
Block 122, Lot 1 [Added 7-1-1991]
4
University Savings & Loan
909 Livingston Avenue
Block 99, Lot 9
1
U.S. Route 1, Block 4.05, Lot 109 2
Veterans Park
Dewey Road and Fillmore Drive
North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902
Block 143, Lot 162 [Added 7-1-1991]
3
Wooden Nickel Restaurant
644 Georges Road
Block 203, Lot 10
2
§ 227-8.1. Designation of restricted parking zones for handicapped
residents. [Added 8-2-1993; amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 00-14]
§ 227-8 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-8.1
222:991
A. Restricted parking zones may be established on public streets in front
of residential uses occupied by handicapped persons in accordance
with the procedures described herein.
B. An application must be filed with the Township Clerk identifying the
name and address of the handicapped individual and the specific
location of the proposed restricted parking zone.
C. Upon application for a permit, the applicant must provide the Township
Clerk with the following:
(1) The license plate and proof of ownership of the vehicle for which
the permit is requested, indicating that the vehicle is either owned
by the handicapped person or by another occupant of the residence
who is a member of the immediate family.
(2) A copy of the special vehicle identification card received from the
State Division of Motor Vehicles.
(3) If the vehicle is driven by the handicapped individual, proof that the
said vehicle is equipped with such special attachments and devices
as deemed necessary by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles to provide for the safe operation by the handicapped
individual.
D. The Township Clerk shall forward said application to the Township
Bureau of Traffic Safety for a recommendation on whether to approve
or disapprove said permit. Said recommendation shall be made within
21 calendar days of receiving such request from the Township Clerk.
E. Upon receipt of an application to designate a restricted parking zone
for handicapped persons, the Bureau of Traffic Safety shall perform a
site inspection to determine the following:
(1) Whether off-street parking is presently available on the property.
(2) The location, width, grade and physical condition of off-street
parking and sidewalk connecting said parking to the residence.
(3) Whether parking is presently prohibited in front of said residence.
(4) Whether there is a distance of 22 feet along the street where a
handicapped parking zone could be designated without interfering
with the normal flow of traffic.
F. Upon receipt of a favorable recommendation for approval, the Township
Clerk shall forward the recommendation to the Township Council for
adoption of an ordinance designating the handicapped zone.
G. Upon adoption of an ordinance, the Clerk shall issue a permit
identifying the following:
(1) The name of the handicapped person.
§ 227-8.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-8.1
222:992
(2) The license plate of the vehicle permitted to park in said zone.
(3) The location of the zone by either street address and/or distance
from the nearest intersecting street.
H. Upon adoption of an ordinance, the applicant shall be required to
deposit with the Township Clerk the dollar amount necessary to
purchase the required sign. If the applicant changes the vehicle to be
permitted to park in the zone, the applicant shall pay an additional
charge necessary to cover the new sign required.
I. The Township shall install a sign at the designated restricted parking
zone. Said sign shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and specifically identify the following:
(1) The license plate number of the specific motor vehicle that may
park in the zone.
(2) The amount of the penalty for parking any vehicle other than the
vehicle with designated license plate number.
J. Only a vehicle with the license plate number shown on the permit and
sign shall be permitted to park in the restricted handicapped parking
zone.
K. Any vehicle bearing a different license plate shall be presumed to have
parked unlawfully and shall be issued a ticket and subject to a fine of
$100, plus related costs, for each offense.
L. All permits issued for the establishment of a restricted handicapped
parking zone shall expire on December 31 two full years after initial
application approval. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-09]
M. Schedule A. In accordance with this § 227-8.1, the following
handicapped residents zones are established: [Added 4-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-4; amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 02-26; 11-17-2003
by Ord. No. 03-37; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-20; 12-21-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-26; 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-27; 8-5-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-09]
(1) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit B175
for and only on behalf of Brian Werda, residing at 943 Nassau
Street, North Brunswick, New Jersey.
(2) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit E176
for and only on behalf of Lawrence A. Riemer, residing at 555 Plum
Street, North Brunswick, New Jersey.
(3) 177Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit
A178 for and only on behalf of Patricia Brown, residing at 224
175. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
176. Editor's Note: Exhibit E is on file in the Township offices.
§ 227-8.1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-8.1
222:993
Hollywood Street, North Brunswick, New Jersey. [Added
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
(4) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit C179
for and only on behalf of Kenneth Canastra, residing at 3 Cypress
Avenue, North Brunswick, New Jersey. [Added 2-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-02]
(5) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit D180
for and only on behalf of Elizabeth Bell, residing at 16 Cleremont
Avenue, North Brunswick, New Jersey. [Added 2-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-02]
(6) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit E181
for and only on behalf of Doris Singleton, residing with the property
owners Irving and Rene Dirkson at 800 Evergreen Court, North
Brunswick, New Jersey. [Added 6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10]
(7) Being the area shown on the sketch attached hereto as Exhibit G182
for and only on behalf of Thomas J. Kotter, residing at 3 Petrich
Place, North Brunswick, New Jersey, with the location of the
handicapped parking zone being in front of 3 Petrich Place. [Added
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-28]
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M(3), regarding the handicapped parking zone assigned
to 919 Lee Avenue, was repealed 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02.
178. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
179. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Township offices.
180. Editor's Note: Exhibit D is on file in the Township offices.
181. Editor's Note: Exhibit E is on file in the Township offices.
182. Editor's Note: Exhibit G is on file in the Township offices.
§ 227-8.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-8.1
222:994
ARTICLE II
Park and Ride Lots
[Adopted 5-20-1991]
§ 227-9. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the purpose of assuring the safe and orderly
parking of motor vehicles and the promotion of traffic safety, reduction
of traffic congestion and overall public safety in the Township of North
Brunswick, and particularly in regards to the operation of the Governor's
Pointe Park and Ride facility located at Hartland Commons Way and
Elizabeth Street.
§ 227-10. Applicability.
§ 227-11. Permit required; hours; parking restrictions.
A. The provisions, rules and regulations of this article pertaining to
parking areas are applicable to all those parcels of land and premises
situated at the Governor's Pointe Park and Ride facility located at
Hartland Commons Way and Elizabeth Street, which land is owned,
leased, occupied or controlled by the Township of North Brunswick and
devoted to the purpose of parking motor vehicles, but does not apply to
any lands or area within the right-of-way of any public street, road or
highway.
B. These provisions, rules and regulations shall also be applicable to any
other parcels of land and premises owned, leased, occupied or
controlled by the Township of North Brunswick and devoted to the
purpose of parking motor vehicles now or hereafter.
A. Parking on said lands and premises hereinbefore designated shall be
allowed by permit only, which shall be evidenced by a document issued
by the Township for the purpose of identifying the parked vehicle and
which shall be prominently displayed on or in the parked vehicle
consistent with procedures specified by the Township's Office of Traffic
Management.
B. With the exception of provisions allowing daily parking, if any, such
parking areas shall be marked by signs indicating that parking will be
by permit only and that vehicles must bear the required identification,
which signs may state "Parking by Permit Only."
C. No vehicle shall be parked in any such parking area unless it displays in
the fashion specified by the Township's Office of Traffic Management a
current and valid parking permit so issued by the Township of North
Brunswick as herein provided.
D. No vehicle shall be parked or remain parked in any such parking area
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. in any day of the week or
§ 227-9 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-11
222:995
§ 227-12. Issuance of permits; transferability; term; fees; record of
permits.
at such other times as may be designated by the Township's Office of
Traffic Management.
E. No vehicle shall be parked except within a single designated parking
space where indicated by marked lines on the surface of the parking
area or as may be directed by the Police or attendant in charge of the
parking area or by a control sign indicating the designated area or
areas in which to park.
F. No trailers, trucks or buses shall be parked in any such parking area
except only in such space as may be specifically designated for the
same.
G. No vehicle shall be parked within the entrance or exit to any such
parking area or within any of the aisles thereof.
H. All vehicles must be parked with the rear window of the vehicle clearly
visible from the aisle behind the space to facilitate permit inspection.
A. Said parking permits shall be issued or renewed by the Township Clerk
during regular business hours when the Office of the Township Clerk is
open, or applied for by mail. Payment for permits or renewals may be
made in person, with cash or check, or by mail, with payment made by
check. Permits shall be issued to Township residents only upon
provision of suitable identification verifying the residency of the
applicant and identifying the vehicle or vehicles for which the permit is
to be used by said resident. Township residents shall receive priority,
but permits may also be issued to nonresidents of the Township
consistent with procedures adopted by the Office of Traffic
Management. Waiting lists shall be maintained of residents and
nonresidents interested in using the facility in the event that demand
exceeds supply.
B. Said permits shall be issued to the owner of the registered motor
vehicle and are nontransferable. However, a permit may be used in
alternate vehicles when such vehicles are used for carpooling purposes
by the permit holder, with such vehicles identified on the permit
application. An issued permit may be transferred during the period for
which it is valid to a new vehicle purchased by the applicant on the sale,
replacement or transfer of the original vehicle. In such case, the owner
shall remove the permit and supply evidence thereof to the Township
Clerk to obtain a new permit or transfer said permit to a different
vehicle.
C. Permits shall be issued for monthly or quarterly periods using
procedures specified by the Office of Traffic Management. Permits shall
be valid from the first of the month or quarter for which the permit is
designated to midnight of the last day of said month or quarter.
§ 227-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-12
222:996
§ 227-13. Presumption of proper permitting.
Any person parking a motor vehicle with such permit displayed shall be
assumed to have properly applied for and received permission to park said
motor vehicle in any such parking area of the Township of North Brunswick
and to have acknowledged the rules and regulations for use of the facility.
§ 227-14. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Further rules and regulations pertaining to such parking areas and the
parking of motor vehicles therein may be made from time to time by
resolution of the Township Council or by the Township Police or Office
of Traffic Management, consistent with the purpose and intent of the
procedures defined herein.
§ 227-15. Disabled vehicles.
No person shall park or place any disabled vehicle or permit any such
disabled vehicle to remain in any such parking area without the express
permission of the Police or Office of Traffic Management.
§ 227-16. Violations and penalties; removal of vehicles.
D. The application for a permit and permission to use the permit shall be
charged at the rate of $25 per month for Township residents and $35
per month for nonresidents should permits be offered to nonresidents.
E. Said permits shall have written thereon "Township of North Brunswick
Parking Permit," together with the date of the permit's expiration.
F. The Township Clerk shall make and keep a record of all permits issued,
including therein the date of issuance, the name, address and telephone
number of the person to whom the permit is issued and the motor
vehicle registration number(s), the make(s), model year(s) and color(s)
of the motor vehicle(s) for which the permit is issued.
A. Any person parking a vehicle in a manner other than as required by this
Article, even though the vehicle bears a valid permit, shall be subject to
a fine not exceeding $15, and each day that such a violation continues
shall be a separate and distinct violation. A summons for violations may
be issued by the Township Police, parking enforcement officers or other
authorized designee. Payments for such violation or violations shall be
made to the Clerk of the Township Municipal Court upon a plea of
guilty.
B. In case of a violation of any other provision of this Article, including but
not limited to parking a vehicle without a valid or duly issued permit or
parking a vehicle in an unsafe manner or outside prescribed hours, the
person so parking and/or the owner of the vehicle shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $100, and each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 227-12 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-16
222:997
§ 227-17. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any municipal vehicles registered to the
Township of North Brunswick nor to any vehicles engaged in police work.
C. Any vehicle parked in any such parking area in violation of this article,
except a vehicle bearing a valid permit and not parked as herein
required, may be removed from the parking area on the order of the
Police, and the owner thereof shall pay the reasonable cost of such
removal and of storage which may result from such removal before
being allowed to regain possession of the vehicle and such costs of
removal and storage shall be in addition to any penalty or fine herein
provided.
§ 227-16 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 227-17
222:998
ARTICLE III
Motor Vehicle Repair Garages and Service Stations
[Adopted 8-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-16]
§ 227-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building or portion of a building
in which auto-body work or the overhauling or replacement of engines is
conducted.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including
structures thereon, used for the servicing of motor vehicles, whose primary
service is the retail sale of gasoline. This use may also include minor repairs
such as replacing of mufflers and tail pipes, motor tune-ups, changing of
tires, polishing, washing and lubrication, all of which are incidental to the
primary service rendered. Auto-body work of any nature shall be excluded.
§ 227-19. Parking restrictions.
Under no circumstances shall any motor vehicle repair garage or motor
vehicle service station use any portion of a public street or public right-ofway
as a staging area for vehicles either awaiting repair or awaiting pick-up
after repairs are completed. Motor vehicle repair garages and motor vehicle
service stations which are also licensed by the State of New Jersey as used
car dealers shall also be prohibited from displaying any vehicle for sale on
any portion of a public street or public right-of-way.
§ 227-20. Enforcement and penalties.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Director of
Community Development or his designee in accordance with the
enforcement procedures designated in § 243-32D.
B. Fines shall be assessed in accordance with the fines designated in
§ 243-33.
§ 227-18 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 227-20
222:999
Chapter 231
PARKLAND DEDICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 205.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 243.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be
developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or
office uses, or both, and any residential and other uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development, all of which shall be
collectively referred to in this chapter as "planned development." Any
planned development as defined herein shall be subject to the requirements
of this chapter.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be
developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses
and any other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted
by ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed
as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential
clusters or planned unit residential developments and one or more public,
quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of
nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified in the zoning
ordinance.183
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of five acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one or more
residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial, public or
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 227-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 231-1
222:1000
quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A contiguous or noncontiguous area to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing residential
housing units which have a common or public open space area as an
appurtenance.
§ 231-2. Dedication required; acreage requirements.
§ 231-3. Dedications of more than 10 acres.
If the required dedication acreage of a planned development, as defined
herein, is calculated to be 10 acres or more, 50% of the calculated acreage
must be improved and dedicated to the Township. The acreage required to
be improved and dedicated shall be in parcels which are a minimum of five
acres in size.
§ 231-4. Population multipliers.
The following population multipliers shall be applied to the acreage
requirements by residential unit type, as follows:
§ 231-5. Applicability.
All planned developments which have not received site plan or final
subdivision approval prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
subject to the requirements of this chapter.
A. The developer of a planned development, as defined herein, shall be
required to dedicate and improve parkland. Any lands proposed to be
dedicated shall be subject to acceptance by the Township Council as to
location, size and improvements. However, at a minimum, 75% of the
acreage to be dedicated shall be developed for active recreation
purposes.
B. The acreage dedication and the improvement contribution equivalent
shall be calculated by utilizing the National Recreation and Park
Association standard of eight acres of developed parkland per 1,000
population. This standard results in a requirement of 0.008 acre per
person. The acreage to be dedicated shall be determined by multiplying
the number of units in the development by the per-person household
multipliers contained herein and by multiplying the resulting project
population by the acreage standard of 0.008 per person.
A. Single-family and duplex units: 3.2 persons per household.
B. All other residential units: 2.2 persons per household.
§ 231-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 231-5
222:1001
Chapter 234
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Loitering — See Ch. 219.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 238.
§ 231-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 231-5
222:1002
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-3-1961]
§ 234-1. Adoption of rules.
The following rules and regulations are hereby made and adopted as the
rules and regulations governing and applicable to all public parks and
playgrounds situated and located in the Township of North Brunswick, New
Jersey.
§ 234-2. Hours. [Amended 11-6-1978; 5-5-1986]
The parks and playgrounds are formally open to the public daily from
sunrise to one hour after sunset, except that use of illuminated tennis
courts, illuminated ice skating facilities and illuminated ballfields may
extend beyond sunset to an hour to which illumination is determined,
provided and authorized by the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services.184
§ 234-3. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall use threatening, abusive or insulting language; do any
obscene or indecent act; throw stones or other missiles; annoy persons;
interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any drive, path,
walk or public place; do any act tending or amounting to a breach of
the peace; climb or stand upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat, statue or
other erection; enter or leave except at established entranceways or exits;
introduce, carry or fire any firecrackers, torpedoes or fireworks; engage
in, instigate, aid or encourage a contention or fight, whether or not a ring
or prize fight; assault any person, play games of chance, participate in the
conduct of a lottery or use or operate any slot machine, gaming table or
instrument; sell fortunes; drink, take use of or have in his possession, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquors, opiates or other habitforming
drugs; spit upon any sidewalk, crossing, safety zone or the floors
of any structure, bridge, platform or stairway; cast, throw or deposit on any
walk, crossing, path, safety zone, floor or parkway surface any portion of
any fruit, vegetable, foodstuff, paper, pasteboard, litter or other substances;
cast, throw or deposit on the grass, road or in the pools any sticks, stones
or other matter that would tend to pollute the pools; or interfere with or fail
to obey any officer in the proper performance of his duties.
§ 234-4. Minors.
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or allow him to
do any act prohibited by law in any park or playground in the Township of
North Brunswick.
184. Editor's Note: Former Department of Human Services became the Department of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-1.
§ 234-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 234-5
222:1003
§ 234-5. Solicitation of alms and contributions.
No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose without
permission of the Mayor and Council.
§ 234-6. Advertising.
No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, hand out, deliver, place, cast
or leave about any bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular or
advertisement, nor display any flag, banner, transparency, target, sign,
placard or any other matter for advertising purpose or attracting attention
to any exhibition, show, performance or other display.
§ 234-7. Animals.
No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in his custody or
under his control, except a dog when restrained by a leash not exceeding six
feet in length, to go or be at large, and each such animal so found at large
may be seized and disposed of as provided by the law or ordinance covering
disposal of stray animals on highways or public property then in effect,185 at
the place where such stray animal may be seen.
§ 234-8. Explosives.
No person shall bring into or have in said parks any explosive, including
any substance, compound, mixture or article having properties of such a
character that, alone or in combination or contiguity with other substances
or compounds, may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas
or pressure, or any or all of them, to produce rapid-flaming combustion or
administer a destructive blow to surrounding objects.
§ 234-9. Firearms, weapons and tools.
No person shall have or carry, whether or not concealed upon his person,
any pistol, revolver or other deadly weapon or any instrument or weapon
commonly known as a "toy pistol" or in which or upon which loaded or blank
cartridges may be used, or any loaded or blank cartridges or ammunition
thereof, or any tools or instruments, skeleton keys, picklocks, jimmies or
other things known or used as burglar tools, except when authorized by law.
No person shall bring into the parks or have in his possession therein any
rifle, shotgun or fowling piece or any air gun, spring gun, slingshot or other
similar instrument or weapon.
§ 234-10. Fires, lighted cigars, etc.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places
provided for such purposes. Any fire for which a permit shall have been
issued or in such places as have been designated shall be continuously
under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Dogs, § 154-5.
§ 234-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 234-10
222:1004
kindled until it is extinguished, and no fire shall be built within 10 feet
of any tree or building or beneath the branches of any tree or in any
underbrush. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match,
cigar or cigarette within or against any building, structure, car, vehicle or
enclosure or under any tree or in underbrush, unless it be to deposit the
same in a suitable container provided for the reception thereof.
§ 234-11. Bathing.
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any park pools except at such times
and in such places as the Director of Recreation may designate and unless
so covered with a bathing suit as to prevent any indecent exposure of the
person.
§ 234-12. Games.
No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick or strike any baseball, golf ball,
football, basketball, beanbag or any other object except in places
designated therefor.
§ 234-13. Meetings, exhibitions, parades, racing.
No person, without permission of the Director of Recreation, shall erect
any structure, stand or platform; hold any meeting; perform any ceremony;
make a speech; address or harangue; exhibit to the public any dramatic
performance or the performance in whole or in part of any interlude,
tragedy, comedy, opera, ballet, play, farce, minstrel, dancing entertainment,
motion pictures, circus, juggling, ropewalking or any other acrobatics;
engage in any parade, drill maneuvers or civic or other procession; or, being
in a vehicle, race with another vehicle, whether such race be founded on
any stakes, dare, bet or otherwise.
§ 234-14. Coasting.
No person shall coast with hand sleds, wagons or other vehicles on wheels
or runners except at such places as may be designated therefor.
§ 234-15. Horses.
No person shall ride, drive or bring any horse within the limits of any park
in the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 234-16. Skating and sledding.
No person shall use roller skates except at such times and upon such places
as may be designated therefor, or skate, sled, walk or go upon any ice except
at such times and upon such places as may be designated therefor and until
such ice is declared by or under the authority of said Director of Recreation
to be in a safe condition therefor.
§ 234-10 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 234-17
222:1005
§ 234-17. Demonstration and instruction vehicles.
No person shall use the park drives or parkways for the purpose of
demonstrating any vehicle nor for the purpose of instructing another to
drive or operate any vehicle nor for learning to drive or operate any vehicle.
§ 234-18. Towing and trailing.
No person shall cause or permit a vehicle in tow of another vehicle to enter
the parks or proceed therein, except that in case of a breakdown a disabled
vehicle may be towed to the nearest exit; and no person shall operate or
drive a vehicle containing any article or object projecting or hanging outside
of or beyond the side or the rear thereof.
§ 234-19. Motor vehicle laws.186
All the provisions of the New Jersey state motor vehicle laws with regard to
equipment, lights, licenses, brakes, etc., will apply in the parks and will be
strictly enforced.
§ 234-20. Commercial vehicles.
No person shall drive or operate within the parks any omnibus or vehicle
adapted for more than 12 passengers, any hearse or any vehicle constructed
or adapted for or engaged in the carrying of any merchandise, or consisting
wholly or in part of machinery adapted for or put to any use other than that
of propulsion thereof or uses incidental thereto, or upon which is displayed
for advertising purposes any writing, symbol, flag, banner, target, sign,
placard, transparency or other matter.
§ 234-21. Obeying officers.
Whenever any police officer, park patrolman or other authorized park
personnel shall indicate or direct, by gesture or otherwise, that the speed
of a vehicle shall be checked or stopped or its course altered, the driver
thereof shall immediately obey such directions.
§ 234-22. Motor vehicle and traffic laws.
All provisions of the New Jersey state motor vehicle and traffic laws will
apply in the parks and playgrounds and will be strictly enforced, along with
such restrictions as may be hereinafter stated.
§ 234-23. Vehicles: where prohibited.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle within or upon a safety zone, walk
or any part of the parkway not designated or customarily used for such
purpose. No person shall ride a motorcycle upon any walk or footpath.
186. Editor's Note: As to vehicles and traffic generally, see Ch. 334.
§ 234-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 234-24
222:1006
§ 234-24. Parking.
No owner or driver shall cause or permit his vehicle to stand anywhere
outside of designated parking spaces, except for a reasonable time during a
drive to take up or discharge passengers. Motor vehicles, wherever parked
at night, shall have lights as prescribed by the New Jersey motor vehicle
laws. No motor vehicle shall be parked in said park from one hour after
sunset until sunrise.
§ 234-25. Careless driving.
No person shall operate, drive or propel, and no owner thereof, thereon
or therein shall cause or permit to be operated, driven or propelled, any
vehicle recklessly or negligently or at a speed or in such a manner as
to endanger or injure or be likely to endanger or injure other persons or
property.
§ 234-26. Maximum speed.
§ 234-27. Injury to property, drives, bridges and equipment.
No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy or
tamper with any drive, path, walk, bridge or approach thereto; take up
or remove or carry away any asphalt, concrete, flagstone, rock, stone,
gravel, sand, clay or earth; or make any excavation of any kind or nature;
or harvest, injure or remove any ice; or injure, deface, displace, remove
or destroy any structure, building, post, railing, bench, seat, platform,
stand, tree guard, telephone, telegraph pipe or main for conducting of
water or wires, or any hydrant, sewer drain, pipe, main, receiving basin,
covering, manhole or vent forming a part thereof or any appurtenance or
appendage connected therewith, or any other property or equipment under
the jurisdiction or control of said Director of Recreation or appertaining to
the creation, government, use or maintenance of said park or playground;
or injure or in any way interfere with the operation of any machine,
instrument or contrivance used in said park or playground; or injure,
deface, displace, remove or destroy any sign, inscription, post or monument
erected or marked for any purpose, or any mileboard, milestone, danger
sign or signal, guide, sign or post or any signaling device sanctioned,
installed or placed at the direction of said Director of Recreation.
A. No person shall drive a vehicle in any part of the parks or playgrounds
proper at a rate of speed exceeding that indicated by signs which may
be placed from time to time in the park or playground system, and
where such signs are not placed, no person shall drive a vehicle at a
rate of speed exceeding 20 miles per hour.
B. Nothing contained in this article shall apply to the wagons, trucks and
apparatus of a fire department, police department or ambulance, nor to
emergency repair vehicles of the Township when responding for
emergency work in case of fire, accident, public disaster, impending
danger or emergency.
§ 234-24 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 234-28
222:1007
§ 234-28. Trees, shrubs and grass.
No person shall destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate, injure, disturb, sever
from the ground or remove any plant, flower, flower bed, shrub, tree,
growing things, plant growth or any branch, stem or leaf thereof; or pile or
maintain any material or debris of any kind against or upon same; or attach
any rope, cable or other contrivance thereto; or set fire or assist another to
set fire to any timber, trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, grass or plant growth;
or hitch any animal thereto or leave same standing near enough to injure
any lawn or grass plot or go upon the same.
§ 234-29. Animals, reptiles and birds.
No person shall molest, kill, trap, hunt, take, chase, shoot or throw missiles
at, remove or have in his possession any animal, reptile, bird, bird's nest
or squirrel's nest, or remove the young of any such animal or the eggs
or young of any such reptile or bird; or knowingly buy, receive or have in
his possession, sell or give away any such animal, reptile, birds or eggs
so taken, except at such times when permission to do or give away any
such animal reptile, birds or egg, has been given by the said Director of
Recreation.
§ 234-30. Pollution of waters.
No person shall, within or without said parks or playgrounds, throw, cast,
lay, drop or discharge into or leave in the waters of the parks or
playgrounds, or any tributary, brook, stream, storm sewer, pool or drain, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may or shall result in the
pollution of said waters.
§ 234-31. Rubbish and refuse matter.
No person shall take into, carry through, leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop
or discharge into or on, or suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee
or person in his or her charge to take into, carry through, leave in or
throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or on, said parks or playgrounds,
any ashes, dross, cinder, shale, paper, dirt, sand, oil, grease, clay, loam,
stone or building rubbish, brush, stumps, hay, straw, sawdust, shavings,
manufacturing or trade or household waste, old iron or other metal or
objects made therefrom, or rubbish of any sort, or sick, diseased or dead
animals, organic refuse or other offensive matter, including swill, brine,
urine, offal, fecal matter, garbage or rubbish.
§ 234-32. Posting of rules and regulations.
The aforementioned rules and regulations shall be conspicuously posted in
all such public parks and playgrounds where the same are effective.
§ 234-28 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 234-33
222:1008
§ 234-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 234-33 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 234-33
222:1009

ARTICLE II
Parks and Recreation Areas
[Article III, Parks and Recreation Areas, of Chapter 285, Smoking,
which article was adopted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-04, is hereby
incorporated by reference.]
MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 234-33
222:1011
Chapter 235
PASSPORT APPLICATION AND FEES
§ 235-1. Application fees for passport. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-07]
Chapter 237
PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
BUYERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 116.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 143.
Hawking and peddling — See Ch. 188.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 212.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 238.
§ 237-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide licensing and regulation
of individuals dealing in precious metals, gems, secondhand goods and
pawnbrokering to protect the residents of North Brunswick, and those
transacting business in the Township of North Brunswick as permitted,
in part, by N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 et seq., the
Pawnbroking Law. The licensing and regulation of such establishments will
A. All residents of the Township of North Brunswick who desire to obtain a
United States passport may apply for same at the Office of the Township
Clerk for the following fees:
(1) Two 2-by-2-inch pictures to be attached to the passport application:
$10.
(2) DS-11 Form (new passport applications) age 16 and over: $75.
(3) Execution fee: $25.
(4) DS-11 (for children under 16 years of age): $60.
(5) Expedited services $60.
(6) File search fee: $45.
(7) Passport card (over 16 years of age): $20.
(8) Passport card (under 16 years of age): $10.
B. All of the above fees, with the exception of (1) and (3) are payable
directly to the United States Department of State.
§ 234-33 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 237-1
222:1012
assist the North Brunswick Police Department and others in recovering
stolen goods. All dealers in precious metals and gems shall comply with this
chapter in addition to all laws, rules and regulations as contained in N.J.S.A.
51:6A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1 et seq.
§ 237-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; or purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehouseman and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PERSON — Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associates, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or unincorporated
groups or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors or any kind
of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either
for himself or for any other person under either personal appointment or
pursuant to law.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker in the course
of his business.
PLEDGER — A person who delivers the pledge into the possession of a
pawnbroker, unless such person discloses that he is or was acting for
another, and in such an event "pledger" means the disclosed principal.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS — Items comprised of gold, silver,
platinum, palladium and alloys thereof, gems, coins containing precious
metals and all forms of previously owned jewelry which contain precious
metals.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS BUYER — A person engaged in the
business of purchasing metals, gems, coins, containing precious metals and
all forms of previously owned jewelry, either as a primary business or in
connection with a related business, from any person who is not in the
business of selling precious metals as required under N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 to
51:6A-8, including, but not limited to, businesses commonly referred to as
"jewelry stores."
SECONDHAND GOODS — All forms of previously owned goods, including
but not limited to antiques, furniture, watches, china, crystal, paintings,
precious metals and gems and goods containing precious metals and gems.
§ 237-3. Written record of purchases required.
Any person, partnership or corporation in the business of buying precious
metals, jewels or gems, secondhand goods or pawnbrokering who buys,
attempts to buy or offers to buy precious metals or gems on the basis of bulk
value from any person who is not in the business of selling precious metals
§ 237-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 237-3
222:1013
or gems in North Brunswick Township shall maintain a written record of all
purchases and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this chapter.
§ 237-4. Form of record.
The record shall be kept in a record book with Smyth sewn binding, with all
pages numbered in sequence. All entries shall be made in pen or ink. There
shall be no spaces between entries, and each entry shall be numbered in
sequence.
§ 237-5. Identification of seller.
The purchaser shall require that the seller present a current and reliable
form of identification. The form of identification shall bear a photograph of
the seller. The record shall reflect the nature of the identification presented.
No transaction shall be made with a person under 18 years of age.
§ 237-6. Contents of record.
The record shall contain the following information which shall be made in
the English language:
§ 237-7. License requirement.
Any person, partnership or corporation in the full- or part-time business of
purchasing gold, silver, precious metals and gems, secondhand goods and/
or pawnbrokering in North Brunswick Township shall maintain a written
record of all purchases of precious metals or jewels, gems, secondhand
goods or pawnbrokering in North Brunswick Township and must, prior to
engaging in such business, be duly licensed by the Township. The licensing
procedure is to be accomplished as follows.
§ 237-8. Registration form.
The business entity shall authorize a representative to complete a
registration application to obtain a license to deal in precious metals, gems,
secondhand goods and pawnbrokering.
A. Date of sale;
B. Name and address of seller, sex, date of birth, telephone number of
seller;
C. Detailed description of items purchased, including the weight of any
precious metal purchased;
D. A picture or photocopy of the items purchased;
E. Purchase price; and
F. A legible photocopy of the seller's identification.
§ 237-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 237-8
222:1014
§ 237-9. Investigation; approval process; appeals.
A. The registration application for a license shall be made available to
persons wishing to secure same through the Township Clerk's office.
B. The registration form shall be executed by that person or persons who
are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the business. Where a
corporation is involved, the president of the corporation shall sign
same, and where partnerships are involved, the managing partner shall
sign same.
C. The registration form shall contain the following information:
(1) The names and current addresses and telephone numbers of all
principals of the business. If the business is a corporation, then the
information shall include the names and current addresses and
telephone numbers of all stockholders;
(2) The place or places where the business entity shall operate from, as
well as a listing of the hours when the entity proposes to conduct
business;
(3) The names and addresses of three business references;
(4) A statement by the applicant that no principal of the business entity
has any arrests or convictions of any crimes. In cases of a
corporation, the certification shall apply to all stockholders. If there
is an arrest or conviction record, same must be disclosed;
(5) A list of business and home addresses of all principals of the
business for the past five years; and
(6) The registration must also include a photograph of the person who
will manage the day-to-day operation of the business, and that
individual must also agree to be fingerprinted by the Township
Police Department.
A. Upon receipt of such application completed pursuant to this chapter,
the Clerk shall refer such application to the Deputy Chief of Police, or
his designee, who shall make an investigation of the prospective
licensee pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of determining the
suitability of the applicant for licensing as follows:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in the definitions of
"pawnbroker," "precious metals and gems," "precious metals and
gems buyer" and "secondhand goods" as set forth in § 237-2,
Definitions, herein, although nothing in this section shall be
construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack
of experience.
§ 237-8 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 237-9
222:1015
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of those articles and
goods referred to in the definitions of "pawnbroker," "precious
metals and gems," "precious metals and gems buyer" and
"secondhand goods," as set forth in § 237-2, Definitions, herein, and
other factors bearing upon whether the licensed business will be of
a fixed and permanent nature. This section, however, shall not be
construed to require denial of any license solely on the grounds
that the business is not conducted from a fixed location.
B. The Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, shall complete any
investigation pursuant to this chapter within 30 days of the submission
of the application to the Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a
criminal record check has been requested within the thirty-day period
and has not been received by the Deputy Chief of Police, or his
designee, within that period, the Deputy Chief of Police, or his
designee, may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a
conditional issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding
criminal record.
C. The Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, shall, upon completion of
the investigation, recommend grant or denial of the requested license
to the Clerk, who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation
of the Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be in writing and, in
the case of a recommendation of denial, shall state fully and specifically
the reasons for said recommendation. If the Clerk accepts the
recommendation of the Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, to deny
any license, the Clerk shall notify the applicant within 10 days of such
denial and forward to the applicant a statement of the reason or
reasons for such denial. The applicant shall have 10 days thereafter to
request reconsideration by the Clerk and may provide the Clerk with
any relevant information in response to that set forth in the Clerk's
notice of denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of a license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to the business for which the applicant seeks a license pursuant
to this chapter. A license may be denied if the investigation conducted
by the Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, reveals conviction of the
applicant or any of its principal officers or employees of any crime or
disorderly persons offense in which deceit or misrepresentation is an
element, or any conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense
§ 237-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 237-9
222:1016
§ 237-10. License fee; term.
The annual fee for the license shall be $100. All such licenses shall be
issued for a period of one year commencing August 1 and expiring July 31
next following the date of issuance, and there shall be no rebate for any
lesser time. The license shall be conspicuously exhibited upon the premises
licensed thereunder.
§ 237-11. Bond.
Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Clerk executed by the applicant as
principal with a surety company authorized to do business under the laws
of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, in a form subject to the
review and approval of the Township Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of
$10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of and compliance
with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of the Township in
force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business, and
conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any
person or persons who shall have received judgment against the licensee
licensed under this chapter by reason of any damage sustained by any such
person as a result of the operations of the licensee under this chapter, which
damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction.
Said bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation of this bond
shall, in addition to the Township of North Brunswick, be and remain for
the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against obligor as
a result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license granted
under Chapter 237 of the Code of the Township of North Brunswick." Said
bond shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of
license and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 237-12. Availability of record for inspection; effect on existing
businesses.
involving theft or receiving stolen goods, whether the prospective
licensee's conviction was as a principal, as an accessory before or after
the fact, or as a coconspirator. Upon receipt of the recommendation of
the Deputy Chief of Police, or his designee, the Clerk shall issue or deny
the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond pursuant
to § 237-11, Bond, herein. In the event of a denial of the license by
the Clerk, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the North
Brunswick Township Council, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such denial.
A. The purchaser shall make the record available for inspection to any law
enforcement officer, upon demand, without the need for advance notice.
The record shall be kept at the purchaser's business premises. The
records shall be maintained for two years from the date of purchase.
§ 237-9 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 237-12
222:1017
§ 237-13. Prohibition.
No business dealer or persons required to be licensed pursuant to this
chapter that are doing business in North Brunswick Township shall sell,
melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles purchased or received
for a period of three business days from the date the notification is made to
the Deputy Chief of Police or his designee. All such items shall remain on
the premises where the purchase was made until the expiration of the time
period set forth herein.
§ 237-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements herein shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in
the discretion of the judge. The continuation of such violation on successive
days shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
herein for each separate offense.
Chapter 238
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public emergencies — See Ch. 165. Loitering — See Ch. 219.
B. Each business dealer or persons required to be licensed pursuant to
this chapter that is doing business in North Brunswick Township shall
deliver to the Deputy Chief of Police or his designee, on forms
prescribed by the North Brunswick Township Police Department, a
description of all items purchased, received or sold, within 24 hours of
the completion of the transaction, except for transactions conducted on
Saturday, in which case said list shall be delivered to the Police
Department by no later than 12:00 noon of the Monday following.
C. As to those business entities which are governed by this chapter and
who are already doing business in the Township prior to the effective
date of this chapter, then the businesses shall be licensed within 30
days of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 237-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 237-14
222:1018
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 9-7-1965]
§ 238-1. Prohibited activities. [Amended 3-3-1980; 3-2-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-03; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-18]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township of North Brunswick, New
Jersey, engage in any of the following activities:
A. Engage in any practice, sport or exercise having a tendency to annoy or
interfere with persons passing on the streets or sidewalks of the
Township of North Brunswick.
B. Loiter, lounge, sleep or create a disturbance on any street, sidewalk or
other public place or in or about any park, public building, school, store
or other business establishment, or utter any loud and offensive or
indecent language or make offensive remarks to any person or persons
passing along, in or upon any such sidewalk, street, park, school, store
or other public place or business establishment.
C. Obstruct, molest, hinder, annoy, frighten, threaten, insult or interfere
with any other person lawfully upon the streets, parks, public places or
in any automobile, bus or other public or private conveyance lawfully
upon any street.
D. Permit any house, shop, store or other building or structure owned or
occupied by him or her to be used, frequented or resorted to by noisy,
riotous or disorderly persons or by prostitutes, gamblers or transients.
E. Throw or discard any tin cans, paper posters, glass, metal or any hard
or dangerous substance whatsoever upon any public street, sidewalk,
highway or public place.
F. Make or assist in making any riot, noise or disturbance at any house,
shop, theater or other place of amusement.
G. Appear on any street or in any park or other public place or in public
view in a state of nudity, or make any indecent exposure of his or her
person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or behave in a lewd or
indecent manner.
H. Maliciously destroy, damage or injure any property, public or private.
I. Cause or permit to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating smoke or odor, or any smoke or odor that may be vile,
offensive, obnoxious or nauseating to any of the residents of the
Township of North Brunswick.
J. Enter any building or trespass upon lands belonging to the Board of
Education of the Township of North Brunswick, or break or injure or
deface such building or any part thereof or the fences or outbuildings
§ 238-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-1
222:1019
§ 238-2. Enumeration not exhaustive; definition.
belonging to or connected with such building or lands, or disturb the
exercises of such school or molest or annoy the children attending such
school or any teachers thereof.
K. Hinder or obstruct any officer in the performance of his duties, or
willfully refuse or neglect to assist any officer when lawfully called upon
by him so to do in the execution of any process or in the suppression of
any breach of the peace or disorderly conduct or in case of any escape
or when such officer is resisted in the discharge of his duty, or
knowingly resist or oppose any officer or person authorized by law in
serving or attempting to serve any writ, bill, order or process or when
making any arrest, either with or without a warrant.
L. Intentionally enter upon or trespass upon the land or property of any
person without permission so to do.
M. Invade the privacy of any person by going upon the private property of
others in stealth and at night for the purpose of "peeping" through
windows, doors or other openings, thereby engaging in conduct
associated with what is commonly known as a "Peeping Tom."
N. Any person, while operating a motor vehicle on any street or highway in
the Township of North Brunswick, who knowingly flees or attempts to
elude any police or law enforcement officer after having received any
signal from such officer to bring the vehicle to a full stop is a disorderly
person.
O. No person shall purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct
any retail or wholesale business operation, function or activity, nor shall
any person purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any
retail or wholesale business owner, employee, agent or personnel
acting in the furtherance of the interests of that business with the intent
to prevent, undermine or otherwise obstruct the lawful retail or
wholesale practices of the business. This subsection does not apply to
conduct considered lawful competitive economic practices.
A. All other riotous, indecent or disorderly conduct, breach of the peace
and vagrancy not hereinabove specifically mentioned are hereby
prohibited.
B. The term "person," as used in this Article, shall, wherever appropriate
in connection with the context, include "individual," "firm,"
"corporation," "partnership," "association," "company" or
"organization" of any kind and shall include the plural. The masculine
pronoun shall include the feminine.
§ 238-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-3
222:1020
§ 238-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 7-1-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-31; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 238-3 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-3
222:1021

ARTICLE II
Noise
[Adopted 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17187]
§ 238-4. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance of the Township
of North Brunswick."
§ 238-5. Declaration of findings and policy.
§ 238-6. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this article have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with
a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or
its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is
more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services, including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
A. Whereas, excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of
science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and whereas the people have a right to and should
be ensured an environment free from excessive sound; now, therefore,
it is the policy of Township of North Brunswick to prevent excessive
sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the citizens
or degrade the quality of life.
B. This article shall apply to the control of sound originating from
stationary sources within the limits of the Township of North
Brunswick.
187. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article II, Noise, adopted 7-6-1992.
§ 238-4 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-6
222:1023
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator, and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTIDWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTIUSE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to, a
commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having boilers,
incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air conditioners, laundry
rooms, utility provisions, or health and recreational facilities, or other
similar devices or areas, either in the interior or on the exterior of the
building, which may be a source of elevated sound levels at another
category on the same distinct parcel of land, or a building, which is both
commercial (usually on the ground floor) and residential property, located
above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of this article that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities, or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
§ 238-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-6
222:1024
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by an NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the vertical boundary that separates one
parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or
commercial property; the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling
unit that is part of a multidwelling unit building; or on a multiuse property
as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries between the two
portions of the property on which different categories of activity are being
performed (e.g., if the multiuse property is a building which is residential
upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be
the interface between the residential area and the commercial area, or
if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC unit on the same
parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of the receiving
unit). Note: This definition shall not apply to a commercial source and a
commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of property
(e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 238-7. Applicability.
A. This model noise ordinance applies to sound from the following
property categories:
§ 238-6 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-7
222:1025
§ 238-8. Nonapplicability.
(1) Industrial facilities.
(2) Commercial facilities.
(3) Public service facilities.
(4) Community service facilities.
(5) Residential properties.
(6) Multiuse properties.
(7) Public and private rights-of-way.
(8) Public spaces.
(9) Multidwelling unit buildings.
B. This model noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following
property categories:
(1) Commercial facilities.
(2) Public service facilities.
(3) Community service facilities (i.e., nonprofits and/or religious
facilities).
(4) Residential properties.
(5) Multiuse properties.
(6) Multidwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Sound from church bells and church chimes when a part of a
religious observance or service.
(2) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
existence of an emergency.
(3) The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(4) The emission of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.188
188. Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 651 et seq.
§ 238-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-8
222:1026
§ 238-9. Exemptions.
§ 238-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Department of
Community Development and the Police Department.
§ 238-10.1. Measurement protocols.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
A. Except as provided in §§ 238-10.4 and 238-10.5 below, the provisions of
this article shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA)189 FEMA or other government agencies to
the extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I, II and III, except as provided for in
§ 238-10.4 below.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
article and to pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this article that do not require the use of a sound level meter
(i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and
to pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 238-10.1B and with the definition of "real property line" as contained
herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling, and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
189. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 238-8 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-10.1
222:1027
§ 238-10.2. Maximum permissible sound levels.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 238-7A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I, II
or III except as specified in § 238-10.1B.
B. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Sunday through
Thursday, and between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Fridays and
Saturdays, impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels.
Between 9:00 p.m., Sundays through Thursdays, and 10:00 p.m.,
Fridays and Saturdays, and 7:00 a.m. daily, impulsive sound which
occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed 80
decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times in any hour
shall be measured as continuous sound and shall meet the
requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels
When
Measured
Outdoors
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential Property, or
Residential Portion of a
Multiuse Property
Commercial Facility,
Public Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of A
Multiuse Property,
or Community
Service Facility
Time
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sunday
through
Thursday; 7:00
a.m. to 10:00
p.m. Friday and
Saturday
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. Sunday
through
Thursday; 10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Friday and
Saturday 24 hours
Maximum AWeighted
sound level
standard
(dB)
65 50 65
§ 238-10.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-10.2
222:1028
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels
When
Measured
Indoors
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential Property, or
Residential Portion of a
Multiuse Property
Commercial Facility
or Nonresidential
Portion of a Multiuse
Property
Time
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
Sunday through
Thursday; 7:00
a.m. to 10:00
p.m. Friday and
Saturday
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. Sunday
through Thursday;
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. Friday and
Saturday 24 hours
Maximum AWeighted
sound level
standard
(dB)
55 40 55
Note: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are
separated by a real property line and they also share a common or
abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same parcel of property.
§ 238-10.2 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-10.2
222:1029
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band
Sound
pressure
levels
in
decibels:
receiving
property
category
Residential
Property, or
Residential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Outdoors
Residential
Property, or
Residential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Indoors
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property, or
Community
Service
Facility
Outdoors
Commercial
Facility or
Nonresidential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Indoors
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz.
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Time
7:00
a.m. to
9:00
p.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
7:00
a.m. to
10:00
p.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
9:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
7:00
a.m. to
9:00
p.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
7:00
a.m. to
10:00
p.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
9:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Friday
and
Saturday 24 hours
24
hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
§ 238-10.2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-10.2
222:1030
§ 238-10.3. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band
Sound
pressure
levels
in
decibels:
receiving
property
category
Residential
Property, or
Residential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Outdoors
Residential
Property, or
Residential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Indoors
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property, or
Community
Service
Facility
Outdoors
Commercial
Facility or
Nonresidential
Portion of A
Multiuse
Property
Indoors
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz.
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Time
7:00
a.m. to
9:00
p.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
7:00
a.m. to
10:00
p.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
9:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
7:00
a.m. to
9:00
p.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
7:00
a.m. to
10:00
p.m.
Friday
and
Saturday
9:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
Sunday
through
Thursday;
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Friday
and
Saturday 24 hours
24
hours
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
Note: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the
source must be constant in level and character. If octave band sound
pressure level variations exceed plus or minus two dB in the bands
containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the
measurement.
§ 238-10.2 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-10.3
222:1031
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
the measurement protocol in § 238-10.1B of this article. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
Table IV
Maximum Permissible Increase in Total Sound Levels
Within a Residential Property
Weeknights, Sunday through Thursday 9:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Weekend nights, Friday and Saturday 10:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. All other times
3 dB(C) 6 dB(C)
§ 238-10.4. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Power tools, home maintenance tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall only be
operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless such
activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At
all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All
motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a
muffler and/or sound reduction device.
B. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, and prohibited at any time on Sundays and federal holidays,
unless such activities can meet the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
All motorized equipment used in construction and demolition activity
shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction device.
C. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
D. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
§ 238-10.3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-10.4
222:1032
§ 238-10.5. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore nonminor violations.
E. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Friday
and Saturday. At all other times, sound operated on a public space or
public right-of-way from such equipment shall not be plainly audible at
a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator.
F. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property
line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort,
and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the
unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a Noise Control Officer or
Noise Control Investigator.
(1) Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but
not be limited to:
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
§ 238-10.4 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-10.5
222:1033
§ 238-10.6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a notice of
violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum penalty
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs
shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this article, the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this article that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 238-6), an NOV shall
be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq., where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator. It shall be noted that the NOV
does not constitute a formal enforcement action, a final agency
action or a final legal determination that a violation has occurred.
Therefore, the NOV may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a nonminor violation, the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected, an NOPA with a civil
penalty of not more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
§ 238-10.5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-10.6
222:1034
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014, will be issued.
If a nonminor violation is immediately corrected, an NOV without a civil
penalty shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation
occurs again (within 12 months of the initial violation), an NOPA shall
be issued regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected
or not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, an NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of an NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances.
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance.
(3) The conduct of the violator.
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
§ 238-10.6 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-10.6
222:1035

ARTICLE III
Obscene Publications
[Adopted 7-15-1957]
§ 238-11. Obscene publications prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, offer for sale,
attempt to sell, display, give away, keep in his possession with intent to sell
or give away, or in any way furnish or attempt to furnish to any person
any illustrated comic book, magazine or other publication which, read as a
whole, is of an obscene or depraved nature.
§ 238-12. Certain crime or horror publications prohibited;
exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, offer for sale,
attempt to sell, display, give away, or keep in his possession with intent
to utter, expose to view, advertise, sell or give away, or in any way
furnish or attempt to furnish to any person, including any child under
the age of 18 years, any comic book, magazine or other publication
which features nudity or seminudity or which, read as a whole, is
concerned with an account of crime or horror and which depicts, by the
use of drawings, photographs or illustrations, any of the following
offenses:
(1) Administering poisonous and injurious potions.
(2) Aggravated assault.
(3) Arson and other willful burning.
(4) Assault in attempting burglary.
(5) Assault to maim or disfigure.
(6) Assault with intent to commit rape.
(7) Assault with intent to commit robbery.
(8) Assault with intent to murder.
(9) Burglary.
(10) False imprisonment.
(11) Kidnapping and abduction.
(12) Maiming and disfiguring.
(13) Malicious mischief.
(14) Murder.
(15)Rape.
§ 238-11 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-12
222:1037
§ 238-13. Presumption from displaying.
If any publication prohibited hereunder shall be displayed in any newsstand,
bookstore, drugstore, market or other mercantile establishment where the
prohibited publication may be seen by any child under the age of 18 years
visiting such establishment, such display shall be prima facie evidence that
the person in charge of such establishment was then displaying the crime
or horror comic book or other prohibited publication and intended to sell,
offer for sale, furnish or attempt to furnish such prohibited publication to a
child or children under the age of 18 years in violation of this article, but it
shall be competent for the defendant in any such case to show that no such
intention existed.
§ 238-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 238-15. Definitions.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number,
(16) Robbery.
(17) Theft.
(18) Conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
B. Intent where text is not prominently featured. It is the intent of this
article to include publications where the text is not prominently
featured but rather is incidental to the picture, being usually in balloons
that indicate the words spoken by the character.
C. News accounts not included. This article shall not be construed to apply
to those accounts of crime which are part of the ordinary and general
dissemination of news, nor to such drawings and photographs as are
used to illustrate such accounts.
D. Historical or literary publications not included. This article shall not be
construed to apply to legitimate, illustrated historical accounts of crime
or crimes.
E. Classics. This article shall not be construed to apply to those books and
publications which are generally known as "classics" or classic
literature.
§ 238-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-15
222:1038
and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. "Person" is any
person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
§ 238-15 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-15
222:1039

ARTICLE IV
Graffiti
[Adopted 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 06-36]
§ 238-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the defacement of public and
private property within the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 238-17. Unlawful acts.
§ 238-18. Aiding minor to violate article prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, or other person having
legal custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years of age
to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage said minor to violate the
provisions of this article, as defined herein, either by words, overt acts, by
failing to act, or by lack of supervision and control over said minor child.
§ 238-19. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, legal guardian or other person
having legal custody of a minor under 18 years of age who fails or neglects
to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct of such minor
shall be liable in a civil action for any destruction or damage caused by such
minor offender under this provisions of this article.
§ 238-20. Restoration of property.
A. No person shall purposefully or knowingly vandalize, deface or
otherwise damage the tangible property of another, whether public or
private property, by painting, writing, drawing, making of any mark or
otherwise inscribing, in any fashion or materials, what is commonly
known as "graffiti," without the prior written permission of the owner of
the property. For the purposes of this article, "graffiti" includes any
form of painting, writing or inscription, regardless of the content of said
painting, writing or inscription or of the nature of material used in the
commission of the act.
B. Any sale of indelible markers and spray paint containers to minors is
prohibited. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall sell or
otherwise transfer any spray paint container or indelible markers to a
person under the age of 18 years of age, unless said underage person is
accompanied by and has the consent of a parent or legal guardian at the
time of the purchase or transfer. For purposes of this section, "indelible
markers" shall be defined as any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar
device that is not water-soluble and which has a flat or angled writing
surface 1/2 inch or greater.
A. As authorized pursuant to the Municipal Beautification Act, P.L. 2006, c.
31, N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59, the owner of a building, structure or other
§ 238-16 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-20
222:1041
exposed surface located in the Township where graffiti has been placed
shall remove such graffiti.
B. The owner of the property shall be entitled to written notice ordering
the removal of such graffiti, which notice shall be delivered to the
owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail. The
order shall afford the owner of the affected property the opportunity to
remove the graffiti within 90 days from the date that such notice is sent;
however, the Department of Transportation shall be afforded 120 days
from the date such notice is sent to remove graffiti from the property
owned by it. The notice to remove graffiti shall contain a return form as
described in Subsection C hereinbelow.
C. The owner who has received notice must inform the Township when
such graffiti has been removed using the return form supplied by the
Township. The form shall contain a provision stating that by affixing a
signature to the form indicating that the graffiti has been removed, the
owner is certifying that the facts set forth therein are true and that the
certification shall be considered as if made under oath and subject to
the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
D. Any owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
Township by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, regarding the following:
(1) Any objection to the order within 30 days of the date of the order;
or
(2) That the graffiti has been removed within 90 days of the date of the
order or, in the case of the Department of Transportation, within
120 days of the date of the order.
E. Any owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti pursuant to this
section may institute an action challenging the order before a court of
competent jurisdiction within 60 days of the date of the order.
F. If an owner does not undertake the removal of the graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order or, in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an
action challenging the order to remove graffiti is still pending, the
Township may remove the graffiti from the affected property and
present the owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by
the Township, by certified and regular mail, for reimbursement from
the owner. Such costs shall be assessed, enforced and collected as a
municipal lien.
G. Whenever the Township undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure or other exposed surface, in addition to assessing
the cost of removal as a municipal lien against the premises, the
Township may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with
interest, as a personal debt of the owner and may institute an action at
§ 238-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-20
222:1042
§ 238-21. Violations and penalties.
law for the collection thereof. The Superior Court of the State of New
Jersey shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
H. Nothing herein shall affect the ability of the Township or the owner
from filing any claims against the person(s) committing acts of graffiti
that may be available pursuant to any other law, ordinance or
regulation, including, but not limited to, any criminal and/or civil
charge.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article,
with the exception of § 238-16 above, upon conviction thereof shall pay
a fine not less than $100 and not more than $2,000 or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding subsection, for a
second offense involving the actual defacing or marring of any private
or public property, a person having been convicted of same shall be
subject to a minimum mandatory fine of not less than $250 and a
minimum mandatory period of imprisonment or a term of community
service not less than 10 days. One day of community service shall
consist of eight hours.
C. In addition to any other penalty imposed by the court, any person
convicted for a violation of this article may, at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, be required to pay to the owner of the
damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of the pecuniary
damage caused by the act of graffiti or be otherwise responsible for
cleaning, repairing, painting, or restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was in prior to being damaged.
§ 238-20 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-21
222:1043

ARTICLE V
Drug Free School Zones
[Adopted 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 238-22. Adoption of Drug Free School Zone Map.190
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the
Drug Free School Zone Map produced on or about May 20, 2009, by
Michael J. McClelland, P.E., of CME Associates, consulting engineers for the
Township of North Brunswick (referred to as the "Drug Free School Zone
Map") is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of
the location and areas within the Township of North Brunswick of properties
which are used for school purposes and which are owned by or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or school board and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 238-23. Drug Free School Zone Map constitutes official record.
The Drug Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 238-22 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet
of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug free
school zones.
§ 238-24. Changes to school boundaries; notices to Township.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township of North Brunswick Engineer
and the Township of North Brunswick Attorney of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
and which is used for school purposes.
§ 238-25. Filing and distribution of Drug Free School Zone Map.
The Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick is hereby directed to receive
and to keep on file the original of the Drug Free School Zone Map approved
and adopted pursuant to § 238-22 of this article and to provide, at a cost
of $5 per map, a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which
may from time to time request such a copy, along with a certification that
such copy is a true copy of the Drug Free School Zone Map approved and
adopted herein by § 238-22 and kept on file. It is hereby further directed
that a true copy of such Drug Free School Zone Map and of this article
190. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 238-22 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-25
222:1045
shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the
Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 238-26. Findings and declarations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated for the purpose of this article:
A. It is understood that the Drug Free School Zone Map approved and
adopted pursuant to § 238-22 of this article was prepared and is
intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the
criminal laws of this state and that, pursuant to state law, each Drug
Free School Zone Map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township of North Brunswick;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted Drug Free School Zone Map, all of the property depicted on the
Drug Free School Zone Map approved and adopted herein as school
property was owned or leased by or to a school or school board and is
being used for school purposes.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et seq., a prosecutor is
not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the Drug Free School
Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 238-22 of this article.
The failure of the Drug Free School Zone Map approved and adopted by
this article to depict the location and boundaries of any property which
is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the
absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the
result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such property
which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved Drug
Free School Zone Map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and
record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
school board or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et seq. concerning
the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug Free School Zone
Map have been complied with.
§ 238-25 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-26
222:1046
ARTICLE VI
Drug Free Public Property Zones
[Adopted 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 238-27. Adoption of Drug Free Park and Public Housing Zone
Map.191
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the
Township Map, with a Drug Free Park and Public Housing Zone Detail Map
annexed thereto (referred to as the "Drug Free Public Property Zone Map"),
produced on or about May 20, 2009, by Michael J. McClelland, P.E., of
CME Associates, consulting engineers for the Township of North Brunswick,
is hereby approved as an official finding and record of the location and
boundaries of the area or areas on or within 500 feet of public housing
facilities, public parks and/or public buildings within the Township of North
Brunswick, within the definitions of same provided by N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
§ 238-28. Drug Free Public Property Zone Map to be official record.
The original of the Drug Free Public Property Zone Map approved and
adopted pursuant to § 238-27 shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500
feet of property used for the purposes of public housing, public park(s) or
public building(s) until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended
to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and
boundaries of such public property.
§ 238-29. Changes to public property boundaries; notices to
Township.
The Business Administrator of the Township is hereby directed and shall
have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Township of North
Brunswick Engineer and the Township of North Brunswick Attorney of any
changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any
public property used for the purpose of a housing facility, park or public
building.
§ 238-30. Filing and distribution of Drug Free Public Property Zone
Map.
The Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick is hereby directed to receive
and to keep on file the original of the Drug Free Public Property Zone Map
approved and adopted pursuant to § 238-27 of this article and to provide,
at a cost of $5 per map, a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court
which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a certification
that such copy is a true copy of the Drug Free Public Property Zone Map
approved and adopted by § 238-27 herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such Drug Free Public Property Zone
191. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 238-27 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-30
222:1047
Map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk
and to the office of the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 238-31. Findings and declarations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated for the purpose of this article:
A. It is understood that the Drug Free Public Property Zone Map approved
and adopted pursuant to § 238-27 of this article was prepared and is
intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the
criminal laws of this state and that, pursuant to state law, each Drug
Free Property Zone Map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
following:
(1) The location of public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings within the Township of North Brunswick;
(2) The boundaries of the real property within the Township of North
Brunswick which is used for public housing, public parks or public
buildings;
(3) That such public property as described herein is and continues to
be used for such public purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public properties as described herein.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this section:
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any publicly owned or leased facility,
including a library or museum.
PUBLIC HOUSING FACILITY — Any dwelling, complex of
dwellings, accommodation, building, structure or facility and real
property of any nature appurtenant thereto and used in connection
therewith, which is owned by or leased to a local housing authority
in accordance with the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. for the purpose of providing living
accommodations to persons who qualify under established income
requirements.
PUBLIC PARK — A park, recreation facility or area or playground
owned or controlled by a state, county or local government.
(2) All of the property depicted on the Drug Free Public Property Zone
Map approved and adopted by § 238-27 was used for a public
purpose in accordance with one or more of the foregoing
definitions.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 et seq., a prosecutor is
not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
§ 238-30 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-31
222:1048
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the Drug Free Public
Property Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 238-27 of
this article. The failure of the Drug Free Public Property Zone Map
approved and adopted by this article to depict the location and
boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for a public purpose,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries
of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved Drug Free Public Property Zone Map, shall not be deemed to
be an official finding and record that such property is not owned by or
leased to a school or school board or that such property is not used for
public purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 et seq. concerning
the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug Free Public Property
Zone Map have been complied with.
§ 238-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 238-31
222:1049
Chapter 243
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 135.
Housing standards — See Ch. 197.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 287.
§ 238-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 238-31
222:1050
ARTICLE I
Commercial and Multifamily Dwellings
[Adopted 4-6-1970]
§ 243-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Commercial and Multifamily Dwelling
Maintenance Code of the Township of North Brunswick," referred to in this
article in the short form as "this code."
§ 243-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of commercial premises, shopping centers and
multifamily dwelling; to establish minimum heating requirements for rental
dwelling units where furnishing heat is the responsibility of the owner;
to fix responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants;
to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of commercial
premises, shopping centers and multifamily dwellings; to fix penalties for
the violations of this code; and to provide for the right of access by the
agents and employees of the Township to enforce compliance with the
provisions hereof whenever necessary. This code is declared to be remedial
and essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this code shall
be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 243-3. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings or any part thereof
and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings are
situated, where commercial activity of any kind takes place. Commercial
activity shall include, but is not limited to, gasoline service stations; stores
for retail sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns; restaurants, including, but
not limited to, drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog, hamburger or icecream
stands; professional activities, including, but not limited to, medical,
dental, legal, architectural, accounting; personal services, including, but
not limited to, real estate, insurance, barbershops, hairdressers; repair
shops of all kinds; and amusements, including, but not limited to, movies,
skating rinks, bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not.
Commercial activity shall not include sale of agricultural products produced
on the premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are
exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any
building erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which affords a
breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
§ 243-1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-3
222:1051
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — One or more buildings or parts thereof
designed or existing for the temporary or permanent residence, abode or
habitation of 10 or more families. Multifamily dwellings shall include, but
not be limited to, high-rise or garden apartments, tenements, hotels, motels
and rooming houses containing 10 or more units.
NUISANCE —
Any common-law nuisance or as provided by the laws of the State of
New Jersey or the ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes, but
is not limited to, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or
poison sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Abandoned vehicles, trailers, carts, wagons, vessels or other things.
Any vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon, vessel or other thing which is
inoperable, physically or by operation of law, or which remains outside
for a period of more than 72 hours in an unfenced area of premises
which are not used or maintained for the sale of motor vehicles, trailers,
campers or boats, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
C.
Any physical condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists.
This includes, but is not limited to: harborage, as defined above;
existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which mosquito
larvae breed or exist; any deposit or accumulation of trash, litter,
garbage, refuse, debris or any organic or inorganic matter which may
attract flies and to which flies may have access or in which fly larvae
or pupae breed or exist; the existence, presence or maintenance of any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, limbs, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris which is or may become
a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of persons; the existence or presence of any ragweed, poison ivy, poison
sumac or other noxious growth of any kind; the presence, existence
or maintenance of any holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, accumulations of ice, snow or water, and excretion of pets
and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking
areas and other parts of the exterior of the premises which are intended
for use by persons or which are accessible to and likely to be used by
such persons.
D.
The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any other
entrance to the open air of such quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust,
fumes, vapors, mists or gases as endanger or interfere with the health,
safety and general welfare of persons.
E.
§ 243-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-3
222:1052
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care or control of the premises or
any part thereof, whether with or without the consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care or control of any
premises as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary, including, but
not limited to, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate, or as mortgagee in possession regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting
or reassigning any part or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a coowner
with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of
the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof designed or
existing as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by one or more businesses for
the conduct of retail sales, with parking space.
§ 243-4. Scope and application.
All commercial premises, shopping centers and multifamily dwellings and
any buildings situated thereon in the Township of North Brunswick shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this code. This chapter establishes minimum standards for
the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings and
premises and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of such buildings or premises
contained therein. Where there is a mixed occupancy with commercial
and other uses on the same premises, all such uses shall be nevertheless
regulated by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 243-5. Conflict with other laws.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than is set forth in any other ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick
Any act or maintenance of any condition which causes or threatens
pollution, as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey, of any
waters in this township in such a manner as to endanger the health,
safety or general welfare of persons upon any premises within this
township.
F.
Unsanitary conditions or anything unreasonably offensive to the senses
or dangerous to health, in violation of this chapter.
G.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
H.
I. Fire hazards.
§ 243-3 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-5
222:1053
or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick or
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in
any such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 243-6. Owner's liability.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this chapter, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from
any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 243-7. Occupant's liability.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§§ 243-12, 243-13, 243-14, 243-15 and 243-16 of this chapter, and the
occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be
entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the
fact that the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
§ 243-8. Duty of occupant to report.
Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition of the premises which
constitutes a violation of this chapter by the owner or operator, the
occupant shall report same to the Building Inspector or Health Officer, who
shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 243-9. Landscaping.
Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, trees, hedges and bushes
shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown.
§ 243-10. Signs.
All signs and printed matter and pictures or illustrations contained thereon,
permitted by reasons of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use,
shall be maintained painted in good repair.
§ 243-11. Exterior in good repair, free of hazards.
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences,
signs and storefronts) shall be maintained free of safety hazards, such as
broken windows, loose and falling shingles, roofing or siding and crumbling
and falling stone or brick, and fire hazards.
§ 243-12. Removal of refuse; receptacles required.
§ 243-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-12
222:1054
§ 243-13. Maintenance of public ways.
The owner, operator and occupant shall maintain paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots, parking areas and other parts of the premises which are
accessible to and used by persons on the premises, in good repair, free
of safety hazards and unsanitary conditions, including, but not limited to,
holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, ice, uncleared snow,
litter and excretion of pets and other animals. All such holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps repaired and other
conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions, with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, operator and occupant to take reasonable steps
to discover, remove and abate any such hazards or unsanitary conditions
which may exist on the premises.
§ 243-14. Duty of occupant to keep premises sanitary.
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises
unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder or maintaining the premises in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 243-15. Duty to keep premises free of infestation.
Every owner, operator and occupant shall be responsible for the elimination
of infestation in and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 243-16. Duty to maintain free of nuisances and hazards.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions.
A. The owner and operator of every shopping center, the owner and
operator of every multifamily dwelling and the owner and operator of
commercial premises with the capacity of seating, serving or otherwise
accommodating 100 or more persons shall furnish, by private contract
or otherwise, scavengers for the removal and disposal of refuse and
garbage.
B. Every owner, operator and occupant shall have the duty and
responsibility of providing sufficient and suitable receptacles with tightfitting
covers for receiving and holding refuse and garbage; and the
receptacles shall be maintained in a manner, with the cover in place, so
as to prevent the creation of a nuisance, and shall be kept in an
enclosed space separate and apart from sidewalks and other pedestrian
areas, except when set out for collection during the hours of a day
scheduled for such collection.
§ 243-12 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-17
222:1055
§ 243-17. Fire lanes, parking spaces, traffic lanes and trash
containers required.
The owner and operator of every shopping center shall be responsible for
providing and/or maintaining the following:
§ 243-18. Outside storage.
A. A fire lane, at least 12 feet wide, adjacent to the public walkway or
sidewalk in front of the entrance to the commercial businesses and
running the entire length of the building or buildings occupied by said
businesses. Concrete barriers, at least six inches high, shall be erected
to prevent vehicles from crossing into the fire lane and parking thereon.
The perimeter of the fire lane shall be clearly delineated by lines
painted in yellow paint on the road surface, and the words "Fire Lane"
shall be painted within the perimeter in twelve-inch letters at least once
every 300 feet.
B. Means of ingress and egress shall be clearly marked by signs; and
concrete barriers, at least six inches high, shall be placed on each side
of said means of ingress and egress in order to provide a safe method of
ingress and egress.
C. Parking spaces shall be clearly indicated by painted lines, white on dark
surfaces or black on light surfaces.
D. Lanes for the movement of traffic, at least 12 feet wide in each
direction, shall be clearly marked, and arrows indicating one-way traffic
shall be painted in these lanes at both ends, white on dark surfaces or
black on light surfaces.
E. A covered trash basket with at least a twenty-gallon capacity shall be
provided for each 150 feet of store frontage in the shopping area. Such
baskets may be placed in the walking or pedestrian area.
A. Outside storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be
forbidden. However, this subsection shall not apply to outside storage
of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats or other similar merchandise
held for retail sale. This subsection shall apply, but not be limited, to
storage of merchandise or equipment in trailers, motor vehicles,
shacks, sheds or other outside containers.
B. Waiver of this provision may be applied for by written request to the
Mayor and Council and granted, based on the size and kind of
merchandise or equipment, duration and location of the outside storage
and the purposes of this article.
§ 243-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-18.1
222:1056
§ 243-18.1. Minimum required temperatures in rental dwellings.
[Added 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
Every owner or operator of a dwelling who permits the dwelling to be
occupied for rent under any agreement wherein the owner is responsible for
furnishing heat, shall comply with the following minimum heating standard:
§ 243-19. Inspection.
All buildings and premises subject to this article are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Building Inspector, Health Officer or any other
township official charged with the duty of enforcing regulations governing
any aspect or conduct of the activity housed in the said premises. At the
time of such inspections, all parts of the premises must be available and
accessible for such inspections, and the owner, operator and occupant
are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such
inspections. The above-mentioned inspector, officer and official are hereby
authorized and empowered to apply for, obtain and execute a search
warrant for any building or premises subject to this article whenever
necessary to inspect such building or premises. Such inspections shall be
made during daylight hours or during hours when the buildings or premises
are open to the public, unless there is reason to believe a violation exists
of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
§ 243-20. Abatement of violations.
A. From September 15 of each year to the next succeeding May 15, every
unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and at least 65° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
A. Whenever any nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition in
violation of this article is found on any premises within the Township of
North Brunswick, the Building Inspector or Health Officer shall order
the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation or to remove
and abate the nuisance or condition by notice in writing, which shall be
served on the owner, occupant or operator in the following manner:
(1) Where the owner resides in the township, or in the case of an
operator or occupant, written notice shall be served by delivering a
copy to him personally, or by leaving a copy thereof at his dwelling
house or usual place of abode with some competent member of his
family of the age of 14 years or over then residing therein, or by
delivering a copy thereof to a person authorized by appointment or
by law to receive service of process on his behalf.
(2) Where the owner resides outside the township or where the
resident owner or the operator or occupant cannot be served as set
§ 243-18.1 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-20
222:1057
§ 243-21. Lien for abatement.
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein or correction of any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition requires expenditure of the Township of
North Brunswick moneys therefor, in addition to other remedies provided
by law, the Building Inspector or Health Officer may present a report of
the work accomplished to the governing body of the Township of North
Brunswick, along with a summary of the proceedings undertaken to secure
compliance, including notices served upon owners, operators or occupants,
as the case may be. The governing body may then approve the expenses and
costs, whereupon they shall become a lien against the commercial premises,
collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution approving the said
expense shall be certified to the Township Clerk and filed with the Tax
Collector of the Township of North Brunswick, who shall be responsible for
the collection thereof, and a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the commercial
premises.
§ 243-22. Enforcing officials.
At the request of the Building Inspector or Health Officer, any officer,
agent or employee of the Township of North Brunswick shall assist in the
enforcement, interpretation or implementation of any provisions of this
article.
§ 243-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
forth above, written notice shall be mailed to the owner, operator
or occupant by certified mail at his last known address.
(3) Where the owner, operator or occupant cannot be served as set
forth above, it shall be sufficient to post a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
Such notice shall be in writing, directing the removal of the
unsanitary or unhealthy condition or the abatement of the
nuisance at the owner's expense, and shall call for a hearing
before the Board of Health of the Township of North Brunswick.
B. Whenever any nuisance is not removed and abated or any unsanitary or
unhealthy condition in violation of this article is not corrected after
notice and hearing before the Board of Health, the Building Inspector
or Health Officer shall abate and remove such nuisance or correct such
unsanitary or unhealthy condition on direction of the said Board of
Health.
§ 243-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-23
222:1058
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 243-23 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-23
222:1059

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-15-1989]
§ 243-24. Findings of fact. [Amended 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
It is hereby found that there exists a need in the Township of North
Brunswick for the establishment of minimum standards for the maintenance
of building exteriors and outside property areas and to establish minimum
heating requirements for rental dwelling units where furnishing heat is
the responsibility of the owner. This finding is based upon observance of
properties where the lack of maintenance and upkeep has resulted in either
the creation of threats of the public health, safety and welfare or the
presence of potentially blighting conditions which could negatively affect
property values.
§ 243-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards to govern the maintenance, appearance
and condition of building exteriors and outside property areas for both
residential and nonresidential premises.
§ 243-26. Compliance.
All residential and nonresidential buildings, structures and premises shall
comply with the provisions of this article, regardless of whether such
buildings or structures shall have been constructed, altered or repaired
before the enactment of this article and irrespective of any permits or
licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
premises.
§ 243-27. Construal.
This article establishes minimum standards for property maintenance, and
the provisions of this article shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which may be more
stringent.
§ 243-28. Effect on existing remedies.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies available to the township, its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 243-29. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this article, be defined as follows:
§ 243-24 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-29
222:1061
BUILDING EXTERIOR — Those portions of a building or structure which are
exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent properties,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and the open
space on the premises outside of any building or structure erected thereon.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building structure, or any part
thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling,
flaking, chipping, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect,
lack of maintenance or excessive use.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of North Brunswick.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage place; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison-spraying,
fumigating or trapping; or by any other approved pest-elimination methods.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
OUTSIDE PROPERTY AREA — The open space on any premises located
outside of buildings and structures.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage.
STAGNANT WATER — Any accumulation of water, with the exception of
approved detention and retention areas, which does not disperse within
three days of the last recorded local rainfall.
§ 243-30. Responsibility for maintenance.
Depending upon the nature of the violation, the owner and/or tenant of the
premises shall be responsible for maintaining the property in compliance
with this article.
§ 243-31. Minimum maintenance standards.
A. Outside property areas.
(1) General. All outside property areas shall be maintained in a safe
and sanitary condition so as not to adversely affect the public
health or safety or result in a blighted appearance.
(2) Drainage. All outside property areas shall be graded and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon or within any structure thereon.
(3) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and without obvious signs of deterioration. Pointed chain link
fences shall not be permitted on any property utilized for
residential purposes.
§ 243-29 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-31
222:1062
(4) Outside storage. Outside storage in the front yard is prohibited.
Outside storage of items such as, but not limited to, building
materials, tires, windows, bottles, drums, trailers, oil tanks and
lawnmowers shall be prohibited unless completely obscured from
surrounding property by a solid screen not less than six feet in
height. Covering such items with canvas or similar material shall
be deemed a violation of this subsection. Firewood may be stored
uncovered in any yard area other than the front yard.
(5) Motor vehicle storage. [Amended 2-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-2;
3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 05-6]
(a) With the exception of automobile service stations and garages
and car dealerships, no more than one unregistered and/or
uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked outside of the
garage on any property, and such vehicle shall be parked on an
improved surface maintained in a weed-free condition. Any
such vehicle shall not be utilized for storage of any items and
shall be subject to all property maintenance standards
applicable to accessory structures. No such vehicle shall
remain outside, whether covered or uncovered, in a state of
partial disassembly or disrepair or be in the process of being
stripped, dismantled or overhauled except in accordance with
the provisions of § 330-4. For purposes of this section, the term
"improved surface" shall be defined as any paved, graveled,
concrete, brick or block surface.
(b) In no event may any unregistered and/or uninspected motor
vehicles be parked outside:
[1] On any property utilized for nonresidential purposes; and
[2] Which property is located adjacent to a residential zone or
residential use or across the street from a residential zone
or residential use; and
[3] Without first obtaining an unregistered/nonoperating
vehicle permit from the Division of Code Enforcement. To
obtain a permit, a property owner must demonstrate:
[a] The vehicle is stored in accordance with all applicable
laws, including § 243-31A(5)(a) hereof;
[b] The vehicle is owned or leased by the business that
owns/occupies the property on which the vehicle is
parked;
[c] The vehicle, except for its nonregistered or
nonoperating status, is suitable for use by the
business that owns/occupies the property on which
the vehicle is parked;
§ 243-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-31
222:1063
[d] The vehicle shall not be parked within 30 feet of any
residential zone or property used for residential
purposes or any closer to a street that the front
building line.
(c) This subsection shall not apply to lawfully operated junkyards.
(6) Disposal of rubbish and garbage. All exterior property areas shall
be kept free from any accumulation of rubbish and garbage, and
any rubbish or garbage placed in an outside property area more
than 24 hours prior to collection shall be placed in covered
containers equipped with tight-fitting covers.
(7) Paved areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved areas shall have the surface maintained in a proper
state of repair so as to afford safe passage under normal weather
conditions. Said areas shall also be kept free of hazardous
conditions, such as snow, ice, mud and other debris. If lighted for
night use, lights shall not be permitted to cast directly upon nearby
dwellings.
(8) Exhaust vents. The construction, maintenance or operation of
pipes, ducts, fans or blowers which discharge gases, steam, vapor,
hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes
directly upon abutting properties is prohibited.
(9) Discarded appliances. All outside property areas shall be free from
abandoned refrigerators, boilers, hot-water heaters, television sets
and other similar major appliances, except for normal placement
for solid waste collection.
(10) Overhanging. Loose overhanging objects, whether natural or manmade,
including accumulations of ice or snow, shall be removed or
repaired so as to eliminate hazards resulting from the objects
falling to the ground.
(11) Ground surface hazards. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally
unsound wells, shafts and exterior cellar openings shall be
appropriately closed and sealed to eliminate the possibility of
accidental entry.
(12) Infestation. All outside property areas shall be maintained to be
free of rodents, vermin, pest infestations and conditions causing
the same.
(13) Loading/Unloading and truck idling restrictions. Any portion of a
nonresidential use which lies within 300 feet of either a residential
zone or a lot developed for residential use which is not separated
from the residential zone or lot developed for residential use by a
noise abatement wall which has been approved by the Township in
accordance with the provisions of Paragraphs 3 through 6 of a
January 23, 2003, consent order in the matter of Church & Dwight
§ 243-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-31
222:1064
v. North Brunswick, Middlesex Superior Court, Docket No.
L-6144-01, shall comply with the following restrictions in those
portions of the rear or side yard areas which lie within 300 feet
of the residential zone or use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
restrictions against truck idling for more than three minutes
contained in Subsection A(13)(c) hereof shall be fully applicable.
[Added 7-6-1993; amended 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 01-8;
4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-9; 11-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-28]
(a) For the purposes of this section, loading/unloading shall
constitute the following:
[1] The loading and unloading of articles from trucks and
tractor-trailers;
[2] The drop-off or pick-up of containers from trucks and
tractor-trailers; or
[3] The disconnection or connection of the tractor segment to
any tractor-trailers.
(b) Loading/Unloading restrictions applicable to all nonresidential
uses within the I-1 and I-2 Zones and only to facilities utilized
for manufacturing, warehouse and distribution operations in
all other zones. Loading/Unloading and the operation of
forklifts outside of the building within 300 feet of a residential
property line shall be prohibited during the hours of 8:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. Monday to Friday and 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday.
(c) Truck idling restrictions. The idling of truck engines for more
than three consecutive minutes when the vehicle is not in
motion shall be prohibited except for the following:
[1] A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business
where the motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle
for 30 consecutive minutes;
[2] A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when
the vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more
hours;
[3] Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power
source is utilized in whole or in part for necessary and
definitively prescribed mechanical operation other than
propulsion, passenger compartment heating or air
conditioning;
[4] Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of
connection, detachment or exchange of trailers; and
[5] Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while
being used by the vehicle's operator for sleeping or resting
§ 243-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-31
222:1065
in a nonresidential area located a minimum of 300 feet
from a residential property line.
(d) Appropriate signs shall be posted both at the rear of the
building and on the buffer located to the rear of the parking lot.
Said signs shall indicate the following: "The idling of engines
for more than three minutes in a rear or side yard is prohibited
and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000."
(e) Truck access restrictions applicable to warehouse/distribution
operations. Truck access to loading/unloading facilities in rear
or side yards abutting residential zones shall be restricted
during the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday to Friday
and 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday by the
installation of a fence with a gate. Said gate shall remain
closed during prohibited hours to keep trucks out of rear or
side yard areas. However, trucks stored at the vehicle
operator's place of business shall be permitted to be parked
overnight in side yard areas subject to truck idling restrictions
of this section.
(f) Inside operation of forklifts. The inside operation of forklifts
and inside loudspeaker systems between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. Monday to Friday and 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday shall be prohibited unless all overhead
doors within 300 feet of a residential use or residential zone
remain closed.
(g) Outside loudspeakers prohibited. The installation of outside
loudspeakers shall be prohibited.
(14) Motor vehicle for sale. [Added 2-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-2]
(a) Residential and nonresidential zones.
[1] Residential zones. For property located in a residential
zone, no property owner or occupant shall be permitted to
place or display “for sale” or similar signs on more than
one vehicle at any one time and not more than twice in one
year while parked on street or off street in the Township of
North Brunswick. Any such vehicle must be owned for at
least three months prior to the display of such "for sale"
sign by the resident or member of his or her immediate
family. Said vehicle must, at all times such signs are
displayed, be physically placed or located on an improved
surface. If the vehicle to be sold is parked on a public
street, the vehicle must be in front of the seller’s property
or, in the alternative, the vehicle to be sold may be parked
on the public street in front of an adjacent neighbor’s
property, provided that said adjacent neighbor grants the
seller permission to do so in writing and not more than
§ 243-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-31
222:1066
twice in one year. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05-6;
11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-31]
[2] Nonresidential zones. No person shall be permitted to
place or display "for sale" or similar signs on more than
one vehicle at any one time while parked on-street or offstreet
in the Township of North Brunswick located in a
nonresidential zone unless such vehicle shall be placed or
located on an improved surface. Such signs may be placed
or displayed on such vehicle only during the hours of the
day when the owner of the vehicle is employed by a
nonresidential use located on the premises where the
vehicle is located, except that the owner of the
nonresidential use may be permitted to display such signs
overnight on a single vehicle located on an improved
surface if owned by the property owner or a member of his
or her immediate family.
(b) No more than two "for sale" or similar signs shall be placed or
displayed within or on any motor vehicle parked on-street or
off-street in the Township of North Brunswick.
(c) "For sale" or similar signs placed or displayed within or on
motor vehicles parked on-street or off-street in the Township of
North Brunswick shall be no taller or wider than 20 inches by
20 inches.
(d) "For sale" or similar signs shall not stay on the motor vehicle
for longer than three continuous months.
(e) This subsection shall not apply to any lawfully operated motor
vehicle sales business.
(15) Stream maintenance. [Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05-6]
(a) Property owners within close proximity to a stream shall be
required to remove any trees and/or vegetation on their
property that is determined by the Township to have a high
probability of falling into said stream. "Close proximity" shall
be defined and understood to be when the distance from the
bank of a stream is less than the height of a potentially
hazardous tree, or, when vegetation such as bushes, shrubs or
underbrush are growing directly into the channel of a stream
in a way that will disrupt the natural flow of the stream. Close
proximity and a high probability of falling over or into a stream
or stream bank shall be determined by the Township in its
reasonable discretion and in consultation with either the
Township Engineer or his designee; or a certified tree expert;
or a certified landscape architect. This includes, but shall not
be limited to, trees and/or vegetation that is dead, dying or
diseased. If any tree and/or vegetation falls into a stream, the
§ 243-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-31
222:1067
property owner from where the tree and/or vegetation was
situated shall immediately remove same to eliminate the
possibility of any backup causing the flow of the stream to be
disrupted or dammed. The Township shall have the right to
cause the removal of any trees and/or vegetation determined
to have a high probability or falling into any stream or to
cause the removal of any trees and/or vegetation which has
fallen into a stream, the sole cost and expense of which shall
be borne by the owner in accordance with the provisions of
§ 243-32, Enforcement provisions, of this article.
(b) If any debris, building material or any other materials used to
stabilize a stream bank falls into a stream, the property owner
from where the debris or building material fell shall
immediately remove said debris, building material or any other
materials to eliminate the possibility of such debris, building
material or any other materials causing a backup which would
cause the flow of a stream to be disrupted or dammed as
determined in the reasonable discretion of the Township
Engineer or his designee. The Township shall have the right to
cause the removal of any such debris, building material or any
other materials causing a backup, disruption or damming of a
stream, the sole cost and expense of which shall be borne by
the owner in accordance with the provisions of § 243-32,
Enforcement provisions, of this article.
(16) Sump pump discharges. Drainage from foundations and/or sump
pumps shall be discharged to a storm drain, approved watercourse
or at grade. When discharged at grade, the point of discharge shall
be at least 10 feet from any property line and shall not create a
nuisance or safety hazard and shall not discharge at or through the
face of any curb, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
13.1.5., Foundation Drains. Where sump pumps discharge at grade
on unpaved surfaces, the discharge pipe shall extend to a splash
block or equivalent, which shall be designed to contain the
discharge, reduce its velocity and avoid disturbing adjacent areas.
Where necessary, the discharge pipe shall terminate with an elbow
to direct the flow along the splash block. Splash blocks shall be at
least 24 inches long. [Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05-6]
(17) Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, trees,
hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming
overgrown. The overgrowth of grass, brush, hedges, bushes,
shrubs, weeds, and other plant life and vegetation; the existence or
presence of dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, grass and other
dead or dying plant growths on any plot of land, lot, street,
highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place which is
deemed to be harmful to the public health or safety is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare. No owner of any plot of land, lot, street,
§ 243-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-31
222:1068
highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place within
the Township of North Brunswick shall cause, allow or permit a
nuisance as declared herein to grow or exist thereupon. [Added
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14; amended 2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-01]
(18) Outdoor athletic equipment. [Added 2-5-2018 by Ord. No.
18-01]
(a) Installation and storage of permanent and portable basketball
hoops and other athletic equipment.
[1] No person, firm or corporation shall install a permanent
basketball hoop between the curb and sidewalk of any
street. A permanent basketball hoop is one which is affixed
into the ground by means of cement or other materials. A
permanent basketball hoop shall also be one which is not
able to be easily removed upon the completion of the use
of that basketball hoop on any particular occasion.
[2] No person, firm or corporation shall store or leave
unattended a portable basketball hoop, hockey net, or
similar portable athletic equipment in the street. When not
actively in use, all such equipment may be stored between
the curb and sidewalk, if it does not block either traffic
upon the street or pedestrians upon the sidewalk, or
otherwise placed within private property.
(19) Fire hydrants. [Added 2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
(a) It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface,
paint, obstruct, or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or Fire
Department connection for the pressurization of fire
suppression systems, including fire hydrants and Fire
Department connections that are located on public or private
streets and access lanes or on private property.
(b) The minimum clearance to any fire hydrant or connection shall
be three feet in all directions and shall not be inhibited by
landscaping, plantings or the overgrowth of grass, brush,
hedges, bushes, shrubs, weeds, and other plant life and
vegetation.
B. Building and structure exteriors.
(1) General. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and other exterior
surface shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance
and repair.
(2) Street numbers. Each building to which a street number has been
assigned shall have the number so assigned displayed in a position
easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All
§ 243-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-31
222:1069
numbers shall be in Arabic figures at least three inches high and 1/
2 inch wide.
(3) Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks,
loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other condition which
might admit rain or dampness into the building interior. All exterior
surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and properly
surface-coated. Said surface coatings shall not exhibit signs of
deterioration, such as flaking, peeling, chipping or crumbling.
(4) Additions and renovations. Structural additions and/or renovations
to a building shall not be halted for a period to exceed 120 days if
inappropriate surface materials, such as tar paper and plywood,
are left exposed to view. Appropriate surface materials shall be
applied.
(5) Roofs and drainage. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner
that creates a public nuisance nor a nuisance to occupants of
adjacent premises.
(6) Decorative features. All cornices, entablature, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair, with proper anchorage, and missing
pieces shall be replaced.
(7) Signs, canopies and awnings. All canopies, signs and awnings shall
be maintained in good repair.
(8) Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch and fire escape, as well as
required handrails, shall be maintained free of hazardous
conditions and in good repair.
(9) Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be
maintained in good repair and in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction so as to exclude rain and wind as completely as
possible.
(10) Projecting surfaces. Exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or
structures containing sharp, rough or projecting surfaces or
objects which might cause injury to persons coming in contact
therewith shall be removed.
(11) Exterior design and appearance. Any nonresidential use which is
adjacent to or located across a local road from any residential use
shall be consistent with the residential character of the
neighborhood interims of exterior appearance.
C. Minimum required temperatures in rental dwellings. Every owner or
operator of a dwelling who permits the dwelling to be occupied for rent
under any agreement wherein the owner is responsible for furnishing
heat shall comply with the following minimum heating standard:
§ 243-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-31
222:1070
§ 243-32. Enforcement provisions. [Amended 7-6-1993; 5-21-2001
by Ord. No. 01-8; 2-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-2; 7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04-14]
(1) From September 15 of each year to the next succeeding May 15,
every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall
be maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and at least 65° F. between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
A. Enforcement officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Director of the Department of Community Development, or his
designee, to enforce the provisions of this article as herein provided,
except that § 243-31A(13) shall be concurrently enforced by the
Director of the Department of Community Development, or his
designee, and the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his
designee. [Amended 11-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-28]
B. Inspection of premises. Inspections of premises and the issuing of
orders in connection therewith under the provision of this article shall
be the exclusive responsibility of the Enforcement Officer, as defined
herein, or his designee. Whenever, in the opinion of the Enforcement
Officer, or his designee, it shall become necessary or desirable to have
inspections of any condition performed by another Township
department, the Enforcement Officer, or his designee, shall arrange for
such inspections to be performed. Orders for the correction of any
violations under this article may be issued by the department head of
the applicable inspecting department without the need for the express
approval of the Enforcement Officer, although the Enforcement Officer
shall be notified of the issuance of any such order for correction of any
violations under this article by such other Township department.
C. Inspections.
(1) Authorization to inspect. The Enforcement Officer, his designee, or
the applicable Township department, pursuant to § 243-32C is
authorized to enter any structure and/or premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of performing inspections under
this article, provided that the Enforcement Officer, his designee, or
the applicable inspecting party will attempt to secure permission to
inspect the structure and/or premises from the owner, operator or
occupant of the said structure and/or premises. When attempting
to secure such permission, the Enforcement Officer, his designee,
or the applicable inspecting party shall advise the owner, operator
or occupant of the said structure and/or premises of their right to
refuse to grant such permission to inspect. Should the owner,
operator or occupant grant the right to inspect all parts of the
structure and/or premises must be available and accessible for
such inspections, and the owner, operator and occupant are
required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such
inspections.
§ 243-31 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-32
222:1071
(2) Residential properties. In the event there is no one available to give
permission to inspect at a residential property or permission to
inspect is denied, the Enforcement Officer, his designee, or the
applicable inspecting party shall have the authority to enter onto
the subject premises to the front and side of any structures on the
premises up to the rear line of the primary structure; provided,
however, that under no circumstances shall there be any entry onto
any section of the premises which is fenced in or any entry into the
structure without the consent or appropriate search warrant issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such inspections of residential
properties shall be made during daylight hours commencing no
later than 30 minutes before sunset or during hours when the
structure and/or premises are open to the public, unless there is
reason to believe that a violation exists of such a character that is
deemed to be an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township of North Brunswick requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
(3) Commercial properties. In the event there is no one available to
give permission to inspect at a commercial property or permission
to inspect is denied, the Enforcement Officer, his designee, or the
applicable inspecting party shall have the authority to enter onto
the subject premises to the front, side and rear of any structures on
the premises and shall have the authority to inspect up to the rear
line of the property itself; provided, however, that under no
circumstances shall there be any entry onto any section of the
premises which is fenced in or any entry into the structure without
consent or the appropriate search warrant issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(4) Application for search warrant. In the event that permission to
inspect is denied, upon request, the Enforcement Officer, his
designee, or the applicable inspecting party is hereby authorized
and empowered to apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for
a search warrant for any structure and/or premises subject to this
article whenever necessary to inspect such structure and/or
premises.
D. Enforcement procedure.
(1) Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there is or has
been a violation of any provision of this section, he may give a
violation notice of such violation to the person, persons or entities
responsible therefor. Such violation notice shall be in writing and
shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance.
Such violation notice shall be deemed to be properly and
sufficiently served if: a) a copy thereof is sent by certified mail and
regular mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon
which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax records
of the municipality; or b) a copy thereof is handed to said person or
persons; or c) a copy thereof is left at the usual place of abode or
§ 243-32 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-32
222:1072
office of said persons or entities. A violation notice shall be given
as aforesaid within or without the municipality.
(2) The violation notice shall also state that, unless the violation is
abated, cured, prevented or desisted within the compliance period
designated in the violation notice, exclusive of the date of service,
the Township may issue a summons for the violation. The
Enforcement Officer may extend the period for compliance with the
requirements of this section in regard to the violation stated in the
violation notice for a period in excess of the compliance period if, in
his judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or
cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within
the compliance period, and in such cases, the Enforcement Officer
shall state such reasonably required extended period in the notice,
which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid compliance
period.
(3) Summonses.
(a) Repeat violations. Whenever any violation reoccurs within one
year from the prior violation, or said person, persons, or
entities violates a similar provision under this section, the
Enforcement Officer may issue additional summonses without
the necessity of an additional violation notice and cure period,
such summons to be in writing and to include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such summons shall
be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if: a) copy
thereof is sent by certified mail to the last known address of the
person or entity upon which the same is served, as shown by
the most recent tax records of the municipality; or b) a copy
thereof is handed to said person or persons; or c) a copy
thereof is left at the usual place of abode or office of said
persons or entities. The summons shall be served as aforesaid
within or without the municipality.
(b) Continued violations. At the discretion of the Enforcement
Officer, additional summonses may be served each and every
day that the violation continues. Service of such summonses
shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth
hereinabove.
E. Abatement of violations by Township. Whenever any violation or
nuisance, as defined under this section, is not removed and abated and/
or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition in violation of this section is
not corrected after notice, summons and hearing before the Municipal
Court or Board of Health or other appropriate tribunal, as applicable,
the Township may, either with Township equipment and labor or by
contract with third parties, undertake to abate and cure such violation,
nuisance and/or correct any such unsanitary or unhealthy condition or
to generally put the premises in proper condition so as to comply with
the requirements of this chapter. The remuneration of the Township's
§ 243-32 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-32
222:1073
expenditure for such abatement, cure and/or removal shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 243-32F hereof.
F. Assessment for Township's cost of removal; lien. Where abatement of
any nuisance, violation or offense, as defined herein, or correction of
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition requires expenditure of the
Township of North Brunswick monies therefor, in addition to other
remedies provided by law, the Enforcement Officer or the Health
Officer may, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f,
arrange for the cost of said abatement to be charged against the
premises, and the amount thereof shall become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers in the same manner as taxes. Said amount shall bear interest at
the same rate and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes. The Township shall have the right to
bring a summary action for collection of such costs incurred in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Middlesex County.
[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05-6]
G. Emergency conditions. Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that an
emergency condition in violation of this section exists, which condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health or
safety, he may issue an order by service of violation notice as set forth in
Subsection D, reciting the existence of such an emergency condition
and requiring that such action be taken by the violator as soon as is
reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section to the contrary, such order shall be
effective immediately. Failure to abate the emergency condition
immediately may result in the municipality exercising its powers under
§ 243-32E hereof.
H. Enforcement of loading/unloading and truck-idling restrictions.
(1) Upon receipt of a complaint relative to truck idling during the
hours of 8:30 am. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday, the Enforcement
Officer or his designee shall respond to the complainant to observe
the violation from said location and/or site of the violation itself.
(2) Upon receipt of a formal complaint relative to truck loading/
unloading or truck idling during the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m.
Monday to Friday, or on weekends, the Department of Public Safety
will respond to the complainant to observe the violation and/or to
the site of the violation itself. The Department of Public Safety will
prepare and file an incident report as to the violation of this
chapter with the Department of Community Development within 48
hours.
§ 243-32 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 243-32
222:1074
§ 243-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04-14]
Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is issued under
the terms hereof; be punished as follows:
(3) All violations of § 243-31A may result in the Enforcement Officer
and/or Department of Public Safety issuing a violations notice to
the building occupant and/or operator of the vehicle.
(4) Penalties for violations of § 243-31A shall be as follows:
(a) For a first offense, a minimum fine of $100 shall be imposed.
(b) For a second offense, a minimum fine of $500 shall be imposed.
(c) For a third offense, a minimum fine of $1,000 shall be imposed.
(d) Any person or business convicted of violating § 243-31A within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same
provision, and who was fined for the previous violation, shall
pay an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine
imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum
fine fixed for a violation of this article, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the initial violation of this
article.
A. For a first offense, by a fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed
$250.
B. For a second offense within two years of any prior conviction under this
chapter, by a fine not less than $250 and not to exceed $500.
C. For a third offense or any subsequent offenses within 10 years of any
prior conviction under this chapter, by a fine of not less than $500 and
not to exceed $1,250 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each violation of
any of the provisions of this article and each day that each such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 243-32 MEAT PACKAGING AND LABELING § 243-33
222:1075
Chapter 250
RAILROAD TRACKS
§ 250-1. Submission of plans for approval.
No railroad track shall be installed, erected, constructed, laid or moved
within the limits of North Brunswick until the plans shall first have been
submitted to the Planning Board and Public Utilities Department and
approved by the Planning Board after public notice and a public hearing,
which public notice and public hearing shall be in conformity with the usual
notices and public hearings prescribed for all matters to be heard by the
Planning Board as specifically set forth in the North Brunswick Township
Zoning Ordinance.192
§ 250-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 254
RECORDS, PUBLIC
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Land Use.
§ 243-33 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 250-2
250:1076
ARTICLE I
Reproduction of Maps and Other Records
[Adopted 7-6-1987; amended in its entirety 8-15-2002 by Ord. No.
02-34]
§ 254-1. Fees and payment. [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19]
The Township of North Brunswick hereby establishes, pursuant to P.L. 2001,
c. 404, entitled "An act concerning public access to government records,
amending and supplementing P.L. 1963, c. 73," the following fee schedule
in accordance with Section c and d thereof.
Item Fee
Township maps from GIS system (up
to 11" x 17")
$5
Township maps from GIS system
(ANSI "D" and "E" sizes)
$20
Tax Map page $10
Zoning Map $10 (if sold separately from the
Zoning Ordinance)
Street Map $10
For larger documents (i.e., plans) $1.50 per square foot (plus costs)
Master Plan $45 (plus $6 postage)
Zoning Ordinance $52.50 (includes Zoning Map plus
$6 postage)
Housing Element/Fair Share Plan $30 (plus $5 postage)
Cassette tape $5
Videotape $25
Information on CD $50
Computer-generated picture (B/W or
color)
$5 (24 or 36 exposure roll)
Copy of computer screen $0.75
Film developing $15 (24 or 36 exposure roll)
Enlargements $15
§ 254-1.1. Postage; surcharges.
A. Postage costs will be added to all requests for public records required
to be mailed and will be determined at time of request.
B. A surcharge of $0.50 per page will be applied to all requests sent via
FAX.
C. Extraordinary service charges shall be applied for any extensive use of
information technology or for the labor cost of personnel providing the
§ 254-1 RAILROAD TRACKS § 254-1.1
250:1077
service that is actually incurred by the agency for the programming,
clerical and supervisory assistance required to provide a government
record in the medium requested if it is not a medium routinely used
by the agency; not routinely developed or maintained by an agency;
or requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming
of information. This rate shall be $45 per hour for supervisory or
programming; $35 per hour for clerical.
§ 254-1.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 254-1.1
250:1078
ARTICLE II
Fees for Copies
[Adopted 2-22-1994]
§ 254-2. Fees established. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10-35]
§ 254-3. Certified copies of vital statistics. [Added 9-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-15; amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-13; 12-4-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-37]
The fees for certified copies of vital statistics shall be as follows:
A. Fees for copies of public records shall be provided in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b, and which fee shall cover the
Township's actual costs for paper and toner.
(1) Fee per copy for year 2010: $0.07.
B. This fee may be adjusted annually by resolution of the Township Council
of the Township of North Brunswick to reflect the actual costs for paper
and toner.
A. Birth, death and marriage certificates: $10.
B. Certificates of domestic partnerships: $10.
C. Burial or cremation permits: $15 ($5 to Township/$10 to State of New
Jersey). [Amended 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09; 3-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-06]
D. Transit or disinterment permits: $15 ($5 to Township/$10 to State of
New Jersey). [Amended 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09; 3-3-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-06]
E. Corrections to original certificates: $15.
§ 254-2 RAILROAD TRACKS § 254-3
250:1079

ARTICLE III
Tax Sale Certificates
[Adopted 4-5-2010 by Ord. No. 10-07]
§ 254-4. Fees for duplicates and calculation of tax sale certificate
redemptions.
Fees for duplicate tax sale certificates and redemption requests shall be as
follows:
A. Duplicate tax sale certificate: $100.
B. Calculation for a tax sale certificate lien for any lienholder: $50.
C. Subsequent calculation for a tax sale certificate lien redemption on the
same parcel, requested by the same party, other than a lienholder after
two redemption calculations have been provided within a calendar
year: $50.
§ 254-4 RAILROAD TRACKS § 254-4
250:1081
Chapter 258
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 191.
Littering — See Ch. 216.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 262.
Refuse — See Ch. 411.
§ 258-1. Title. [Amended 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09]
The title of this chapter shall read as follows: "An Ordinance Establishing a
Program for the Separation of Used Newspapers, Papers, Clean Corrugated
Cardboard, Glass, Aluminum Cans, Steel Cans, Plastic Containers, Mixed
Paper, Textiles, Brush, Used Motor Oil, White Goods and Light Iron, Heavy
Iron, Nonferrous Scrap and Other Aluminum Scrap from Solid Waste and
Rechargeable Batteries for Recycling Purposes and Promulgating Rules and
Regulations Therefor and Prescribing Penalties for the Violation Thereof."
§ 258-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM — Includes all recyclable aluminum cans.
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other like vegetative materials that
do not exceed four inches in diameter and Christmas trees. "Brush" does not
include leaves, grass clippings. Bundles should be no more than 40 pounds
and should be cut in to a maximum length of four feet.
CLEAN CORRUGATED CARDBOARD (i.e., NONFOOD CONTAINERS) —
Nonfood containers constructed of two pieces of paper with a corrugated
center, i.e., appliance boxes, etc. The term does not include cardboard items
made of chipboard, such as shirt boxes, shoe boxes, milk cartons, cereal
boxes and all other similarly constructed items.
ELECTRONICS — Televisions, CPUs, monitors, laptops and mercurycontaining
devices.
FLUORESCENT BULBS — Lamps that contain mercury.
GLASS — Includes all products made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used for
packaging or bottling of various matter, and all other materials commonly
known as "glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass, commonly known
as "window glass."
HEAVY IRON — All ferrous scrap, structural steel or cast-iron components.
§ 254-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-2
250:1082
LEAVES — Seasonal vegetative residue generated by deciduous trees
mainly during the autumn months and during early spring in normal growth
cycles.
MASONRY/PAVING MATERIALS — Asphalt, block, brick, cinder and
concrete.
MIXED PAPER — High-grade office paper, computer paper printout,
computer tabular cards, white ledger, glossy inserts, magazines, junk mail,
colored paper, note paper, telephone books, computer paper, paperboard
(chipboard and pressboard), nonmetallic wrapping paper, soft-cover books,
hardcover books with covers removed, and fine paper.
NONFERROUS AND OTHER ALUMINUM SCRAP — All noncontainer
aluminum, stainless steel, copper, zinc, brass and other metals which
generally do not rust.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Soda bottles made of PETE (SPI Code No. 1)
and milk, water and laundry products and bottles made of HDPE (SPI Code
No. 2), but shall exclude products containing, or at one time had contained,
household hazardous waste(s).
PLASTIC FILM — Stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags (only for
warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with 25 or more
employees).
RECHARGEABLE BATTERIES — Nickel cadmium, (Ni-Cd), nickel metal
hydride (Ni-MH), lithium ion (Li-ion) and small-sealed lead (Pb).
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage, rubbish and waste matter usually
disposed of and normally placed at curbside by residents and commercial
occupants in the Township of North Brunswick for usual collection at
regular intervals by the Township garbage collection vehicles or private
collection haulers.
STEEL CANS — Tin-plated, bimetal and other ferrous food and beverage
containers.
TEXTILES — Clean, dry clothing or fabric measuring at least one foot by
one foot in size.
TIRES — Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck and equipment tires.
USED MOTOR OIL — A petroleum-based or synthetic oil which, through
use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due
to the presence of impurities or loss of original properties.
USED NEWSPAPER — Newspaper, clean, unsoiled, bundled and securely
tied with a string, in stacks no higher than 12 inches. Anything that comes
with the newspaper is recyclable with the newspaper.
WHITE GOODS and LIGHT IRON — All appliances such as washers, dryers,
ranges, refrigerators, air conditioners, etc., as well as products made from
sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks and other
nonstructural ferrous scrap. NOTE: CFC refrigerants must be completely
§ 258-2 RAILROAD TRACKS § 258-2
250:1083
removed from appliances by licensed technicians. CFC refrigerants so
recovered shall be sent to an EPA-approved reclamation facility.
WOOD SCRAP — Unfinished lumber from new construction projects,
including pallets. "Unfinished" shall mean nonchemically treated (not
pressure-treated, impregnated with preservatives, insecticides, fungicides,
creosote or other chemicals, and not painted, resin-coated or otherwise
surface treated, and not laminated or bonded and not similarly altered from
its natural condition). Only for new construction sites.
§ 258-3. Program established; compliance required; recycling
requirements. [Amended 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09]
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation and
collection of certain waste materials, as specified herein, in the Township of
North Brunswick for recycling purposes. For this purpose, effective August
1, 1987, it shall be mandatory for all residents, owners, lessees or occupants
of residential and nonresidential structures located within the Township of
North Brunswick to separate used newspaper, used paper, clean corrugated
cardboard, glass, aluminum, leaves, steel cans, plastic containers, mixed
paper, textiles, brush, used motor oil, white goods and light iron, heavy iron,
nonferrous and other scrap aluminum and electronics.
A. Residential separation. It shall be mandatory for all residential
premises within the Township of North Brunswick to separate from all
other solid waste used newspaper, glass, aluminum cans, steel cans,
plastic containers, mixed paper (as defined hereinabove), brush, clean
corrugated cardboard, used motor oil, white goods and light iron, heavy
iron, nonferrous and other scrap aluminum, leaves and consumer
electronics for recycling purposes. All residential premises receiving
curbside collection services from the Township of North Brunswick
shall conform to the following separation procedures for disposition of
materials separated for recycling purposes. [Amended 3-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Newspaper shall be clean, unsoiled, bundled and securely tied with
a string, in stacks no higher than 12 inches. Anything that comes
with the newspaper is recyclable with the newspaper. Bundles may
not exceed 30 pounds.
(2) Glass, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic containers shall be
thoroughly rinsed and contained in a reusable bucket or container.
Buckets or containers may not exceed 30 pounds.
(3) Mixed paper/high-grade office paper, such as computer paper
printout, computer tabular cards, white ledger, glossy inserts,
magazines, junk mail, colored paper, office paper, telephone books,
computer paper, paperboard (chipboard and pressboard),
nonmetallic wrapping paper, softcover books, hardcover books with
covers removed and fine paper, shall be bundle tied or placed in a
§ 258-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-3
250:1084
cardboard box with a secured lid or placed into a taped brown
paper bag. Bundles, boxes or bags may not exceed 30 pounds.
(4) Leaves as defined in § 258-2 shall be placed in the biodegradable
bags for curbside pickup, according to published schedules. Each
biodegradable bag shall not weigh more than 40 pounds.
(5) Brush/branches as defined in § 258-2 may not exceed four inches in
diameter individually. Residents must bundle tie branches prior to
collection. Brush bundles may not exceed four feet in length or 18
inches in height and must weigh no more than 40 pounds.
Residents are limited to no more than eight bundles per curbside
pickup. Residents must call the Department of Public Works to
schedule a collection appointment.
(6) Clean corrugated cardboard (i.e., nonfood containers) shall be
bundled separately and secured in bundles not exceeding 30
pounds in weight and shall not be contained in plastic bags.
(7) Used motor oil must be placed in a plastic container with a screwon
cap. Plastic soda bottles are prohibited. Residents must call
DPW to schedule an appointment.
(8) Tires. Rubber-based scrap automotive tires without rims will be
collected limited to four per collection. Residents must call DPW to
schedule an appointment. No heavy-truck or equipment-type tires
will be accepted.
(9) White goods and light iron and heavy iron and nonferrous and other
aluminum scrap will be collected by prescheduled appointment.
NOTE: CFC refrigerant compounds shall be completely removed by
licensed technicians from any device or appliance that contains
them. CFC compounds so recovered shall be sent to an EPAapproved
reclamation facility.
B. Designated recycling locations. The following items shall be separated
from the residential solid waste stream but are not included in the
North Brunswick Township Recycling Program Residential Collection
Services. The following items and materials shall be recycled by the
resident(s) individually, not through the Township recycling program
residential collection services. Residents may call the Township of
North Brunswick Department of Public Works for Current dropoff
locations and information regarding these items and materials.
(1) Textiles, which must be placed into a tied twenty- or thirty-gallon
plastic bag.
(2) Masonry and paving materials comprising asphalt, block, brick,
cinder and concrete.
(3) Electronics, as defined in § 258-2.
§ 258-3 RAILROAD TRACKS § 258-3
250:1085
(a) Residential curbside collection service has been terminated for
televisions, consumer computer equipment, CPUs, monitors,
laptops, keyboards and other electronics. The Township of
North Brunswick will sponsor periodic dropoff events for
residents to recycle consumer electronics. Access to the
dropoff event shall be limited to North Brunswick residents.
Prior to the recycling transaction participants must provide
proof of residency with name and address.
(b) Electronic recyclables must be protected from moisture prior
to arrival at the dropoff event site. Materials will be inspected
for contamination prior to acceptance. Materials deemed
unacceptable shall be removed from the site by the resident.
(c) Information regarding additional residential e-waste recycling
dropoff locations and schedules may be obtained by contacting
the North Brunswick Department of Public Works during
normal business hours, Monday through Friday.
(4) Rechargeable batteries; nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd), nickel metal
hydrides (Ni-MH, lithium ion (Li-ion) and small-sealed lead (Pb)
common batteries. Batteries may be dropped off at DPW, North
Brunswick Municipal Complex, at 710 Hermann Road and the
North Brunswick Municipal Library. Prior to dropoff, rechargeable
batteries must be individually bagged or each battery terminal
insulated with tape. Batteries not so prepared will not be accepted.
NOTE: Alkaline batteries have been rated as nonhazardous by
USEPA and may be disposed of in regular household solid waste.
C. Nonresidential separation (commercial, office and industrial premises).
The following materials shall be separated from the solid waste at all
commercial, office, and industrial facilities. The recyclable materials
shall not be collected mixed into the regular solid waste/refuse
accumulation. Nonresidential locations as listed above will not be
provided with pickup service by the Township.
(1) Clean corrugated cardboard (i.e., nonfood containers) shall be
separated and secured in bundles, bins or containers and protected
from detrimental impact of wind and precipitation until collection.
(2) Containers consisting of glass containers, aluminum cans, steel
cans and plastic containers (i.e., soda, milk, water, and laundry
containers as defined in § 258-2) in establishments such as taverns
and restaurants shall be thoroughly rinsed and stored in a reusable
bucket or container. Storage buckets and/or designated containers
labeled for recycling purposes must be shielded from detrimental
impact of wind and precipitation until collection.
(3) Mixed paper. High-grade office paper, computer paper, computer
printout, computer tabular cards, white ledger, glossy inserts,
magazines, junk mail, colored paper, telephone books, paperboard
(chipboard and pressboard), nonmetallic wrapping paper, soft-
§ 258-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-3
250:1086
cover books, hardcover books with covers removed and fine paper
shall be securely contained in designated recycling containers
labeled for that purpose. Said containers must be located in such
manner so as to be shielded from detrimental impact of wind and
precipitation.
(4) Textiles must be placed into a tied twenty- or thirty-gallon plastic
bag.
(5) Brush, branches and all other parts of trees that are to be removed
from a commercial premises must be recycled at a facility certified
to process such materials.
(6) Used motor oil must be safely stored on premises until removed by
a licensed hauler or safely transported to a facility certified to store
motor oil for recycling. Said recycling procedures must fully
comply with all federal, state and local codes rules and regulations
governing such activities.
(7) White goods and light iron and heavy iron and nonferrous and other
aluminum scrap. NOTE: Prior to arranging for recycling, CFC
refrigerant compounds shall have been completely removed by
licensed technicians from any device or appliance that contains
them. CFC compounds so recovered shall be sent to an EPAapproved
reclamation facility.
(8) Newspaper shall be clean, unsoiled, securely stored in designated
recycling containers labeled for that purpose. Said containers must
be located in such manner so as to be shielded from detrimental
impact of wind and precipitation or contamination. Anything that
comes with the newspaper is recyclable with the newspaper.
(9) Electronics, including televisions, CPUs, monitors, laptops and
mercury-containing devices.
(10) Rechargable batteries; nickel cadmium, (Ni-Cd), nickel metal
hydride (Ni-MH), lithium ion (Li-ion) and common small-sealed lead
(Pb) batteries.
(11) Tires. Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck and equipment tires
must be stored indoors or in such manner that will not provide
harborage for pests of any kind.
(12) Fluorescent bulbs and lamps that contain mercury.
(13) Plastic film, including stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags
(only for warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with
25 or more employees).
(14) Masonry and paving materials comprising asphalt, block, brick,
cinder and concrete.
§ 258-3 RAILROAD TRACKS § 258-3
250:1087
(15)Wood scrap, unfinished lumber from new construction projects,
and wood shipping pallets (as defined hereinabove).
(16) Grass and leaves as defined in § 258-2.
D. Institutional premises (educational facilities, hospitals, including
county, state and federal institutional facilities). These locations will not
be provided with pickup service by the Township.
(1) Clean corrugated cardboard (i.e., nonfood containers) shall be
separated and secured in bundles, bins or containers and protected
from detrimental impact of wind and precipitation until collection.
(2) Comingled containers consisting of glass containers, aluminum
cans, steel cans and plastic containers (i.e., soda, milk, water, and
laundry containers as defined in § 258-2) shall be thoroughly rinsed
and stored in a reusable bucket or container. Storage buckets and/
or designated containers labeled for recycling purposes must be
shielded from detrimental impact of wind and precipitation until
collection.
(3) Mixed paper. High-grade office paper, computer paper, computer
printout, computer tabular cards, white ledger, glossy inserts,
magazines, junk mail, colored paper, telephone books, paperboard
(chipboard and pressboard), nonmetallic wrapping paper, softcover
books, hardcover books with covers removed and fine paper
shall be securely contained in designated recycling containers
labeled for that purpose. Said containers must be located in such
manner so as to be shielded from detrimental impact of wind and
precipitation until collection.
(4) Textiles must be placed into a tied twenty- or thirty-gallon plastic
bag.
(5) Branches and all other parts of trees that are to be removed from
commercial premises must be recycled at a facility certified to
process such materials.
(6) Used motor oil must be safely stored on premises until removed by
a licensed hauler or safely transported to a facility certified to store
motor oil for recycling. Said recycling procedures must fully
comply with all federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations
governing such activities.
(7) White goods and light iron and heavy iron and nonferrous and other
aluminum scrap. NOTE: Prior to arranging for recycling, CFC
refrigerant compounds shall have been completely removed by
licensed technicians from any device or appliance that contains
them. CFC compounds so recovered shall be sent to an EPAapproved
reclamation facility.
§ 258-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-3
250:1088
(8) Newspaper shall be clean, unsoiled, securely stored in designated
recycling containers labeled for that purpose. Said containers must
be located in such manner so as to be shielded from detrimental
impact of wind and precipitation or contamination until collection.
Anything that comes with the newspaper is recyclable with the
newspaper.
(9) Electronics, including televisions, CPUs, monitors, laptops and
mercury-containing devices.
(10) Rechargable batteries; nickel cadmium, (Ni-Cd), nickel metal
hydride (Ni-MH), lithium ion (Li-ion) and common small-sealed lead
(Pb) batteries.
(11) Tires. Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck and equipment tires
must be stored indoors or in such manner that will not provide
harborage for pests of any kind.
(12) Fluorescent bulbs and lamps that contain mercury.
(13) Plastic film, including stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags
(only for warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with
25 or more employees).
(14) Masonry and paving materials comprising asphalt, block, brick,
cinder and concrete.
(15)Wood scrap, unfinished lumber from new construction projects,
and wood shipping pallets (as defined hereinabove in § 258-2).
(16) Grass and leaves as defined in § 258-2.
E. Residential centralized storage and containment locations for
recycling. Multifamily complexes, such as condominiums, townhomes
and apartments, with large-capacity, centralized solid waste collection
containers shall provide and maintain separate centralized container
locations for the purposes of source separation of Mandated Residential
Recyclable Materials from the municipal solid waste stream.
(1) Containers so provided for the storage of recyclable materials shall
be compatible with municipally provided container collection
equipment.
(2) Centralized recycling collection locations shall be designed to
provide storage containment of recyclable materials that is
protected from accumulation of water, snow or ice. The enclosure
and containment must prevent the degradation or migration of
recyclable materials from weather related impacts, and shall
prevent accumulation of rain, snow or ice within the container load
space.
(3) Each container must be clearly labeled to designate the material to
be deposited within.
§ 258-3 RAILROAD TRACKS § 258-3
250:1089
§ 258-4. Recycling plan; building permits; certificates of occupancy;
design standards.
(4) Secure locations must be provided for the separation, containment
and storage of recyclable white goods, appliances and various
scrap metals as defined in § 258-2.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, homeowners'
association, or their designated property management service to
maintain service access to the containment storage facilities.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, homeowners'
association, or their designated property management service to
ensure residential compliance with solid waste and recycling
mandates. It shall be the responsibility of the same to provide for
the correction of any condition not in compliance with solid waste
or recycling regulations including removal and disposal of all
unacceptable or contaminating materials.
A. Any application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Township of North Brunswick for subdivision or site plan approval
for the construction of condominiums, townhouses or multifamily
dwellings of three or more units, single-family or two-family housing
unit developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional,
or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or
more of land must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and shall contain other attributes (signage, lighting,
fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. At the time of issuance of any building permit, the building code official
will provide written instruction on proper disposal and recycling of
construction and demolition waste and shall furnish a notification of
construction/demolition activity form that must be filled out by the
permittee and faxed to the Middlesex County Division of Solid Waste
Management ("MCDSWM") within 48 hours of the issuance of a
municipal permit.
C. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township of
North Brunswick, the owner of any new multifamily housing or
commercial, institutional or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
§ 258-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-4
250:1090
§ 258-5. Department of Public Works authority.
The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
establish and promulgate regulations as to the manner, days and times of
such collections and the bundling, handling, location and time of placement
of all materials for collection and to establish and maintain dropoff points
for materials to be recycled.
§ 258-6. Private collections restricted.
This chapter shall not prohibit or restrict any owner, any lessee or any
occupant of a premises from making arrangements or agreements for
private collection of recyclable materials, provided that the receiving
person, firm or corporation may not collect said material from curbside or
any public street.
§ 258-7. Unauthorized collections prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
unauthorized by the Township of North Brunswick to collect or remove or
cause to be collected or removed any recyclables. Each such collection in
violation hereof from any one or more sources shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 258-8. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violations or negligence in complying with the provisions of
this chapter or the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be by a fine not
to exceed $2,000.
§ 258-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Public
Works or his/her designee and/or the Police Department of the Township of
North Brunswick.
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials in
those instances where the Township does not otherwise provide such
service. The Township's standards are as follows:
(1) A roofed and walled enclosure with rollout containers sized as a
maximum of four cubic yards each. All containers must be
constructed, sized and maintained to provide no hindrance for
reasonable collection effort; and
(2) Enclosure gates and ramps to street level must be constructed and
maintained to provide no hindrance to collection personnel.
D. Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed outdoor storage and
pickup of solid waste; same to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 258-4 RAILROAD TRACKS § 258-10
250:1091
§ 258-10. Public education/awareness program; dissemination of
information.
A. The Township shall develop and implement a comprehensive public
information/educational campaign that describes the municipal
recycling program generally, which campaign shall be aimed at all age
groups, and may utilize such tools as public speaker presentations,
posters and flyers.
B. Notices.
(1) North Brunswick shall notify all residents of the designated
recyclables that must be source separated, the schedule for
collection and the manner in which the designated recyclables are
to be prepared for collection. Such notices shall be posted or
published, at a minimum, not less than twice yearly and may
include one of the following forms of notice:
(a) An advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the
municipality.
(b) A posted notice in public places where public notices are
customarily posted.
(c) Inclusion of a notice with other official notifications
periodically mailed to residents, such as, for example, tax
notices.
(2) North Brunswick shall pay the costs and expenses associated with
the preparation, posting, advertisement and distribution of all such
notices.
C. Additional literature.
(1) North Brunswick may prepare and distribute additional literature
and other educational materials describing, among other things:
(a) The municipal recycling program established pursuant to the
Recycling Ordinance.
(b) The county-wide recycling program and the recycling services
to be provided within the geographic boundaries of the
municipality.
(c) The designated recyclables to be source separated.
(d) The manner or method of preparing source-separated material
for collection.
(e) The location and schedules for collection.
(2) All such literature and other educational materials shall be
prepared in accordance with written guidelines established by
Middlesex County.
§ 258-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 258-11
250:1092
§ 258-11. Enforcement program to be established by municipality.
The municipality shall establish and maintain a program to enforce the
provisions of the Recycling Ordinance, which program shall include:
Chapter 262
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 262-1. Abandonment of certain containers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for
opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator or container.
§ 262-2. Removal of airtight snaplocks and doors required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of
any kind which has an airtight snaplock or other device thereon without
first removing the said snaplock or doors from said icebox, refrigerator or
container.
§ 262-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
A. A method to ensure compliance with the county-wide recycling
program.
B. A method to prohibit the scavenging of designated recyclables.
§ 258-11 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 262-3
262:1093
Chapter 266
RENTAL HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42.
Dwellings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 161.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 195.
Housing standards and occupancy
limits — See Ch. 197.
Rent control — See Ch. 268.
§ 266-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
§ 266-2. Applicability; exceptions.
This chapter shall apply to all residential uses with the exception of owneroccupied,
single-family dwellings.
§ 266-3. Definitions. [Added 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13193]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own, or purport to own, or
exercise control of any building or project in which there is rented or offered
for rent housing space for living or dwelling purposes under either a written
or oral lease.
RENTAL HOUSING — This definition shall include single-family, two-family,
and owner-occupied two-family premises which are rented by a landlord,
as well as any multiple dwelling subject to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling
Law, P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
A. To protect the health, safety and welfare of residential tenants by
ensuring that both the interior and exterior of all rental properties are
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
B. To protect the welfare of residential tenants by assuring that maximum
occupancy limits are not exceeded in rental units.
C. To protect the real estate values of properties located in close proximity
to rental housing by requiring the upkeep and maintenance of building
exteriors and outside property areas.
193. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 266-2.1
through 266-10 as §§ 266-4 through 266-12, respectively.
§ 262-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-4
262:1094
§ 266-4. Enforcement authority.
The Director of Community Development or his designee is hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall be referred to
hereinafter as the "Enforcement Officer."
§ 266-5. Requirements for certificate of rental housing compliance
prior to change in tenancy; certificate of maximum occupancy and
use. [Amended 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-12]
No person, agency, corporation, partnership, firm, company, owner, real
estate agent, broker or any other individual shall hereafter rent, lease
or sublet any residential unit, other than those exceptions enumerated in
§ 266-2 of this chapter, without first obtaining from the Enforcement Officer
one of the following:
A. A certificate of rental housing compliance stating that at the time of the
proposed rental, lease or subletting the unit complies with the property
maintenance standards of this chapter and is approved for occupancy.
B. A conditional certificate of rental housing compliance indicating that
the unit is conditionally approved for occupancy.
C. No rental housing two-family, three-family or any other multifamily
units, or any units with habitable spaces used for sleeping purposes in
an attic or basement, shall be rented without first obtaining a certificate
of rental housing compliance from the Department of Community
Development. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
D. A purchaser of any rental property or any units with habitable spaces
used for sleeping purposes in an attic or basement shall certify that he
or she has been informed of the maximum number of persons permitted
to occupy the premises and has reviewed § 266-6, Rental housing
standards, of this chapter and does not intend to use or occupy or
permit the use or occupancy of such property in violation of the
provisions of § 266-6, Rental housing standards, of this chapter. Such
purchaser must obtain a certificate of rental housing compliance from
the Department of Community Development as to the validity and
compliance of said units prior to the closing of title. Failure to comply
with these requirements may affect the validity of the transfer of title
and ownership. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
E. A real estate agent licensee who is involved in the sale of a rental
property comprising two-family, three-family or any other multifamily
units or any units with habitable spaces used for sleeping purposes in
an attic or basement must obtain or ensure that the purchaser obtains a
certificate of rental housing compliance from the Department of
Community Development as to the validity and compliance of said
rental units prior to and as a condition of the validity of the title and
ownership. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
§ 266-4 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 266-5
262:1095
§ 266-6. Rental housing standards. [Amended 5-21-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-12]
All rental housing not exempted in § 266-2 of this chapter shall comply with
the following codes and regulations, which are hereby accepted, adopted
and established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining whether
dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation
and rental and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this
chapter:
F. It shall be unlawful for any purchaser of rental property as described
herein or real estate licensee involved in a sale of rental property to
knowingly transfer or assist in the transfer of ownership in violation of
this section. In addition to the applicable penalties provided in this
chapter, the Township may, in its discretion, report any real estate
licensee found to have violated the requirements of this section to the
New Jersey Real Estate Commission.
A. The most recently adopted International Property Maintenance Code
(IPMC) as amended and authorized by the International Code Council,
except that the occupancy and square footage requirements set forth in
§ 266-6D hereinbelow shall be applicable in lieu of those requirements
set forth in the IPMC. Three copies of the IPMC have been placed on file
in the office of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick and are
available to all persons desiring to use and/or examine the same.
B. N.J.A.C. 5:10, Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings
Regulations, except that the occupancy and square footage
requirements set forth in § 266-6D hereinbelow shall be applicable in
lieu of those requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:10, Maintenance of
Hotels and Multiple Dwellings Regulations.
C. N.J.A.C. 5:70, New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code, including but not
limited to requirements for smoke detectors on each level of a home
with living space, including basements where applicable; carbon
monoxide detectors within 10 feet of every sleeping area; and an ABCstyle
fire extinguisher placed within the kitchen(s) or within 10 feet of
all kitchens but not necessarily mounted. [Added 8-5-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-12194]
D. The following minimum standards shall be required:
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not
less than 175 square feet for the first occupant and 125 square feet
for each additional occupant.
(2) In every dwelling unit, every room occupied or intended to be
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a
minimum usable floor area of 70 square feet, and every room
194. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C
as Subsection D.
§ 266-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-6
262:1096
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall have a usable floor area of at least
50 square feet for each such occupant; provided, however, that
children under the age of three shall not be considered to be
additional occupants.
(3) Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and
one lavatory without passing through another bedroom.
(4) The following shall constitute the minimum occupancy area
requirements:
Minimum Occupancy Area in Square Feet
Space 1 - 2 Persons 3 Persons 4 or more Persons
Living
room/
dining room
No
requirements
100 100 square feet with
an additional 25
square feet for each
person 3 years old and
older
Kitchen 50 50 70
Bedrooms Shall comply with § 266-6D of the Code of the
Township of North Brunswick
(5) Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior public areas such as
hallways and all portions of living and dining rooms shall not be
occupied for sleeping purposes.
(6) A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven
feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway
of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or
counter fronts and walls.
(7) The following minimum standards for ceiling heights shall apply:
(a) Other than a kitchen, basement or attic, ceiling heights in
habitable rooms, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms
and laundry rooms on the first or second floor shall have a
ceiling height of not less than seven feet. The required height
shall be measured from the finished floor to the lowest
projection from the ceiling. Exception: Beams and girders
spaced not less than four feet on center may project not more
than six inches below the required ceiling height.
(b) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces to be
used for sleeping purposes may project to within six feet eight
inches of the finished floor, and beams, girders, ducts or other
obstructions may project to within six feet four inches of the
finished floor.
(c) Ceilings in basements or attics with habitable spaces not to be
used for sleeping purposes may project to within six feet two
§ 266-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 266-6
262:1097
inches of the finished floor, and beams, girders, ducts or other
obstructions may project to within five feet 10 inches of the
finished floor.
(d) Not more than 50% of the required floor area of a room or
space is permitted to have a sloped ceiling less than the height
required herein, with no portion of the required floor area less
than five feet in height. Portions of a room with a sloping
ceiling measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to
the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to
the minimum required habitable area for that room.
(8) If there is a room occupied or to be occupied for sleeping purposes
located in a basement or an attic, an inspection of the premises to
be let or sold shall be made and a certificate of rental housing
compliance from the Department of Community Development must
be issued for such rooms to be used for sleeping purposes.
[Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
(9) Emergency escapes and rescue openings shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(a) Basements with habitable space to be used for sleeping
purposes must contain emergency escape and rescue openings
in the room(s) used for sleeping purposes. All emergency
escape and rescue openings shall have a minimum net clear
opening of 5.7 square feet. Exception: Grade floor openings
shall have a minimum net clear opening of five square feet. The
minimum net clear opening height shall be 24 inches.
Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have the bottom
of the clear opening not greater than 44 inches measured from
the floor. The minimum net clear opening width shall be 20
inches. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys
or tools.
(b) Window wells required for emergency escape and rescue shall
have horizontal dimensions that allow the door or window of
the emergency escape and rescue opening to be fully opened.
The horizontal dimensions of the window well shall provide a
minimum net clear area of nine square feet with a minimum
horizontal projection and width of 36 inches. Exception:
Ladder(s) or steps required shall be permitted to encroach a
maximum of six inches into the required dimensions of the
window well.
(c) Window wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches
below the adjacent ground level shall be equipped with a
permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in
the fully open position. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside
width of at least 12 inches and shall project at least three
§ 266-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-6
262:1098
§ 266-7. Procedures for inspections and issuance of certificates of
rental housing compliance.
inches from the wall and shall be spaced not more than 18
inches on center vertically for the full height of the window
well.
(10) All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall
contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and
services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.
(11) Any persons violating the provisions of this § 266-6D shall be
subject to reinspection of the subject premises twice a year for
three years and shall be charged a reinspection fee of $150 for
each such reinspection taking place during the three-year
reinspection period, provided that such violation has not been
overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(12) All interior doors and hardware within any dwelling unit shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks on any such door shall be of a
passage or privacy type only. Deadbolts or similar security door
locks shall be expressly prohibited on any interior door leading to
living space and are limited to closets and storage units that cannot
be occupied. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
A. The Enforcement Officer shall provide the necessary application form.
This form shall be available at the Community Development Office.
[Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
B. The applicant shall submit a completed application and all required fees
to the Community Development Office no less than five business days
prior to the date that a new tenant is anticipated to occupy the dwelling,
except in accordance with the emergency inspection procedures
described in § 266-7E. Inspections can be requested up to 30 days
before the desired inspection date and shall be scheduled by the
Enforcement Officer in the order that requests arc received. [Amended
7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
C. The Enforcement Officer or his designee shall inspect the building
interior, exterior and outside premises to make sure that the premises
complies with the standards incorporated in § 266-6 of this chapter.
D. Within five business days of receipt of a complete application, the
Enforcement Officer or his designee shall issue either a certificate of
rental housing compliance, a conditional certificate of rental housing
compliance, or a denial of rental housing compliance in accordance
with the following:
(1) If the dwelling complies with the above-referenced codes and
regulations, the Enforcement Officer or his designee shall post a
§ 266-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 266-7
262:1099
signed certificate of rental housing compliance approving the unit
for occupancy.
(2) If the dwelling fails to comply with all of the above-referenced
codes and regulations but none of the violations are determined to
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the intended occupants,
the Enforcement Officer or his designee shall post a signed
conditional certificate of rental housing compliance which allows
the new tenant to occupy the unit prior to repairs being completed.
The conditional certificate of rental housing compliance shall
establish a definite time frame for completion of all required
repairs. A list of all necessary repairs shall be provided at the time
of issuance.
(3) If the building fails to comply and it is determined that such
violations endanger the health, safety or welfare of the intended
occupants, the Enforcement Officer or his designee shall post a
signed denial of rental housing compliance stating that the unit is
not to be occupied until all required repairs are completed and
approved. A list of necessary repairs shall be provided at the time
of issuance.
E. If a prospective tenant needs to move into an uninspected unit within a
time frame which does not allow for the required five-day notification,
upon payment by the landlord of an emergency inspection fee per
§ 266-8, the Enforcement Officer or his designee shall conduct an
inspection within 24 hours. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
F. If a conditional certificate of rental housing compliance or a denial of
rental housing compliance is issued, the applicant shall perform the
required work and obtain all necessary inspections from the
Construction Code Office prior to requesting a reinspection. The
reinspection and issuance of a subsequent certificate, conditional
certificate or denial shall occur within three business days of receipt of
a request for reinspection and payment of the reinspection fee per
§ 266-8. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
G. If the inspection was scheduled in advance, as required by this chapter,
and the required inspection is not conducted, then the new tenant may
be permitted to occupy the unit without it being deemed a violation of
§ 266-5 of this chapter. However, the Township reserves the right to
conduct the inspection at a later time. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-13]
H. The certificate of rental housing compliance, conditional certificate of
rental housing compliance or denial of rental housing compliance shall
be permanently displayed in the apartment unit until such time as it is
replaced by a more current certificate, conditional certificate or denial.
Said certificate shall be posted by the Enforcement Officer in an
inconspicuous area to be designated by the landlord but observable by
the tenant. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
§ 266-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-8
262:1100
§ 266-8. Fees.
All fees shall be paid prior to the inspection being performed in accordance
with the following:
§ 266-9. Information required to be distributed to tenants.
[Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
Beginning May 1, 1995, the following information shall be provided to each
tenant by the landlord or the landlord's agent:
§ 266-10. Rental housing landlord registration requirements.
[Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
A. Initial inspection: $50.
B. Reinspection fee for conditional certificate: $30.
C. Reinspection fee for denials: $50.
D. Emergency initial inspection fee: $70.
A. A truth-in-renting statement prepared by the Department of Community
Affairs in accordance with the Truth-in-Renting Act (N.J.S.A. 46:8-43 et
seq.) shall be distributed to all tenants living in buildings with more
than two dwelling units.
B. A copy of the registration statement filed with the Township Clerk and/
or New Jersey Bureau of Housing Inspection.
C. A copy of the New Tenant Notification Form provided by the Township
of North Brunswick. Said form shall be signed by the tenant and
maintained by the owner during the term of the tenancy. For buildings
with more than four units, the form shall be maintained in a log at the
rental office.
A. Every landlord of any building or structure which comes under the
provisions of this chapter shall file with the Department of Community
Development a written registration statement. For three-family or any
other multifamily unit buildings, the registration statement shall be the
certificate of registration filed with the New Jersey Bureau of Housing
Inspection. For buildings with fewer than three dwelling units, the
registration statement shall contain the following information on a form
to be provided by the Township of North Brunswick:
(1) The names and addresses of the owners in title of the property.
(2) If the record landlord is a corporation, the name of the registered
agent that will accept all legal notices on behalf of the corporation.
(3) If the landlord is an entity other than an individual (i.e., a
corporation, company, trade name, partnership, trust,
condominium association, LLC, LLP, or other legal entity), the name
§ 266-8 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 266-10
262:1101
and address of each partner and/or owner or person having a
beneficiary interest; in the case of a corporation, the names and
addresses of each stockholder if the total number of stockholders
is 20 or fewer. In any event, with regard to corporate ownership,
the registry shall disclose the name and address of any stockholder
who owns, either directly or beneficially, 10% of the stock of the
corporation.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the managing agent of
the premises, if any.
(5) The name, address and telephone number, including the dwelling
unit, apartment or room number, of the superintendent, janitor,
custodial or other individual employed by the record owner or
managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if
applicable.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the landlord or managing agent who may be
reached or contacted at any time in the event of an emergency
affecting the premises or property, or any unit or dwelling or
commercial space therein, and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building or property and any
repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.
(7) The number of dwelling units by unit type.
B. For single-family, two-family, and two-family owner-occupied units,
there shall be a landlord registration fee of $30, which fee shall be
renewable and due for payment every three years on October 1.
C. All single-family, two-family, and owner-occupied two-family unit
landlord registrations shall expire on the third September 30 following
their filing. The registration fee shall not be prorated for those
registrations received after October 1 of any year.
D. Penalty for not registering; emergency inspection.
(1) A landlord of single-family, two-family, and owner-occupied twofamily
units who is determined to be renting a dwelling not
previously or currently registered shall be required to pay a
registration fee of $30 and a penalty fee as follows:
(a) A penalty fee of $250 for the first offense; and
(b) A penalty fee of $500 for a second or subsequent offense, all
such fees to be cumulative. A summons and complaint may be
issued to the owner for appearance in Municipal Court for a
second or subsequent offense, all such offenses to be
cumulative.
(2) In addition to the remedies set forth herein, any unpaid fees and
penalties pursuant to this section shall also be deemed a violation
§ 266-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-10
262:1102
§ 266-11. Notice for evictions due to overcrowding violations.
Any evictions by landlord/owners of property that are required as a result
of violations of housing standards, occupancy limits and overcrowding as
set forth under N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1(g) shall be made in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:11-2.3, which requires that when a landlord is cited for a violation
pursuant to illegal occupancy which could potentially result in an eviction
of this tenants, the following must be included by the landlord/owner as an
insert sent with the violation notice:
of this chapter pursuant to § 266-12 and subject to the penalties
therein.
(3) The affected dwelling shall immediately be subject to an
emergency inspection per § 266-7E of this chapter. The landlord
shall be required to pay, in addition to the landlord registration fee
of $30 and the applicable penalty, fee as set forth herein, the fee of
$70 for such emergency inspection as set forth herein in § 266-8 of
this chapter.
E. If there is any change in any of the information on the landlord
registration statement, an amended registration statement must be
filed within 30 days and the amended statement posted and distributed
to tenants within seven days of filing. Failure to file such amended
registration statement shall result in the following administrative
penalties:
(1) A penalty fee of $150 for failure to register within 30 days;
(2) A penalty fee of $250 for failure to register within 60 days; and
(3) A penalty fee of $500 for failure to register within or after 120 days,
such fees to be cumulative.
F. The certificate of registration shall be posted in an inconspicuous area
to be designated by the landlord, but observable by the tenant.
G. The initial registration for all buildings shall also be accompanied by a
floor plan and the square footage for each unit type to be used by the
Township in establishing maximum occupancy limits for each unit type.
H. Any unpaid fees or penalties required pursuant to this § 266-10 shall be
charged against the owner of the said premises, and the amount thereof
shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner as
taxes. The Township shall have the right to bring a summary action for
collection of such costs incurred in the Superior Court of New Jersey,
Law Division, Middlesex County.
§ 266-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 266-11
262:1103
"If, in seeking to correct the illegal occupancy for which you have been
cited, it is necessary for you to evict one or more tenants to comply,
you must notify those tenants of their potential eligibility for relocation
assistance. Further information regarding your responsibilities as owner
pursuant to regulations concerning eviction and relocation may be
obtained by contacting the following:
Department of Community Affairs
Division of Codes and Standards
Office of Landlord-Tenant Information
P.O. Box 805
Trenton, NJ 08625-0805
Telephone: 609/633-6606"
§ 266-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
11-13]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a minimum
mandatory fine of $500 up to a maximum mandatory fine of $1,250,
provided that the owner of the subject property shall be afforded a thirtyday
period to cure or abate such condition and shall also be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing before the Municipal Court for an independent
determination concerning said violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day cure period, a fine greater than $1,250, but not greater than
$2,000, may be imposed if the Municipal Court has determined or, upon
reinspection of the subject property, it is determined that the abatement
or cure of the condition has not been substantially completed.
Notwithstanding the above to the contrary, solely in cases of illegal
occupancy, overcrowding and conditions constituting unsafe ingress and
egress in violation of the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code,
there shall be a minimum fine of not less than $1,000.
Chapter 268
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 42. Affordable housing — See Ch. 195.
§ 266-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 266-12
262:1104
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-4-1978; amended in its entirety 8-13-1984]
§ 268-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by the
Housing Inspection Code and occupied or unoccupied and offered for rent.
BASE RENT — The gross rent charged as of June 29, 1987, or the gross
rent charged upon initial occupancy if said initial occupancy occurred
subsequent to June 29, 1987. Hardship increases previously granted shall
be considered to be a component of base rent.[Added 8-3-1987]
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — The Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers of New York and northeastern New Jersey (1967=100%),
published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
DECONTROLLED — Any dwelling or housing space which is not subject to
the provisions of this chapter as defined in §§ 268-3, 268-11 and 268-12195
of this chapter.
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure rented or offered for rent
to one or more tenants or family units. Exempt from this article are motels,
hotels and similar-type buildings, buildings in which more than 1/3 of the
occupied floor space is commercial, housing units of two or fewer units
in which the owner of the premises resides, as well as single-family units
offered for rent.[Amended 8-3-1987; 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
FREEHOLDER — One having title to realty.[Added 8-3-1987]
GROSS RENT — The actual monthly rent charged and received over the
preceding twelve-month period. "Gross rent" is comprised of the
following:[Added 8-3-1987; amended 11-6-1989196]
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
A. Base rent.
Major capital improvements surcharges and surcharges mandated by
new laws and regulations.
B.
195. Editor's Note: Former § 268-12, Units to be decontrolled upon vacation, as amended, was
repealed 8-3-1987.
196. Editor's Note: Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
§ 268-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-1
262:1105
JUST AND REASONABLE RATE OF RETURN ON OWNER'S INVESTMENT
— The rate of return determined to be high enough to achieve the
following:[Added 8-3-1987]
LANDLORD — The owner of an estate in land who leases it for a term to
another in exchange for payment of rent.[Added 8-3-1987]
MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — An alteration in residential property
which would significantly add to the rental value of the units effected in
whole or substantial part. It is different than ordinary and foreseeable
repair, replacement and maintenance.[Added 8-3-1987; amended
5-1-1989]
OWNER'S ACTUAL CASH INVESTMENT — The owner's cash investment,
calculated by deducting from the total investment in the property that
portion of the investment which was financed through mortgages. Neither
a refinance of the property nor an increase in value due to property
appreciation shall affect the "owner's actual cash investment" for purposes
of calculations pursuant to this article. The total cash investment shall be
limited to the purchase price of the premises together with any capital
improvements to the premises which do not add additional units and which
are not otherwise compensated through rent increases pursuant to this
article, reduced by the financing which was used to purchase and improve
the premises.[Added 8-3-1987]
SURCHARGES — Charges in addition to base rent, as specified by this
article, payable by the tenant to the landlord. Surcharges are not to be
considered part of the base rent when calculating percentage increases
based on the Consumer Price Index.[Added 8-3-1987]
TENANT — One who has the temporary use and occupation of real property
owned by another person.[Added 8-3-1987]
§ 268-2. Applicability; determination of rent increases. [Amended
8-3-1987]
To encourage good management, including adequate maintenance of
services.
A.
B. To furnish a reward for efficiency.
C. To discourage the flight of capital from the rental housing market.
D. To enable the owners to maintain and support their credit.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the lease or
rental agreement between the landlord and the initial tenant for newly
constructed unit or a unit which underwent major rehabilitation as
determined by the Board. The landlord shall not be restricted in the
amount of rent charged such initial tenant. However, all subsequent
increases shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this article.
B. Determination of rent increases.
§ 268-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-2
262:1106
§ 268-3. Exemptions.
Any and all housing space or dwelling units which would otherwise be
subject to this chapter but are covered by the Federal Moderate
Rehabilitation Program are hereby exempted from the provision of this
chapter regarding rent considerations as provided by § 268-2 herein;
however, they shall continue to be subject to all other provisions of this
chapter.
§ 268-4. Certain rent increases void.
Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental increase in excess
of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be void.
(1) Lease renewal.
(a) At the expiration of a lease for a unit where the landlord
supplies heat, the monthly base rent may increase by an
amount not to exceed the percentage increase in the Consumer
Price Index from March of the past year to March of the
present year. For units in which the tenant supplies his own
heat, the increase shall be limited to 80% of the Consumer
Price Index. However, the owner may increase rents by a lesser
amount. Any such increase, if applicable, shall be effective
upon renewal for base periods commencing on and after the
first day of September immediately following the March-to-
March period for which the Consumer Price Index increase
was calculated. Only one such rental increase can be exacted
upon any one tenant within any one year.
(b) The percentage increase allowable hereunder shall be applied
only to the existing base rent. Major capital improvements
surcharges and mandated expenditures surcharges shall be
added to the increased base rent in order to arrive at the new
gross monthly rent. [Amended 11-6-1989197]
(2) Change of tenant. Where there is change of tenant as a result of the
previous tenant's vacating a unit, the unit vacated shall be
decontrolled for the initial lease only. The landlord shall not be
restricted in the amount of rent which he may charge to such
tenant for the initial lease, however, any subsequent rent increases
shall not exceed the percentage increase in the Consumer Price
Index.
197. Editor's Note: Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
§ 268-2 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-5
262:1107
§ 268-5. Notification of tenant.
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant of the
calculations involved in computing the increase.
§ 268-6. Surcharges; tax refunds. [Amended 8-3-1987]
A. The following surcharges and adjustments shall be permitted:
[Amended 11-6-1989198]
(1) Capital improvements surcharge.
(2) Mandated expenditures surcharge.
(3) Tax refund.
B. (Reserved)199
C. Tax refund. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(1) In the event that a tax appeal is taken and the landlord is successful
in the appeal and taxes are reduced and a rebate made to the
landlord, the tenants shall receive 50% of the total rebate, as
applied pro rata to each tenant's proportionate living space so
leased. The landlord shall not be entitled to deduct from said
reduction amount any expenses incurred in connection with the
appeal. The landlord shall, within 30 days of receipt of this tax
refund, identify for each tenant and the Rent Leveling Board, in
writing:
(a) The total tax refund.
(b) The tenant's share of the refund.
(c) The individual tenant's proportionate share of the tax refund.
(d) The method of computation of the tenant's proportionate share
of the tax refund.
(2) If the tenant is still residing in the dwelling or complex, then the
tenant's proportionate share of the refund shall be deducted from
his next rent payment. A tenant who is no longer residing in the
dwelling or complex is entitled to his proportionate share of the tax
refund. The landlord shall so inform him by sending a notice to his
198. Editor's Note: Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
199. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Tax surcharge as amended 5-1-1989, was repealed
11-6-1989. Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
§ 268-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-6
262:1108
forwarding address. Money unclaimed after 60 days shall revert to
the township for general purposes.
D. Major capital improvement surcharge. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(1) A landlord may seek a major capital improvement surcharge for
qualified improvements, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Following the completion of the improvement, but in no event
later than six months after such completion, the landlord shall
make application to the Board for a major capital improvement
surcharge. The application shall be made on the form provided
by the Board and shall be submitted to the Board, along with
all supporting documentation, at least 90 days before the
proposed effective date of the surcharge.
(b) At least 60 days prior to the proposed effective date of the
surcharge, the Board shall establish a hearing date. Thirty
days prior to the hearing date, the owner shall notify all
tenants of the total cost of the completed improvement, the
number of years of useful life of the improvement as
determined with reference to the regulations of the Internal
Revenue Service concerning straight-line depreciation of
capital improvements, the average annual cost of the
improvement as described below, the need for such
improvement, the benefit to the tenant and the effective date of
the proposed increase.
(c) At the hearing, the Board shall afford all parties a full
opportunity to be heard and to present any testimony or
evidence relevant to the matter before the Board. The Board
will then determine if the improvement is major in character
and, if so, whether the cost was reasonable. A capital
improvement surcharge, however, shall not include any
interest expense paid by the landlord or the cost of repair or
service of the improvement, as only the initial cost of the
improvement is eligible for inclusion in the surcharge. In
calculating the capital improvement surcharge to be granted, if
any, the cost of the improvement shall be divided by the
number of years of useful life of such improvement, with
reference again being made to the regulations of the Internal
Revenue Service concerning straightline depreciation of
capital improvements, to determine the average annual cost of
such improvement. If the improvement will benefit all units in
the dwelling, the average annual cost of the improvement shall
be divided by the total square feet of the dwelling to determine
the surcharge per square foot, which figure shall then be
multiplied by the total square feet occupied by the tenant to
arrive at the surcharge. If the improvement effects only
specific units, then only those tenants who receive the benefit
shall be surcharged.
§ 268-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-6
262:1109
(d) The total annual surcharge for all capital improvements
applicable to each tenant shall not exceed 10% of his base
rental and shall be payable in 12 equal monthly installments.
(e) Surcharges granted shall not be considered as base rent in
calculating future annual rent increases.
(2) A landlord may also seek an early determination from the Board as
to whether a contemplated improvement, or any part thereof, will
be considered a major capital improvement under this section and
what portion of the estimated cost of the improvement is eligible
for the surcharge. The Board will also make a determination as to
the useful life of the improvement. The landlord must submit an
application for an early determination with the Board and a hearing
date will then be set. The landlord must notify all tenants effected
at least 30 days before the scheduled hearing date and provide
them with a copy of the application. At the hearing, all sides will
have the opportunity to be heard, and then the Board will make a
determination. Upon completion of the improvement, the landlord
will submit appropriate documentation demonstrating that the
improvement was completed in accordance with the specifications
previously submitted to the Board and that the total cost of the
improvement has been paid. The Board will then schedule another
hearing date, at which the surcharge will be granted if all of the
information submitted to the Board at the early determination
hearing remains unchanged. All of the tenants effected shall again
be given notice by the landlord at least 30 days in advance of this
hearing date.
E. Mandated expenditure surcharge. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(1) A landlord shall be entitled to a surcharge representing each
tenant's proportionate share of new expenditures mandated by new
federal, state, county or municipal laws, ordinances or regulations.
Such surcharges shall be payable in 12 equal monthly payments
and shall be calculated by dividing the cost of the expenditure by
the number of units in the dwelling.
(2) To obtain a mandated expenditure surcharge, the landlord must
make application to the Board at least 60 days in advance of the
proposed effective date of the surcharge, but in no event later than
six months from the date of the expenditure. The Board shall then
establish a hearing date. Ten days prior to the hearing date, the
owner shall notify all tenants who would receive an increase in
gross rent if the requested mandated expenditure surcharge was to
be granted. Notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service, certified either by affidavit or by
acknowledgment of service. Said notice and application shall
include the following:
(a) The date, time and location of the hearing.
§ 268-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-6
262:1110
§ 268-7. Rent Leveling Board.
(b) The amount of the expenditure.
(c) The law, ordinance or regulation requiring such expenditure.
(d) The number of units in the dwelling.
(e) The total monthly mandated expenditure surcharge and
monthly gross rent to be charged the tenant if the request is
granted.
(3) Following the hearing, the Board shall grant or deny the request for
the mandated expenditure surcharge.
(4) The surcharge granted hereunder shall not exceed 3% of the
tenant's base rent in effect at the time of the granting of the
surcharge.
(5) Surcharges granted hereunder shall not be considered as base rent
in calculating future annual rent increases.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of
North Brunswick. [Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
B. The Board shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor, one
of whom shall be the Director of Community Development who shall
serve as Chairperson, two landlords owning property in the township or
their representatives, two tenants residing in the township, one owner
of a manufactured home park in the township, and one resident from a
manufactured home park in the township. There shall also be two
alternate members, one of whom shall be a landlord and one of whom
shall be a tenant. All appointments shall be made for three-year terms
and any existing appointment which is terminated during the pendency
of a term shall be filled by a qualified member of the same class for the
remainder of the unexpired term. To achieve staggered terms, the
initial terms of office shall be one, two and three years to be designated
by the Mayor in making the appointment. [Amended 1-15-1990;
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
C. Attendance by four members or alternates without regard to class shall
constitute a quorum. In the event a regular member does not attend a
meeting, the alternate member for that category shall have all of the
powers of a regular member for that meeting. Passage of any motion
requires an affirmative vote by a majority of members present and
requires a minimum of four affirmative votes with the chair voting only
in the case of tie. [Amended 8-3-1987; 1-15-1990; 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-05]
D. The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers therein granted, all powers necessary and
§ 268-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-7
262:1111
§ 268-8. Hardship rent increases.
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) To recommend rules to the Township Council, which will adopt
regulations governing the operation of the Board and its powers.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to
help them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental as determined by §§ 268-6 and 268-8 of this
article. [Amended 8-3-1987]
(4) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for
reduced rental as determined by §§ 268-6, 268-9 and 268-10 of this
article. [Amended 8-3-1987]
(5) To request experts to be provided by the Township Council in order
to help render decisions.
(6) To require that certain rental information be furnished by every
landlord within the borders of the Township of North Brunswick
who is presently renting or who has dwelling units available to rent,
regardless of whether the units in question are presently subject to
other provisions of this article and to impose those sanctions
enumerated under § 268-13 of this article necessary to obtain this
information. [Added 8-5-1985; amended 8-3-1987]
E. The Rent Leveling Board shall give 10 days' written notice of a hearing
to both landlord and tenant except as provided in §§ 268-6 and 268-8C.
[Amended 8-3-1987]
F. The Rent Leveling Board shall render a written decision within 45 days
after the conclusion of presentment of all evidence and testimony.
G. The Rent Leveling Board shall continue to function during the effective
term of this article and shall act as hearing tribunal concerning
landlord-tenant disputes under this article.
H. Any harassment by a landlord or tenant as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:33-4 is
hereby prohibited, and as such the landlord or tenant may seek the
remedies provided by law.
A. A landlord may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for an increment in
rent due to hardship on the grounds that he is not receiving a just and
reasonable rate of return on his investment when that investment is
compared to other similar types of investment. To be just and
reasonable, a rate of return must be high enough to encourage good
management including adequate maintenance of services, to furnish a
reward for efficiency, to discourage the flight of capital from the rental
housing market, and to enable operators to maintain and support their
§ 268-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-8
262:1112
credit. The Board shall scrutinize all hardship applications for selfinduced
hardship.
B. The original application, plus 15 duplicates, shall provide in detail
financial and ownership information to be completed by the applicant
on a form to be furnished by the Rent Leveling Board.
C. The Rent Leveling Board, upon at least 30 days' notice to the landlord,
shall hold a public hearing on the landlord's application. At least 20
days prior to the public hearing, the landlord shall notify each tenant of
said hearing by regular mail or by personal service. The notification
shall include the date, place and time of the hearing and the substance
of the landlord's application. An affidavit of service shall be filed with
the Board showing compliance with the notice provision above. The
Rent Leveling Board shall either grant or deny a hardship rental
increase within 45 days after the conclusion of presentment of all
evidence and testimony.
D. If the services of a financial consultant are necessary to assist the Board
in evaluating accounting data, the financial consultant's fee shall be
funded through an escrow account required of landlords making
hardship appeals. The escrow may not be more than $1,000 for a
landlord of 100 or more units, $500 for a landlord of 10 to 99 units and
$200 for a landlord of less than 10 units. Any money not required for
consulting fee shall be refunded to the landlord.
E. The Board shall not grant a hardship increase if it finds that:
(1) The conditions sought to be cured by the hardship increase were
caused by sustained and systematic neglect on the part of the
landlord over a period of time during which the landlord had the
resources available to properly maintain his property.
(2) The landlord has failed, without just cause, to supply any data
required by the Board.
(3) The landlord has practiced poor or improper management.
F. The Board may condition the grant of a hardship increase on the
applicant's compliance with such reasonable terms as are consistent
with the laws of North Brunswick and the laws or Constitution of the
State of New Jersey and the United States of America. The Board is
further empowered to order such inspections and investigations as are
necessary to confirm compliance with said conditions.
G. If the Board finds that the landlord is receiving an insufficient return on
his investment, that his lack of return has not been due to poor
management practices or extraordinary nonrecurring expenses and
that the same conditions would persist without an increase in total rent,
then it may authorize an increase in total rent.
§ 268-8 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-9
262:1113
§ 268-9. Maintenance of standards; determination of reasonable
rental value.
§ 268-10. Unauthorized rent increase prohibited.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this chapter, charge any rents
in excess of what he was receiving from the effective date of this chapter,
except for the increase authorized by this chapter, unless said dwelling unit
has been decontrolled as provided by this chapter.
§ 268-11. General regulations. [Added 8-3-1987200 ]
§ 268-12. (Reserved)201
A. During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall provide substantially
the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishing or
equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he provided or was
required to do by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into or
the landlord provided at the time of the enactment of this chapter.
B. An individual tenant or a class of tenants who are not receiving
substantially the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture,
furnishing or equipment in their housing space and dwelling may have
the Rent Leveling Board determine the reasonable rent value of the
housing unit or dwelling in view of this deficiency. The tenant or class of
tenants shall pay the reasonable rental value as full payment for rent
until the landlord proves that the deficiency has been corrected.
A. Effective date. The provisions of this article governing calculation of
rental charges shall be retroactive to June 29, 1987, and any lease
entered into after June 29, 1987, but prior to the effective date of this
article shall be renegotiated so as to be in compliance with this article.
This provision for retroactivity shall not be interpreted to mean that any
rents paid prior to the effective date hereof which are lowered by this
article shall be reimbursed.
B. Mandatory lease notations. Every lease executed after the effective
date of this article shall contain the following statement in boldface
type on the first page of the lease: "This dwelling is controlled by the
provisions of the Rent Control Ordinance of the Township of North
Brunswick." In addition, all charges or alterations to the existing lease
shall be identified in boldface type.
C. Filing of rent rolls. A landlord shall be required to file rent rolls annually
in January with the Rent Leveling Board. A landlord shall indicate for
each rental unit the rent as of January, which shall be broken down into
a base rent and surcharges, if applicable. The landlord shall also
provide to the Rent Leveling Board the number of bedrooms and the
address of each unit on the rent roll report.
200. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former § 268-11, initial rent not restricted.
§ 268-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-13
262:1114
§ 268-13. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any provision of this article may be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $1,000. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be
considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 268-14. Statute of limitations.
All actions by a tenant or landlord except those actions brought pursuant
to § 268-9, shall be brought by filing of a complaint not more than one year
after the incident complained of.
§ 268-15. Construal of provisions.
This Article, being necessary for the welfare of the township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 268-16. When effective. [Amended 8-3-1987]
This Article shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required by law.
201. Editor's Note: Former § 268-12, Units to be decontrolled upon vacation, as amended, was
repealed 8-3-1987.
§ 268-13 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-16
262:1115

ARTICLE II
Manufactured Home Parks
[Adopted 6-1-1987]
§ 268-17. Applicability; initial rents.
§ 268-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE RENT —
A. The provisions of this article shall apply only to the leasing of rental
spaces in manufactured home parks.
B. There shall be no restriction on the rent charged for the initial leasing
of a manufactured home space. Thereafter, the owner shall be entitled
to an annual increase in rents not exceeding the maximum permitted by
this article. However, any subsequent increase shall be subject to the
provisions of this article governing permissible increases.
C. The provisions of this article governing calculation of space rental
charges in manufactured home parks shall be retroactive to January 1,
1987, and any lease entered into after January 1, 1987, but prior to the
effective date of this article, shall be renegotiated so as to be in
compliance with this article. This provision for retroactivity shall not be
interpreted to mean that any rents paid prior to the effective date
hereof, which are lowered by this article, shall be reimbursed. [Added
7-6-1987]
The gross monthly rent charged and received for a manufactured home
rental space over the preceding twelve-month period, adjusted to
exclude the following:
(1) (Reserved)202
The monthly surcharge per space to cover the cost of major capital
improvements.
(2)
The monthly surcharge per space to cover the cost of expenditures
mandated by new laws and regulations.203
(3)
A.
Hardship increases previously granted shall be considered to be a
component of base rent.
B.
202. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), dealing with tax surcharges, was repealed
11-6-1989. Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), which dealt with maintenance surcharge and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-3-1991.
§ 268-17 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-18
262:1117
BOARD — The Rent Leveling Board of the Township of North Brunswick
or the Manufactured Home Rent Leveling Board, if such a board should be
created by Township Council.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (CPI) — The All Urban Consumers' Price Index
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of
Labor for the New York - Northeastern New Jersey region
GROSS ANNUAL INCOME —
GROSS RENT[Amended 11-6-1989204] — The actual monthly rent charged
and received for a manufactured home rental space over the preceding
twelve-month period. "Gross rent" is comprised of the following:
JUST AND REASONABLE RATE OF RETURN ON OWNER'S INVESTMENT
— The rate of return determined to be high enough to achieve the following:
MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — An alteration to the park property
above and beyond ordinary repair, replacements and maintenance which
significantly adds value to rental spaces.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
All income resulting from the operation of a manufactured home park,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) Rental income from manufactured home spaces.
(2) Income from coin-operated equipment and vending machines.
A.
For the purposes of this article, income from the sale of manufactured
homes and income derived from late charges shall specifically be
excluded in the calculation of "gross annual income."
B.
A. Base rent.
Major capital improvements surcharges and surcharges for
expenditures mandated by new laws and regulations. [Amended
9-3-1991]
B.
To encourage good management, including adequate maintenance of
services.
A.
B. To furnish a reward for efficiency.
C. To discourage the flight of capital from the manufactured home park.
D. To enable the owners to maintain and support their credit.
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site.
A.
204. Editor's Note: Section 12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory
ordinance shall be retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989,
which include a tax surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the
amount of the tax surcharge.
§ 268-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-18
262:1118
MANUFACTURED HOME RENTAL SPACE — That portion of a
manufactured home park improved and offered for rent for the purpose
of anchoring one manufactured home thereon, together with all of the
privileges, services, equipment, facilities and improvements associated with
the occupancy of such portion of the property.
OWNER'S ACTUAL CASH INVESTMENT — The owner's cash investment,
calculated by deducting from the total investment in the park that portion of
the investment which was financed through mortgages. Neither a refinance
of the property nor an increase in value due to property appreciation
shall affect the owner's "actual cash investment" for purposes of hardship
calculations pursuant to this article. The total cash investment shall be
limited to the purchase price of the premises, together with any capital
improvements to the premises which do not add additional space to the park
and which are not otherwise compensated through rent increases pursuant
to this article, reduced by the financing which was used to purchase and
improve the premises.
REASONABLE AND NECESSARY OPERATING EXPENSES — Expenses
incurred by the owner/operator of a manufactured home park for the
operation and maintenance of the park. The following limitations shall
apply:
§ 268-19. Lease requirements; property maintenance.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis.
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on a
permanent or nonpermanent foundation.
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a
manufactured home by the Secretary of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
D.
Principal and interest payments on mortgages, depreciation, fines and
penalties shall not be considered operating expenses.
A.
Costs of major capital improvements shall not be considered operating
expenses.
B.
Professional fees shall be limited to actual costs for the day-to-day
operation of the park.
C.
Management expenses shall be limited to amounts paid for services
provided by a manager or management firm and shall be competitive
with amounts paid for similar services in the area.
D.
The purchase of new equipment shall be reflected and prorated over
the useful life of the equipment as claimed by the landlord for the
purpose of depreciation on income tax forms.
E.
§ 268-18 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-19
262:1119
A. Lease required. Manufactured home park owners shall provide a
written lease for a period of not less than one year to all tenants within
30 days of occupancy. Subsequent rent increases, with the exception of
hardship increases, major capital improvement surcharges and
mandated expenditures surcharges, may only be imposed upon the
renewal of an expired lease or upon a change of occupancy. [Amended
11-6-1989; 9-3-1991]
B. Analysis of components of existing gross rents. From the effective date
of this article until such time as a permitted surcharge is approved,
gross rents and base rents shall be equal on all manufactured home
spaces. Upon approval of a permitted surcharge, authorization for
future rent increases shall require that existing gross rents be broken
down into base rent and any applicable surcharges. [Amended
11-6-1989; 9-3-1991]
C. Mandatory lease notations.
(1) Every owner/operator of a manufactured home park shall cause to
be printed on all leases executed after the effective date of this
article the following two statements:
(a) "This manufactured home space is controlled by the provisions
of the Manufactured Home Parks Rent Control Ordinance of
the Township of North Brunswick."
(b) "Maintenance and replacement of heating tape is the
responsibility of the homeowner. Periodic examination and
replacement as necessary is hereby recommended."
(2) Both statements shall be in bold-face type and set off from other
paragraphs on the first page of the lease.
D. Property maintenance responsibilities.
(1) The owner/operator is responsible for the general upkeep of the
park, including the maintenance of all services agreed to in the
lease. Unless otherwise specified in the lease, the owner/operator
shall be responsible for the following property maintenance and
services:
(a) Garbage collection a minimum of two times per week.
(b) Snow removal and sanding of all streets, common parking
areas and walkways which serve either common areas,
designated school bus stops and common mailboxes.
(c) Mowing of lawns and resodding or reseeding of areas as
required, if not a direct result of tenant neglect or damage.
(d) Pruning and replacement of trees, shrubs, etc., as required.
(e) Streetlighting and lighting of common areas.
§ 268-19 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-19
262:1120
(f) Maintenance of recreation facilities, the clubhouse and other
common areas.
(g) Street cleaning a minimum of once in the spring and once in
the fall.
(h) Maintenance and repair of the internal roadway system and
driveways to individual manufactured home rental spaces.
(i) Replacement of damaged or stolen street signs.
(j) Removal of leaves from the premises at least as often as the
Township of North Brunswick provides such pickup service.
(k) Prompt replacement of damaged or stolen street signs.
(l) Removal of leaves from grassed areas and the premises.
(2) At a minimum, the following manufactured home park livability
standards shall be maintained:
(a) Grass shall not be permitted to achieve a height which exceeds
six inches.
(b) Snow shall be removed from roads when snowfall exceeds
three inches in accumulation.
(3) While the owner is responsible for general landscape maintenance,
the tenant shall be responsible for watering newly laid sod until the
sod takes to the soil.
(4) The owner is specifically not responsible for upkeep, repairs and
maintenance of manufactured homes located in the park unless
said home is owned by the owner.
(5) Tenants shall be responsible for maintenance of heating tape and
for fuel, electrical and water lines from the surface of the pad to the
home and for sewerage lines from the street to the home, with the
exception of any failure in the sewer lateral due to any break or
settlement or act of vandalism, which, in those circumstances, shall
be the maintenance responsibility of the owner/operator of the
park. Snow removal from sidewalks that do not service common
areas, school bus stops and common mailboxes shall be the
responsibility of the manufactured home owner leasing the space.
E. Required relocation of home within manufactured home park. In
accordance with the Mobile Home Law, N.J.S.A. 46:8C-2 et seq., a
manufactured home park owner/operator shall provide notice by
personal service a minimum of 30 days prior to requiring a tenant to
relocate his manufactured home to a different rental space. However,
upon requiring relocation, the owner/operator shall not be permitted to
increase the amount charged the tenant in his existing lease, regardless
of previous rental charges on the rental space to be occupied.
§ 268-19 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-19
262:1121
§ 268-20. Annual rent increase. [Amended 11-6-1989; 9-4-1990;
9-3-1991]
F. Excessive increase. Any increase in rental charges which exceeds that
authorized by this article shall be void.
G. Written representation of services binding. The owner shall be required
to provide any and all services to the homeowners which have been
promised by the owner of the park in writing in either a lease
agreement, a promotional brochure, a newspaper advertisement or any
other written format. In the event that the owner of the park fails to
provide such service which was promised in writing within a reasonable
period of time, the homeowner may apply for a reduction in rent
commensurate with the value of the service not provided, in accordance
with the terms of this article.
H. Park owner permission for improvements to homes. The owner of the
manufactured home park shall not withhold permission to a homeowner
for an improvement or change to the home if such withholding of
approval is arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable. In the event that
approval is arbitrarily, capriciously or unreasonably withheld by the
park owner, the Board may order such owner to execute any and all
documents necessary for the homeowner to make the requested
improvement or addition.
A. Lease renewal.
(1) At the expiration of a lease, for a three-year period beginning
September 1, 1991, the monthly base rent for a manufactured
home rental space may increase by an amount not to exceed 90% of
the percentage increase in the consumer price index from March of
the present year, subject to not exceeding a maximum base rent of
$425 per month. However, the owner may increase rents by a
lesser amount. Any such increase, if applicable, shall be effective
upon renewal for base periods commencing on and after the first
day of September immediately following the March-to-March
period for which the CPI increase was calculated. Only one such
rental increase can be exacted upon any one tenant within any one
year at any one manufactured home site. For a subsequent twoyear
period beginning September 1, 1994, the monthly base rent
may increase any an amount not to exceed 100% of the percentage
increase in the CPI. The maximum base rent permitted shall remain
at $425 for this subsequent two-year period only if the percentage
increase in the CPI is equal to 5% or greater.
(2) The percentage increase allowable hereunder shall be applied only
to the existing base rent. Major capital improvement surcharges
and mandated expenditure surcharges shall be added to the
increased base rent in order to arrive at the new gross monthly
rent.
§ 268-19 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-20
262:1122
§ 268-21. Additional authorized changes in gross rent.
B. Change of tenant. Where there is a resale of a manufactured home
which is to remain on the same rental space or where a rental space is
to be occupied by a new tenant and manufactured home as a result of
the previous tenant's vacating a rental space, the owner/operator shall
be permitted to increase the base rent to an amount which does not
exceed the highest base rent charged in the park at the time.
C. Procedure for annual rent increase.
(1) The owner/operator shall notify each tenant who will receive an
annual increase a minimum of 30 days prior to the proposed
increase. Notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service certified either by an affidavit or
by an acknowledgment of service executed by the person served.
The notice shall include the following:
(a) The date of expiration of the lease.
(b) A breakdown of the gross rent into base rent and any
applicable surcharges.
(c) The percentage increase in the CPI for the preceding calendar
year.
(d) The amount of the increase and the percentage of base rent
represented by such increase.
(e) The total gross rent, including the annual increase in base rent.
(2) The failure of the owner to provide the tenant with this information
30 days prior to the lease date shall make any increases void, and
the tenant shall recover any increases which the tenant may have
paid.
(3) The effective date of any annual increase shall be the first day of
the next month following 30 days' notification; provided, however,
that in no event shall said increase precede expiration of the annual
lease.
(4) Filing of rent rolls. An owner shall be required to file rent rolls
annually in January with the Rent Leveling Board. An owner shall
indicate for each rental unit the rent as of January, which shall be
broken down into a base rent and increase, if applicable. The owner
shall also provide to the Rent Leveling Board the address of each
unit on the rent roll report.
A. This Article provides the mechanism for requesting gross rent increases
which exceed the annual increase in base rent permitted annually. All
such requests shall be classified as one of the following: [Amended
11-6-1989; 9-3-1991205]
§ 268-20 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-21
262:1123
§ 268-22. Hardship rent increase.
(1) Hardship increase.
(2) Capital improvement surcharge.
(3) Mandated expenditure surcharge.
B. Procedures for hardship increases are outlined in §§ 268-22 through
268-26 of this article,206 and procedures for reductions in rents are
outlined in §§ 268-27 and 268-28 of this article.207
A. Criteria for hardship rent increase.
(1) An owner of a manufactured home park may apply to the Board for
an increase in base rents beyond that which is otherwise permitted
in this article if the landlord can show that the gross annual income
generated by the manufactured home park does not cover the cost
of mortgage interest and amortization for mortgages on the park,
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the owner/
operator in connection with operation and maintenance of the park
and still ensure a just and reasonable rate of return on the owner's
investment.
(2) Determination of reasonable and necessary operating expenses
shall be in accordance with § 268-18 of this article.
(3) No applicant shall be permitted to receive an increase under this
section until such time as the applicant has owned and operated
the manufactured home park for a period of 36 months.
(4) Only one hardship increase may be granted during any twelvemonth
period.
(5) The effective date of such increase shall be determined by the
Board, giving due consideration to the date of submission of the
completed application and the length of the hearings.
(6) The amount of any hardship increase granted shall be considered
to be a component of base rent for calculating future annual rent
increases.
B. Procedure for hardship rent increase.
(1) In order to provide the Board with sufficient time to review the
required financial data and schedule necessary public hearings, the
205. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B, which stated that this
article provides the mechanism for a reduction in gross rent based upon inadequate
maintenance or a reduction in property taxes.
206. Editor's Note: Former § 268-26, Property maintenance surcharge, as amended 9-4-1990,
was repealed 9-3-1991.
207. Editor's Note: Former § 268-28, Reduction in rent due to tax appeals or decreases in taxes
or fees, as amended 5-1-1989, was repealed 9-3-1991.
§ 268-21 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-22
262:1124
§ 268-23. (Reserved)208
owner is required to submit an application for a hardship rental
increase under this section at least 90 days prior to the effective
date of the proposed rent increase.
(2) The Board shall establish a hearing date. Thirty days prior to the
hearing date, the owner shall notify all tenants who will receive an
increase in gross rent if the requested hardship increase was to be
granted. Notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or by personal service certified either by affidavit or by an
acknowledgment of service executed by the person served. Said
notice and application shall include the following information:
(a) The date, time and location of the hearing.
(b) The amount of the increase requested, the percentage of base
rent represented by such request and the total monthly gross
rent to be charged the tenant if the request is granted.
(c) A detailed statement of income and expenses for the 12 most
recent consecutive months ending not more than 60 days prior
to application.
(d) The name and address of managing agent.
(e) The date of purchase of property and purchase price.
(f) Development costs.
(g) The terms of all mortgages.
(h) The owner's actual cash investment.
(i) The owner's estimate of the rate of return for the preceding
two years and for the current year if no hardship increase is
granted, and the owner's estimate of the rate of return if the
requested increase is granted.
(3) In addition to any financial requirements which must be satisfied,
the owner/operator must satisfy the Board that he is an efficient
operator of the manufactured home park, that the park is in a safe
and sanitary condition and that the park complies with all township
and state codes pertaining to construction and tenants' rights.
(4) Following the public hearing, if the Board is satisfied that the
applicant is an efficient landlord and that a hardship increase is
necessary in order to realize a just and reasonable rate of return on
the owner's investment, the Board may grant a hardship rent
increase sufficient to ensure said return.
208. Editor's Note: Former § 268-23, Tax and fees surcharge, was repealed 11-6-1989. Section
12 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of the amendatory ordinance shall be
retroactive to January 1, 1989. Any rents paid from January 1, 1989, which include a tax
§ 268-22 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-24
262:1125
§ 268-24. Major capital improvements surcharge.
A. Criteria for major capital improvements surcharge.
(1) The owner of a manufactured home park may apply to the Board for
an additional rental charge necessary to amortize the cost of major
capital improvements which were necessary for the proper
operation of the park.
(2) For the purpose of this section, "capital improvements" shall be any
item considered as such under the federal internal revenue
enactments and regulations.
(3) An owner seeking a capital improvements surcharge shall apply to
the Rent Leveling Board within six months of completing said
capital improvements with the following exception: However,
where a proposed major capital improvement is estimated to
exceed $50,000 and said capital improvement is not required by
any township or state code or regulation, the tenants shall first be
provided with an opportunity to approve or disapprove said capital
improvement. Notice of a meeting to vote on said improvement
shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service certified either by an affidavit or by an acknowledgment of
service executed by the person served. Notification shall be a
minimum of 30 days prior to voting. If a majority of tenants actually
voting vote against the capital improvement, then the cost of said
improvement shall not be eligible for a capital improvements
surcharge.
(4) Any increase granted by authority of this section shall be paid over
the period of the useful life of the completed capital improvement,
as established by the Board at public hearing.
(5) Any surcharge granted hereunder shall not exceed 10% of the
tenant's base rent in effect at the time of the granting of the
surcharge.
(6) The cost of expanding or enlarging a manufactured home park or a
section thereof shall not be borne by existing tenants through the
imposition of a capital improvements surcharge.
(7) A capital improvements surcharge shall not be considered as base
rent in calculating future annual rent increases.
B. Procedure for capital improvements surcharge.
(1) The owner shall make application for a capital improvements
surcharge within six months of completion of the capital
improvements and at least 60 days prior to the proposed effective
date of the capital improvements surcharge. The Board shall
surcharge shall be reimbursed or credited to the tenant equal to the amount of the tax
surcharge.
§ 268-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-24
262:1126
§ 268-25. Mandated expenditures surcharge.
establish a hearing date. Thirty days prior to the hearing date, the
owner shall notify all tenants who would receive an increase in
gross rent if the requested capital improvements surcharge was to
be granted. Said notice shall include the following:
(a) The date, time and location of the hearing.
(b) The total cost of the completed capital improvement.
(c) The number of useful years of life of the improvement.
(d) The average cost, including debt service, of the improvement
(calculated by dividing the cost of the major improvement by
the total number of completed manufactured home spaces in
the manufactured home park.)
(e) The capital improvements surcharge being sought from each
tenant.
(2) Following the public hearing, the Board may grant a capital
improvements surcharge in an amount determined to be
appropriate.
A. Criteria for mandated expenditures surcharge. An owner of a
manufactured home park shall be entitled to a surcharge representing
each tenant's proportionate share of new expenditures mandated by
new federal, state, county or municipal laws, ordinances or regulations.
Such surcharge shall be payable in 12 equal payments owing monthly
and shall be equal to an amount calculated by dividing the cost of the
expenditure by the number of spaces occupied and available for
occupancy at the time the expenditure was made. However, any
surcharge granted hereunder shall not exceed 3% of the tenant's base
rent in effect at the time of the granting of the surcharge. Additional
spaces which are made available after the expenditure shall not have
such surcharge added into the gross rent calculations.
B. Procedure for mandated expenditures surcharge.
(1) The owner made application to the Board 30 days prior to the
proposed effective date of the mandated expenditures surcharge.
The Board shall establish a hearing date. Ten days prior to the
hearing date, the owner shall notify all tenants who would receive
an increase in gross rent if the requested mandated expenditures
surcharge was to be granted. Notice shall be by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal service certified either by
affidavit or by an acknowledgment of service executed by the
person served. Said notice and application shall include the
following: the date, time and location of the hearing and the
calculations involved, including:
§ 268-24 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-25
262:1127
§ 268-26. (Reserved)209
§ 268-27. Reduction in rent due to change in standards of
maintenance or service.
(a) The amount of the owner's expenditure.
(b) The law, ordinance or regulation requiring such expenditure.
(c) The number of manufactured home rental spaces occupied at
the time of this expenditure.
(d) The total monthly mandated expenditures surcharge and
monthly gross rent to be charged the tenant if the request is
granted.
(2) Following the public hearing, the Board shall grant or deny the
request for the mandated expenditures surcharge in an appropriate
amount.
A. Criteria for reduction.
(1) Every owner/operator shall maintain substantially the same
standards of service, maintenance, recreational facilities and
landscaping connected with the tenancy as was provided at the
inception of the tenancy. A failure on the part of the owner/operator
to properly maintain the grounds or services may entitle the
manufactured home tenant to withhold rent. The obligation of the
tenant to pay the approved gross rent in its entirety is dependent
upon the owner's continuing ability to provide substantially the
same level of services and property maintenance which were being
provided upon execution of the lease.
(2) Should minimum property maintenance livability standards not be
maintained by an owner/operator, or should facilities and services
which were provided upon execution of the lease be substantially
reduced by the owner/operator, or should the failure of the owner/
operator to make necessary repairs or improvements result in the
failure of the manufactured home park to comply with federal, state
or local codes, then tenants so affected shall be entitled to a
reduction in rent until such time as the deficiency has been
corrected.
B. Procedure for reduction.
(1) Any tenant or group of tenants who is affected by either a failure of
the owner/operator to comply with township codes or by a
reduction in standards of maintenance and services may, on 30
days' prior written notice to the owner by certified mail, return
209. Editor's Note: Former § 268-26, Property maintenance surcharge, as amended 9-4-1990,
was repealed 9-3-1991.
§ 268-25 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 268-27
262:1128
§ 268-28. (Reserved)210
§ 268-29. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any of the provisions of this article, including but not
limited to the willful filing with the Board of any material misstatement
of fact, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500. A violation
affecting more than one rental space shall be considered a separate
violation as to each rental space.
§ 268-30. Construal of provisions.
This Article, being necessary for the welfare of the township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 268-31. Reexamination of provisions. [Added 9-3-1991]
The provisions of this article affecting permitted increases in gross rents
shall be reviewed and studied beginning four years from the effective date
of this amendment.
receipt requested, or by personal delivery, with an affidavit of
service to the Board, ask the Board to determine the percentage
reduction in the gross rent in view of the deficiency. The Board,
after hearing, shall determine the percentage reduction in rent by
using the following suggestive, but not exhaustive, guidelines:
(a) The extent of violations of applicable codes.
(b) The nature of the deficiency or extent of the reduction in
service.
(c) Whether the owner knew or should have known of the
condition.
(d) The potential or actual effects upon safety and sanitation.
(e) The length of time of the existence of the condition has existed.
(2) Upon finding that a rent reduction is in order, the tenant(s) shall
only be required to apply the rent as determined by the Board until
such time as the owner proves to the Board that the deficiency has
been corrected. Said payment shall constitute fulfillment of the
tenant's payment obligation during that time. Where a reduction in
rent has been ordered for a past deficiency, the tenant shall be
entitled to a credit against the rent(s) next due, as reduced by any
continuing deficiency which may be found by the Board, until such
times the total credit has been exhausted.
210. Editor's Note: Former § 268-28, Reduction in rent due to tax appeals or decreases in taxes
or fees, as amended 5-1-1989, was repealed 9-3-1991.
§ 268-27 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 268-31
262:1129
Chapter 274
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 276. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
421.
§ 274-1. Legislative determination.
The Township of North Brunswick, New Jersey, does hereby determine that
it will be economical and in other respects advantageous to it to have
sewage and other wastes treated and disposed of by the Middlesex County
Sewerage Authority on and pursuant to the terms of the contract authorized
by this chapter.
§ 274-2. Authority to enter contract.
The Township of North Brunswick, New Jersey, shall enter into a contract
with the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority (and various other parties)
providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal of sewage and other
wastes, on the terms and conditions and substantially in the form set forth
in this chapter, and the President of the Township Council shall be and he
hereby is authorized and directed on behalf of said township to execute said
contract under the corporate seal of said township, which shall be affixed
and attested by the Deputy Clerk, and to deliver the same.
§ 274-3. Form of contract; approval of terms.
Said contract shall be substantially the form of agreement attached
hereto211 and entitled "Agreement with the Middlesex County Sewerage
Authority and Others," and the terms and conditions thereof are hereby
approved and specifically agreed to.
Chapter 276
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 274. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
421.
211. Editor's Note: The contract referred to in this section is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 268-31 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 274-3
274:1130
ARTICLE I
Use
[Adopted 2-15-1960]
§ 276-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
FOG — Fats, oils and grease that exceed 100 ppm discharge to the sanitary
sewer, including that which is produced by the cooking, serving or
processing of food or by any commercial or industrial process that uses fats,
oils or grease.[Added 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-15]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of
foods and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes and
distinct from sanitary sewage.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, proprietorship or any other group of persons, or the legal
successors and representatives thereof.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residence,
business and other buildings, institutions, factories and industrial
establishments, together with such surface and storm water as may be
present.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
§ 276-2. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 4-16-1962; 6-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-15]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer
or storm sewer within the Township of North Brunswick any of the following
described liquids or substances:
A. Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage system.
B. Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
§ 276-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-2
274:1131
§ 276-3. Prohibited connections.
§ 276-4. Construction of sewers.
No public or private sanitary sewer or storm sewer shall be constructed
in the Township of North Brunswick unless the same is constructed in
accordance with the standards of construction as shall be laid down and
promulgated from time to time by the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 276-5. Construction of private sewers.
C. Garbage and FOG, i.e., fat, oils or grease discharges over 100 ppm.
D. By-products or refuse from any mechanical garbage disposal or grinder
used in the operation of any mercantile or business establishment.
E. Waters or wastes having a pH lower than five or containing toxic,
corrosive or poisonous substances or suspended solids of such
character and quantity as to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process or which constitute a hazard to humans or animals or
to the structure or equipment of the sewage works.
F. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
G. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
H. Any water or waste which may contain radioactive materials.
I. Stormwater, surface or ground water or unpolluted industrial process
waters of any kind.
J. Water from any swimming pool or air-conditioning system.
K. Industrial or commercial waste, except as hereinafter provided.
A. No person shall connect or allow to be connected into any sanitary
sewer located within the Township of North Brunswick any drain or
leader designed to collect ground or surface waters.
B. No new sump pump shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of
the Township of North Brunswick. [Added 7-19-1971]
A. No private sanitary sewers shall be constructed in the Township of
North Brunswick unless:
(1) Detailed preliminary maps showing the proposed locations for said
sewer lines are filed with the Sewer Department of the Township
and a permit is issued by said Department.
(2) The same is constructed under the supervision and direction of the
Township Engineer, whose services therefor shall be paid by the
abutting property owner.
§ 276-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-5
274:1132
§ 276-6. Acceptance of sewers.
§ 276-7. Sewer rentals. [Amended 7-19-1971; 2-18-1975; 1-15-1979]
The Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick deems it
necessary and proper that the following sewer fees and charges be paid to
the Township for the use of the sanitary sewer located within the Township
for all meter reading after January 1, 1979. The rates for sewer usage shall
be as follows:
B. Where a permit to construct a private sanitary sewer is granted, the
cost and expense of such construction shall be borne by the abutting
property owner.
C. The cost of construction and maintenance of sewer laterals (that is,
sewer lines running from the trunk line to the curb or property line and
the sewer line running from the curb or property line to the building
served) shall be the obligation of the abutting owner.
A. No sanitary sewer or storm sewer shall be accepted by the Township of
North Brunswick unless the contractor responsible for the construction
of the said sewers shall first file with the Sewer Department of the
Township of North Brunswick and the Clerk of the Township detailed
maps of the installation of said sewer lines as built.
B. Upon receipt of written demand from the Township of North Brunswick,
the contractor responsible for constructing any sanitary sewer or storm
sewer within the Township shall, within 14 days thereafter, file with the
Sewer Department of the Township and the Clerk of the Township
detailed maps of the installation of said sewer lines as built.
A. The Township Council of North Brunswick deems it necessary and
proper that the following sewer fees and charges be paid to the
Township for the use of the sanitary sewer system within the Township.
For charges after September 1, 2019, on accounts that have received a
new meter that is now read in gallons, the charge for sewer shall be
calculated upon the rate set forth hereinbelow using the following
conversion to estimate consumption: one cubic foot equals 7.4805
gallons. [Amended 4-6-1981; 4-5-1982; 2-21-1989; 2-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-3A; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-39; 6-2-2002 by Ord.
No. 03-21; 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-34; 5-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-07; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
Water Consumption Range
Sewer Rate per 748 Gallons (Gal)
Effective date
0 to 9,000
Gal
9,000 to
27,000 Gal
More Than 27,000
Gal
July 1, 2016 $4.029 $5.008 $5.757
July 1, 2017 $4.150 $5.158 $5.929
§ 276-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-7
274:1133
Water Consumption Range
Sewer Rate per 748 Gallons (Gal)
Effective date
0 to 9,000
Gal
9,000 to
27,000 Gal
More Than 27,000
Gal
July 1, 2018 $4.275 $5.313 $6.107
July 1, 2019 $4.403 $5.472 $6.290
B. Residential users of the sewer system that do not exclusively use
Township-supplied water for indoor usage shall be charged for sewer
use based on a quarterly consumption of 17,205 gallons. Nonresidential
and multifamily users of the sewer system that do not exclusively use
Township-supplied water for indoor usage or for any other usage that
may enter the sewer shall be charged for sewer use based on the
estimated volume of water they use as determined by the Township or
the quarterly consumption of 17,205 gallons, whichever is greater.
[Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-39; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
C. Industry and multiple dwellings shall be billed on a monthly basis.
D. Additional charges for treatment of industrial wastes. [Added
4-6-1981212]
(1) The sewer rent for collection and treatment of industrial waste
discharges into the sewer system shall be based upon premium
charges for extra-strength waste, as follows:
Extra-Strength Waste
Charges
(per ton)
Excess biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD)
$245.00
Excess suspended solids (SS) $330.00
Excess chlorine demand (CLD) $80.00
(2) The foregoing charges will be applicable to sewage and wastewater
pollutants in excess of the following normal sewage concentrations
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l): [Amended 5-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
Type
Concentration
(mg/l)
Suspended solids (SS) 200
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD)
200
212. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased rates as stated therein shall
be effective on the first billing date of each end user on or after 4-1-1981.
§ 276-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-7
274:1134
Type
Concentration
(mg/l)
Chlorine demand (CLD) 10
(3) The strength of wastewater discharges into the sewerage system
by industrial users shall be determined from test samples taken of
the industries' wastewater discharges in accordance with accepted
sampling and testing procedures.
(4) The weight of excess pollutants in pounds per quarter shall be
determined by the application of the excess sewage strength in
milligrams per liter to the quarterly sewerage flows (as determined
elsewhere in this section) in million gallons times the factor of
8.345 pounds per gallon.
(5) "Industrial user" is defined as any nongovernmental, commercial,
nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works.
[Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11]
(6) "Residential user" is defined as all private, domestic dwellings.
[Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11]
(7) Wherever actual readings of biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids and chlorine demand of a user are available,
those readings shall be used in determining charges for strength of
sewage. All industrial users shall provide, at the discretion of the
Township, means at each user facility to allow periodic
determination of the concentration of the wastes as a basis for
charges for suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand and
chlorine demand. The determination will be made at least quarterly
or, if deemed necessary, monthly. Determination of the character of
the waste will be made by the Township and shall be binding as a
basis for charges. [Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11]
(8) At least once every two years the Township of North Brunswick
shall review and revise, as necessary, sewer use and sewer user
charges and shall establish a schedule of charges by user class,
flow, biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, chlorine
demand and such other criteria as the governing body shall deem
appropriate. Any charges so established shall, at a minimum,
provide for the equitable distribution of Middlesex County Utility
Authority charges and sewer operating costs of the Township of
North Brunswick. The schedule of charges shall be amended at
least every two years by resolution or at such other time as the
governing body may determine, to reflect changes and/or
adjustments in the charges
§ 276-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-8
274:1135
§ 276-8. Payment of sewer rents, fees, and other charges. [Amended
5-17-1976; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-39]
All bills for sewer rents, fees, and other charges shall be due and owing
to the Township upon the bill date. All such charges which have not been
paid within 30 days from the bill date shall bear interest at the rate of 8%
per annum for principal amounts of $1,500 or less and 18% per annum
for principal amounts in excess of $1,500 or the maximum interest rate(s)
allowed by state law. Interest shall be charged from the 31st day after the
bill date until payment is made or a past-due bill is issued. If a past-due bill
is issued, interest charges on the principal amount stated in the past-due
bill shall be suspended for 30 days from the past-due bill date. If the full
amount of a past due bill is not paid within 30 days from the past-due bill
date, interest charges shall be reinstated for the thirty-day period as if no
suspension occurred. Payments shall be credited to the amounts owed in
the following sequence:
§ 276-9. Overdue payments as lien.
The aforementioned rents and charges, plus all other costs, expenses,
interest and penalties arising therefrom, shall be a lien upon the particular
premises where such rental or charge is incurred from the time that such
rental or charge arises until the same is fully paid and satisfied.
§ 276-10. Arrearages.
In the event that payment in full of the aforementioned rents and charges
shall not have been made within six months from the date when due, then
the Township Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick shall file with the
Tax Collector of the Township a statement of arrearages, and the said Tax
Collector shall enforce these rents and charges in the same manner as liens
for unpaid taxes.
§ 276-11. Determining the amount of sewage.
The amount of the rental fee or charge to be paid by the owner of a house,
residence, building, place of business or factory for the discharge of sewage
into a sanitary sewer shall be determined on the basis of the amount of
water consumed in such house, residence, building, place of business or
factory. The reading on the water meter attached to such premises shall
constitute the measure of sewer flow from such house, residence, building,
place of business or factory, for which use the rental is payable. Where
A. Interest on sewer rents;
B. Interest on water rents;
C. Miscellaneous charges;
D. Sewer rents; and
E. Water rents.
§ 276-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-11
274:1136
a house, residence, building, place of business or factory does not have a
water meter attached thereto, the owner thereof shall install at his own
expense, at the intake of the water supply, a meter of a type approved by the
Sewer Department of the Township of North Brunswick for the purpose of
measuring the amount of water used therein, which amount shall constitute
the measurement of the amount of sewage for the purpose of determining
the rental charge due to the Township of North Brunswick for the use of the
connecting sanitary sewer.
§ 276-12. Determining the amount of industrial or commercial
wastes.
Each industry discharging industrial waste into the sewer system of the
Township of North Brunswick shall install a suitable metering device,
approved by the Sewer Department of the Township of North Brunswick,
which meter shall continuously record the industrial waste flow discharged
into the sewer system for the purpose of measuring the amount of such
waste discharged. The rental charge due to the Township of North
Brunswick shall be computed on the basis of the readings recorded on said
metering device. Where the total annual charge for discharging industrial
waste is estimated to be less than $1,000, then no meter shall be required
and the volume of flow shall be determined on the basis of the metered
water consumption as aforesaid.
§ 276-13. Schedule of discharge of industrial wastes.
Each industry discharging industrial waste into the sewer system of the
Township of North Brunswick shall adopt a schedule of discharges of such
waste, which schedule is subject to the approval of the Sewer Department
of the Township of North Brunswick, to the end that peak concentrations of
sewage flows shall be minimized, giving due consideration to the capacities
of the sewer system and to the necessities of factory production.
§ 276-14. Change of discharge operations. [Amended 4-16-1962]
A. In the event that the industrial waste discharged by any industry
interferes with the efficiency of the operation of the sewer system of the
Township of North Brunswick or with the disposal of the sewage flowing
therein, or unduly increases the cost of the operation of said system,
then such industry shall be required by the Sewer Department of the
Township of North Brunswick to:
(1) Reduce its peak discharge;
(2) Construct equalizing tank;
(3) Partially pretreat the waste;
(4) Eliminate troublesome waste; or
(5) Use any approved means,
§ 276-11 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-14
274:1137
§ 276-15. Inspection of industrial wastes, commercial wastes and
FOG-generating facilities. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-15]
to produce industrial waste of a quality acceptable to said Sewer
Department before such waste can be discharged into the sewer
system of the Township.
B. In the event that the industrial waste discharged contains acid, then the
industry, upon notice from the Township Sewer Department, shall
immediately install a recording pH meter, the type and installation of
which shall first be approved by the Township consulting engineers.
The meter readings shall determine acceptability of such waste in
accordance with standards set up by § 276-2 concerning prohibited
discharges. Said meter shall be so installed as to make it readily
accessible for inspection or reading at any time by a representative of
the North Brunswick Township Sewer Department.
A. Industrial wastes. Each industry discharging industrial waste into the
sewer system of the Township of North Brunswick shall provide
facilities and means whereby the waste being discharged may be
inspected by designated employees of the Township of North Brunswick
for the purpose of determining the character of the waste, its
concentration and its rate of flow. Determination of character,
concentration and rate of flow by the Sewer Department of the
Township shall be binding for the purpose of computing applicable
charges, fees and/or fines. Samples may be collected and evaluated,
pursuant to standard methods of analyses, for the purpose of
determining the quality and quantity of such industrial waste.
B. Commercial and other FOG-generating facilities. The Township's
Director of Public Works and/or any duly authorized employees or
agents of the Township bearing proper identification shall, subject to
law, be permitted to enter all facilities that generate or may generate
FOG, with the exception of private residential residences, for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Each
commercial establishment, including but not limited to food service
establishments or other nonresidential FOG generators, shall provide
the facilities and means whereby the waste being discharged may be
inspected by authorized employees or agents of the Township of North
Brunswick for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter
and any other applicable laws, rules and regulations, including
determination of the characteristics of the waste, its rate of flow, and
whether the grease traps/interceptors are adequate and are being
operated, cleaned and maintained properly. Determination of the
character, concentration and rate of flow by the Township of North
Brunswick shall be binding for the purpose of computing any applicable
charges, fees and/or fines. The person in charge of the establishment to
be investigated, or known FOG generator, shall, at the time of
inspection, make available to the employees or agents of the Township
§ 276-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-15
274:1138
§ 276-16. Revision of rates.
The rates set forth in this chapter are subject to adjustment and change to
such extent as the Mayor and Council of the Township of North Brunswick
may deem necessary or advisable.
§ 276-17. Permit for disposal of industrial or commercial waste.
of North Brunswick, all records, manifests, and logs of the removal
of the contents of grease traps and grease interceptors as well as
the maintenance, cleaning and repair of those traps or interceptors
and any facilities that flow into them. Records providing proof of an
employees' education program to minimize FOG discharge, including
records providing proof of the implementation of such FOG reduction
procedures, shall also be provided at that time. Such records must
include, without limitation, those records that pertain to the design,
operation, cleaning and maintenance of FOG facilities, including but
not limited to the disposal of contents of the grease trap/interceptor,
and the removal of FOG for rendering, reprocessing or disposal.
Authorized Township employees or agents shall inspect commercial
and other FOG-generating establishments without notice. Any failure
to consent to such inspections shall constitute probable cause for the
Township to secure an administrative search warrant in order to
inspect such establishments. This section shall apply solely to
commercial properties.
C. Reinspection fees - FOG-generating facilities. Any time an authorized
agent of the Township of North Brunswick must reinspect the facilities
of a FOG generator for the purpose of determining whether any
condition of noncompliance with the FOG-related requirements of this
chapter that were identified in a previous inspection has been
adequately corrected, a fee of $100 shall be charged to recover the
Township's cost of administering and conducting the reinspection.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions hereinbefore set forth, no industrial or
commercial waste shall be disposed into the sewer system of the
Township of North Brunswick until an application has been made to the
Township for a special permit permitting such disposal, and such
application shall contain full information as to the type of business to be
or being conducted, an estimate of the quantity and content of such
waste and such technical information as may be required by the
Township.
B. The application fee to cover the examination and processing of said
application shall be $15, which fee shall be in addition to any charges
set forth above and which fee shall not be returnable.
C. Within a reasonable time after the receipt of the filed application, the
Sewer Department of the Township of North Brunswick shall examine
said application and the premises to which it is applicable and the plans
and specifications to determine the volume of such waste to be
§ 276-15 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-17
274:1139
§ 276-18. Control of industrial wastes.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors may be required and shall be provided
wherever, in the opinion of the Township, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease or flammable substances. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Township and
shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
They shall be of substantial construction, capable of withstanding extreme
changes of temperature and equipped with easily removable covers which
shall be gastight and watertight.
§ 276-19. Fat, oil, grease, and sand traps/interceptors. [Amended
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-15]
discharged into the Township sewer system and whether such volume
would adversely or injuriously affect the operation of the sewage
system or any part of its equipment or processes.
D. The special permit for the discharge of industrial or commercial wastes
shall be issued by the Township of North Brunswick upon
recommendation of the Sewer Department of said Township, upon such
terms and conditions as shall be required in order to operate the
sewage system of the Township in the most efficient and orderly
manner.
A. Maintenance. All FOG and sand traps/interceptors shall be cleaned and
maintained by the owner, at his or her sole cost and expense, in
reasonably efficient operation at all times, in accordance with this
chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. FOG
generators, except for private residences, must maintain a continuous
log of every cleanout and maintenance event for each grease trap/
interceptors at their facilities as well as a copy of each receipt for the
removal of the contents of grease traps/interceptors or the removal of
concentrated FOG for reuse. These records must be kept available for
the Township's physical inspection at the facilities where the grease
traps/interceptors are located for a period of five years. In addition,
FOG generators must send a copy of each receipt for the removal of the
contents of grease traps/interceptors or the removal of concentrated
FOG for reuse to the Township employee specified by the Township
either by facsimile, e-mail or regular mail. The Township may require
FOG-generating facilities to post prominent signs stating, "NO
GREASE," at locations when the Township so designates.
B. Installation. Grease traps shall be installed when required by the
Plumbing Code, the Health Department or any other regulatory agency
with jurisdiction, and when the Township of North Brunswick Director
of Public Works or his designee determines that they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing FOG, or any flammable
solvents, sand or other harmful or noxious ingredients, except that such
grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for private
§ 276-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-19
274:1140
§ 276-20. Preliminary treatment facilities: when required.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substance having the
characteristics described in § 276-2, or having an average daily flow greater
than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Township, shall be subject
residential dwellings. All of the traps/interceptors shall be located so
that they are readily and easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance,
inspection, and sampling, including the final effluent from the trap;
interceptor, all water flowing into the trap/interceptor is always below
150° Fahrenheit. If a waste flow is above 150° Fahrenheit, it must be
routed around the trap/interceptor or cooled to below said temperature
before entering the trap/interceptor.
C. Pretreatment of waste from FOG generators. Any establishments,
except for private residential dwellings, that generate FOG shall, at
their sole cost and expense, pretreat their waste with a Townshipapproved
bacteriological product in a manner and dosage approved by
the Township for the purpose of controlling and eliminating the
introduction of FOG into the Township's sewers. This includes but is not
limited to all retail food establishments, commercial food processors,
meat processors or similar food processors or food service
establishments, including schools, churches, banquet halls, clubs and/
or other social or charitable associations, athletic facility food facilities,
and/or any other private or commercial establishment that periodically
prepares food for more than 25 persons in any one day.
(1) The bacteriological product must be free of wetting agents,
surfactants, reducing agents and other additives, enzymes,
solvents, and chemical degreasers and must be approved by the
Township's Director of Public Works or his designee prior to
application and/or installation of the feeding equipment or the start
of application of the bacteriological product. The bacteriological
product shall be introduced into the waste system upstream from
the grease trap/interceptor once in every twenty-four-hour period
or as directed by the Director of Public Works or his designee after
the closing of business or during the period of time with the least
business activity (at the beginning of the period of time with the
least wastewater for the longest time). If the establishment fails to
apply the bacteriological product correctly or sufficiently, the
Township of North Brunswick shall have the right to require the
use of an automated feed system or extended release block
bacteriological product, regardless of whether such feed system or
block increases the cost of treatment. Chemicals, cleaners,
undiluted bleach or other disinfectants that are toxic to the
bacteria being added must not be allowed to enter the grease trap/
interceptor unless otherwise required by law.
§ 276-19 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-20
274:1141
to the review and approval of the Township. Where necessary in the opinion
of the Township, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand
to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million
by weight, or reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within
maximum limits, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Township, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
§ 276-21. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Whenever required by the Township, if preliminary treatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
reasonably effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 276-22. Manholes.
When required by the Township, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Township. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him.
§ 276-23. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses shall be taken by the Township of the
characteristics of waters and wastes and shall be determined in accordance
with American Public Health Association "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage" and shall be determined upon suitable
samples taken in said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
§ 276-24. Overloaded private sanitary sewers.
Whenever the Superintendent of Sewers shall determine any private
sanitary sewer to be overloaded so as to become injurious to the health
and safety of the people served by said sewer, he shall forthwith advise the
Township of North Brunswick of his determination; thereafter the Township
of North Brunswick shall cause notices to be given to the owners of the
property served by said sanitary sewer to show cause why said sanitary
sewer should not be forthwith repaired so as to comply with the standards
of construction for private sanitary sewers as herein provided, and upon
the failure of said property owners to comply with said order, the Township
of North Brunswick shall have the right to condemn said private sanitary
§ 276-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-24
274:1142
sewer and to order that the same be replaced with a public sewer, with
the costs thereof to be assessed against the real estate served thereby, in
accordance with the statutes in such case made and provided.
§ 276-25. Separate water and sewer connections; cesspools, septic
tanks; stoppages. [Added 7-20-1964]
§ 276-26. Fresh-air inlet. [Added 7-20-1964]
A fresh-air inlet must be connected with the house drain just inside the
house trap.
§ 276-27. Damaged sewer pipe. [Added 7-20-1964]
Where any sewer pipe is damaged while in the course of installation, it must
be immediately removed and replaced by the plumber.
§ 276-28. Connection of cellar drains to sanitary sewers. [Added
7-20-1964]
On and after the adoption of this section, no cellar drains of any kind may
be connected with the Township's sanitary sewer system.
§ 276-29. Standard provisions. [Added 4-6-1981213]
Each user shall be notified, at least annually, with the regular bill, of the
rate and charges for wastewater treatment representing operating and
maintenance costs of the Middlesex County Utilities Authority.
A. Each house shall be provided with entirely separate water and sewer
connections from the main line to the building. Under no circumstances
shall a single water and sewer connection be permitted to serve two or
more separate buildings, even where same are owned by the same
party.
B. In all cases where there is a sanitary sewer main within 100 feet or less
of a person's property, it shall be unlawful to own, operate, maintain or
use, or permit the maintenance, operation or use of, any cesspool,
septic tank or outhouse.
C. The Township shall not be liable for any stoppage of the sewer lines
between the main sewer line and the building served thereby nor for
any damage resulting from said stoppage, and in no event will the
Township provide any labor or material to free, clear or remove the
obstructions from the said drainage system, but all such work shall be
the sole and exclusive responsibility of the owner of the premises
served.
213. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased rates as stated therein shall
be effective on the first billing date of each end user on or after April 1, 1981. This
ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 276-29, 276-30, 276-31 and
276-32 to become §§ 276-32, 276-33, 276-34 and 276-35, respectively.
§ 276-24 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-30
274:1143
§ 276-30. Extraneous flows. [Added 4-6-1981214]
Any flows or strengths which are not chargeable to a particular use,
whether by reason of the user being exempted from the charges or by
reason of the flow entering the system by infiltration or inflow, shall be
charged to all users proportionately on the basis of flow.
§ 276-31. Toxic pollutants. [Added 4-6-1981215]
Any user who discharges into the system toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment
works shall pay for such increased costs.
§ 276-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-06; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-15]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
214. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased rates as stated therein shall
be effective on the first billing date of each end user on or after April 1, 1981. This
ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 276-29, 276-30, 276-31 and
276-32 to become §§ 276-32, 276-33, 276-34 and 276-35, respectively.
215. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased rates as stated therein shall
be effective on the first billing date of each end user on or after April 1, 1981. This
ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 276-29, 276-30, 276-31 and
276-32 to become §§ 276-32, 276-33, 276-34 and 276-35, respectively.
§ 276-30 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-32
274:1144
ARTICLE II
Facilities Charges
[Adopted 3-7-1977; amended in its entirety 2-21-1989]
§ 276-33. Assessment of fee on new buildings.
Each new building constructed shall be assessed a fee as set forth hereafter,
which assessment or charge shall be used toward contributing to the costs
of maintenance, repair, replacement and expansion of sewer and water
facilities of the Township.
§ 276-34. Purpose of fund.
The fees charged and collected pursuant to this Article shall be deposited in
a separate account entitled "Utilities Escrow Account," and retained for the
purposes set forth above.
§ 276-35. Charges. [Amended 4-17-1995; 9-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18]
A. Connection fees.
(1) Residential properties. The applicant shall pay a connection charge
of $1,675 at the time of the application for each service connection
to the utility water system.
(2) Commercial, industrial and other nonresidential properties.
(a) Connection fees or connections made by owners of
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential properties
shall be based on the schedule of fees as set forth below for
each sewer lateral connected, based on the size of the
connection in accordance with the following schedule:
Size
(inches) Connection Fee
4 $1,675
6 $3,350
8 $5,650
10 $8,625
12 $12,275
(b) The fee shall be collected at the time the construction permit is
issued.
§ 276-33 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-35
274:1145

ARTICLE III
Separate Stormwater Sewer System
[Adopted 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-19]
§ 276-36. Definitions.
As used in this Article III, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans and household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) into the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of North Brunswick,
unless that discharge is authorized under a New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater
General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical
connections may include, but shall not be limited to, leaks, flows or
overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [(33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or STORMWATER
SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels or storm drains, that is owned or operated by the
Township of North Brunswick or other public body and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
§ 276-36 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-36
274:1147
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 276-37. Prohibited conduct.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as the municipal separate storm sewer
system or to a natural outlet approved by the Township Engineer. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval
of the Township Engineer, to the municipal separate storm sewer system or
a natural outlet.
A. Prohibited conduct. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by the Township of North Brunswick is prohibited. The
spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater in
such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
B. Exceptions to prohibition:
(1) Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(2) Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
(3) Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact
cooling water).
(4) Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
(5) Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
(6) Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
(7) Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
(8) Flows from fire-fighting activities.
(9) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
§ 276-36 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-37
274:1148
§ 276-38. Illicit connections prohibited.
Prohibited conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
through an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by the Township of North Brunswick any domestic sewage,
noncontact cooling water, process wastewater or other industrial waste,
other than stormwater.
§ 276-39. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Department
of Public Works of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 276-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 276-41. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting. [Added 8-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-18]
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage or reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
A. Retrofitting mandatory. All existing storm drain inlets which are in
direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property shall be retrofitted in
accordance with the requirements of this section to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Township of North Brunswick, to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
B. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their
use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of North Brunswick or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 276-37 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-41
274:1149
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property (except a
residential lot with one single-family house) shall authorize the
repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion
or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 276-41D below
prior to the completion of the project.
D. Design standard. Storm drain inlets identified in § 276-41C above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 276-41D(3) below.
(1) Grates.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(b) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains.
§ 276-41 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 276-41
274:1150
(c) Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
E. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced concurrently by the
Director of Community Development and/or his or her designee and by
the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Penalties. Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm
drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standards set forth
herein.
§ 276-41 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 276-41
274:1151
Chapter 281
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 138.
§ 281-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PARKING AREA — A parking lot or other property provided by a retailer
for the use of a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. The
parking area of a retail mercantile establishment located in a multistore
complex or shopping center shall include the entire area used by the
complex or center.
PERSON — Includes a person of either sex, corporation, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, societies and other entities capable of
being sued.
SHOPPING CART — A push cart of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and their parking areas.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, road, alley, lanes, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, parks, parking lots,
parking areas and places used by the general public.
§ 281-2. Owner's name and warning notice prominently fixed.
Any person providing to his customers or patrons shopping carts which,
being mounted on wheels, are able to be moved off the premises of such
person, shall cause to be placed and maintained upon such shopping carts
in a conspicuous manner the name of the owner thereof and shall likewise
place and maintain thereon in such conspicuous manner a further notice
reading as follows: "The removal of this cart from these premises is
prohibited by law."
§ 281-3. Removal from owner's premises.
No person shall move, push or carry any shopping carts belonging to and
bearing the name of another person or owner upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or private property other than the premises of the owner
of the shopping cart.
§ 276-41 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 281-4
274:1152
§ 281-4. Clearance from sidewalks and parking areas.
The person operating a place of business which supplies shopping carts
for the use of customers or patrons shall keep the sidewalk, parking lots
and parking areas in front of or upon his business premises clear of such
shopping carts by removing therefrom any such shopping carts left thereon
by his patrons or customers; provided, however, that he may, while his place
of business is open, maintain in a suitable area a place for the orderly
collection of such shopping carts, provided that such area shall not be so
situated as to interfere with the ingress and egress of customers or patrons
on foot or in automobiles.
§ 281-5. Impoundment of abandoned shopping carts.
A. The Township shall not impound any shopping cart that has a sign or
notice identifying the owner of the shopping cart, or the retailer who
has written consent from the owner to use the shopping cart, and listing
a valid telephone number or address through which the owner or
retailer may be contacted, unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area
of a retail mercantile establishment;
(2) The Township notifies the owner or retailer of the location of the
shopping cart and allows three business days from the date of such
notification for the owner, retailer, or an authorized agent to
retrieve the shopping cart, unless the immediate removal is
necessary to prevent a danger to public safety;
(3) The Township notifies the owner or retailer upon impoundment of a
shopping cart, and includes information as to how the shopping
cart may be retrieved;
(4) The location that an impounded shopping cart is held is reasonably
convenient to the owner, retailer, or authorized agent, and is open
for business at least six hours of each business day;
(5) Any fine imposed upon the owner or retailer for an impounded
shopping cart does not exceed $50 for each occurrence for failure
to retrieve shopping carts. An occurrence includes all shopping
carts impounded in accordance with this section during a twentyfour-
hour period; and
(6) The Township must allow the owner or retailer a minimum of five
business days following receipt of notice that a shopping cart has
been impounded to retrieve the shopping cart before the Township
may sell or otherwise dispose of the shopping cart.
B. The Township may impound a shopping cart that has a sign or notice
identifying the owner of the shopping cart, or the retailer who has
written consent from the owner to use the shopping cart, and lists a
valid telephone number or address through which the owner or retailer
§ 281-4 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 281-5
274:1153
§ 281-6. Disposal by Township.
If said shopping cart(s) shall not be sold at public auction, the Township
may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such shopping cart(s). Any
disposition of such shopping cart(s) made pursuant to this chapter shall
be made without any liability of the Township to the owner, retailer or
authorized agent of such shopping cart(s) or any other person lawfully
entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 281-7. Violations and penalties.
can be contacted, without meeting the conditions required by
Subsection A(1) through (5) of § 281-5A hereinabove if the Township:
(1) Notifies the owner or retailer within 24 hours of impounding the
shopping cart, and includes information on how the shopping cart
may be retrieved; and
(2) Releases the cart to the owner, retailer or authorized agent without
any charge or fine whatsoever, if the owner, retailer, or authorized
agent attempts to retrieve the shopping cart within five business
days of notice.
C. In accordance with the provisions of § 281-5A and B, the Department of
Public Works, the Police Department or the Department of Community
Development are authorized to seize and impound all shopping carts
abandoned or otherwise left on public streets, public property or on
private property. Upon due notice of such impoundment to the owner,
retailer or authorized agent, as set forth in § 281-5A(2), and upon
provision of five business days for the retrieval of such shopping cart(s)
pursuant to § 281-5A(6) hereinabove, if such shopping cart(s) has not
been retrieved by the owner, retailer or authorized agent, such
shopping cart(s) may be sold in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157, at public auction by the Police Department as
unclaimed property after a period of six months.
D. If the owner, retailer or authorized agent of such impounded shopping
cart(s) retrieves such shopping cart(s) within the five-business-day
retrieval period, no fine shall be imposed upon the owner, pursuant to
§ 281-5B(2) hereinabove. If the owner, retailer or authorized agent fails
to retrieve the shopping cart(s) after such retrieval period, a fine of $50
shall be charged to the owner, retailer or authorized agent, for all
shopping carts so impounded in accordance with § 281-5A(5)
hereinabove. In addition, the Township shall impose an additional fee of
$2 per day charge for storage of such shopping cart(s) impounded.
E. All fines and fees to be paid hereunder shall be to the Treasurer of the
Township of North Brunswick.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of § 281-2,
281-3 or 281-4 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
§ 281-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 281-7
274:1154
Chapter 285
SMOKING
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at
the discretion of the Judge. The continuation of such violation on each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
B. All violations of § 281-5A and B shall be penalized in accordance with
the provisions set forth in § 281-5D, i.e., a fine not to exceed $50 per
violation and storage fees of $2 per day per impounded shopping cart.
§ 281-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 281-7
274:1155

ARTICLE I
School Buildings and Grounds
[Adopted 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-6]
§ 285-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this Article are as follows:
§ 285-2. Applicability.
This Article shall apply to the following:
§ 285-3. Prohibitions.
Smoking tobacco shall be prohibited, except as part of a classroom
instruction or theatrical production, in the following areas:
§ 285-4. Exceptions permitted.
An exemption may be granted by the Board of Education to allow smoking
on exterior school grounds when said grounds are being utilized by outside
organizations.
§ 285-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this Article shall be subject to a fine of $100 and
the following:
A. To eliminate the discomfort and potential harm done to residents by
secondhand tobacco smoke during school-related events.
B. To limit the exposure of adults, students and other minors to the habit
of smoking tobacco, which has been documented to be a health hazard.
C. To expand the provisions of an existing statute in this township so that
smoking is at all times and at all school events prohibited or regulated.
A. Anywhere inside of all public school facilities; and
B. Anywhere on exterior public school grounds.
A. At all times anywhere inside the school buildings of this township.
B. At all times on the exterior grounds of the school buildings of this
township.
A. Five hours of community service for a first offense
B. Community service that shall increase by increments of 5 hours with
each subsequent offense (i.e., 10 hours for a second offense and 15
hours for a third offense, etc.).
§ 285-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 285-6
274:1157
§ 285-6. Notification of policy; costs.
The providing and financing of all public notification, be it publishing,
signage or otherwise, shall be executed by the Board of Education.
§ 285-7. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this Article shall fall under the auspices of the following:
A. Any officer of the North Brunswick Township Police Department.
B. Any faculty member of the Board of Education that is specifically
designated for this detail.
§ 285-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 285-7
274:1158
ARTICLE II
Outside Municipal Buildings
[Adopted 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07216]
§ 285-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enact local legislation in support of and as
an adjunct to the New Jersey Smoke Free Air Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq.,
by creating a smoke-free environment around municipal buildings within
the Township of North Brunswick to further enhance the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens and those employed at or visiting municipal buildings.
§ 285-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.
§ 285-10. Smoke-free zone.
There is hereby established, around all municipal buildings located within
the Township of North Brunswick, a twenty-foot smoke-free zone wherein
the smoking of any form of tobacco product, either a cigarette, cigar or
pipe, is strictly prohibited.
§ 285-11. Signs.
There shall be placed, at all public entrances and exits of municipal
buildings, signs which shall be located so as to be clearly visible to the
public and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color with
the sign indicating that smoking is prohibited within 20 feet of the building,
citing this article. Such sign shall also indicate that any violators shall be
subject to a fine.
§ 285-12. Violations and penalties.
It shall be a violation of this article to smoke anywhere within 20 feet of
a municipal building within the Township of North Brunswick. Any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 for the
first offense, $250 for the second offense and $500 for each subsequent
offense.
216. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that signs clearly stating this regulation shall
be posted around the entrance and exits to all municipal buildings.
§ 285-8 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 285-12
274:1159

ARTICLE III
Parks and Recreation Areas
[Adopted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-04]
§ 285-13. Purpose.
The following are the purposes of this article:
§ 285-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo
or pipe.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other matter or substance
which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked, or the
inhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking device.
§ 285-15. Smoking in parks and recreation areas prohibited.
A. The United States Surgeon General has determined that there is no safe
level of exposure to secondhand smoke and that nonsmoking Americans
exposed to secondhand smoke in public places are at significantly
increased risk of heart disease and lung cancer. (See U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, the Health Consequences of Involuntary
Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: a report of the Surgeon General, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, 2006.)
B. Smoking is the leading cause of death in the United States and the
United State Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
determined that reduction of the death and disease caused by tobacco
use and exposure to secondhand smoke is one of the six top national
healthcare priorities.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, North Brunswick is given the authority to
adopt ordinances for the public health, safety and welfare of the
Township, its citizens, residents and guests.
D. The New Jersey Smoke-free Air Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63) specifically
authorizes local restrictions on smoking "equivalent to, or greater than"
those provided in the NJSFAA for purposes of "protecting public
health."
§ 285-13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 285-15
274:1161
§ 285-16. Incorporation of provisions by reference.
This Article III of Chapter 285 of the Code of the Township of North
Brunswick shall be cross-referenced and incorporated by reference into
Chapter 234 of the Code of the Township of North Brunswick entitled "Parks
and Playgrounds" as new §§ 234-34 to 234-39.
§ 285-17. Enforcement.
Whenever the Director of the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services or his or her designee or a park patrolman or park
personnel or any law enforcement personnel observes or reasonably
believes that there exists a violation of this article, he or she may issue
a summons and complaint to the violator. The complaint shall be written
and served on the violator. Citizens of the Township may also bring private
complaints for violation of this article.
§ 285-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 for the first offense, $250 for the second offense and $500 for each
subsequent offense.
A. No person shall smoke while in any and all of the Township parks,
recreational areas and adjacent parking lots whether owned, leased or
utilized by the Township.
B. No person shall smoke in any vehicle owned or leased by the Township.
§ 285-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 285-18
274:1162
Chapter 287
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 287-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Includes the person, persons or entity(ies) holding legal title to
any lot, parcel of land or real property, whether improved or unimproved,
and whether or not occupied by the owner or any tenant.
PARKING LOT — A lot or parcel or any other real estate providing space for
the parking of motor vehicles within a private parking area.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land owned by the Township of North
Brunswick intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer and
other similar uses.
SIDEWALKS — Includes paved or flagstone walk(s) intended for use by
pedestrians, or, in the absence of such paved or flagstone walks, that
portion of unpaved area normally traversed by pedestrians.
STATE OF EMERGENCY — When a snowstorm occurs which constitutes
a serious public hazard impairing pedestrian travel, transportation, the
movement of food and fuel supplies, medical care and fire, health, police
protection and other vital facilities of the Township, the Office of Emergency
Management Coordinator shall declare a state of emergency.
§ 287-2. Duty to remove snow and ice; enforcement. [Amended
4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10]
A. Duty of owners.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner of any residential lot, parcel of land
or real property in the Township abutting or bordering on the
sidewalks of a public street to remove or cause to be removed all
snow and ice from the sidewalk area in front of or bordering upon
the owner's lands. Within 24 hours of the cessation of any storm or
fall of snow or ice, as determined by the Director of the Department
of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard, such
as the National Weather Service reports. Said snow or ice shall be
so removed so that an unobstructed portion of the sidewalk area is
open and cleared to a width of at least three feet.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any nonresidential
lot, parcel of land or real property in the Township abutting or
bordering on the sidewalks of a public street to remove or cause to
be removed all snow and ice from the sidewalk area in front of or
bordering upon the owner's lands, within 12 hours of the cessation
of any storm or fall of snow or ice, as determined by the Director of
§ 285-18 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 287-2
274:1163
the Department of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective
standard, such as the National Weather Service reports. Said snow
or ice shall be so removed so that an unobstructed portion of the
sidewalk area is open and cleared to a width of at least three feet.
The owners of any premises used for any nonresidential purposes
shall, in addition to the removal of snow and ice on sidewalks,
remove or cause to be removed any and all snow and ice from
parking lots, walkways and any other areas used by their
customers or employees.
(3) It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any parking lot
which is open to the public or to which the public is invited and
which contains special parking spaces for the use of persons who
have been issued a placard or wheelchair symbol license plates
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq., to be responsible for assuring
that access to these special parking spaces and to curb cuts or
other improvements designed to provide accessibility for
handicapped persons is not obstructed.
(a) If snow or ice is obstructing such special parking space, curb
cut or other improvement designed to provide accessibility for
the handicapped on a residential lot, same shall be removed
within 24 hours of the cessation of any storm or fall of snow or
ice, as determined by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard, such as
the National Weather Service reports.
(b) If snow or ice is obstructing such special parking space, curb
cut or other improvement designed to provide accessibility for
the handicapped on a nonresidential lot, same shall be
removed within 12 hours of the cessation of any storm or fall of
snow or ice, as determined by the Director of the Department
of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard,
such as the National Weather Service reports.
(4) Ice which is so frozen as to make removal impractical shall either
be treated with rock salt or other chemicals which will thaw the ice
sufficiently to permit removal or be thoroughly covered with sand,
ashes or cinders.
(5) In the case of condominium developments, the condominium
association may designate, in writing, primary and secondary
walkways which shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Department of Community Development. Any walkways not
specifically designated in writing and approved as secondary
walkways shall be presumed to be primary walkways. Snow shall
be removed from all primary walkways within 24 hours and shall be
removed from all secondary walkways within 72 hours of the
cessation of any storm or fall of snow or ice as determined by the
Director of the Department of Public Works, based upon a
reasonably objective standard, such as the National Weather
§ 287-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 287-2
274:1164
§ 287-3. Casting snow and ice upon streets, sidewalks and other
areas.
No person shall throw, place or in any way deposit snow or ice into or upon
any street, highway, public right-of-way, sidewalk, walkway or parking lot.
§ 287-4. Casting snow and ice upon adjacent properties.
No person shall throw, place or in any way deposit snow or ice onto any
adjacent properties without the prior express written consent of the owners
of the adjacent properties.
Service reports, and, if same cannot be wholly removed from such
primary and secondary walkways, sand, salt or other proper
substance shall be sprinkled thereon so that such primary and
secondary walkways shall be safe for travel.
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his designee, shall
be primarily charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter with respect to public streets and shall cause prosecutions for
violations thereof to be instituted before the Judge of the Municipal
Court with all reasonable dispatch. In addition to the Director of the
Department of Public Works, the Police Department and/or the Director
of the Department of Community Development, or his designee, shall
have concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter with
respect to public streets. The Director of the Department of Community
Development, or his designee, shall be primarily charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter with respect to private
property and commercial, industrial and multifamily properties and
shall cause prosecutions for violations thereof to be instituted before
the Judge of the Municipal Court with all reasonable dispatch. In
addition to the Director of the Department of Community Development,
the Police Department and/or the Director of the Public Works, or his
designee, shall have concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter with respect to private property and commercial, industrial
and multifamily properties. The applicable enforcement authority or
any department with concurrent enforcement authority, shall not be
required to serve a violation notice or like correspondence to violators
of the provisions of this chapter and shall have the right to immediately
issue summonses to any violators of the provisions of this chapter.
C. In cases where the owner has failed and/or refused to remove said snow
and/or ice or has failed to provide for the covering of any icy patches
within the time frames provided by this chapter, the applicable
enforcement authority or his designee shall have the power to cause the
said snow or ice to be removed or covered, as the case may be, the sole
cost and expense of which shall be borne by the owner in accordance
with the provisions of § 287-9 hereinbelow.
§ 287-2 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 287-5
274:1165
§ 287-5. Safety hazard.
It shall be illegal for any person to create a safety hazard by causing any
obstruction to the sight line of motor vehicles and pedestrians on streets
and sidewalks due to the piling up of snow and ice from the plowing and/or
removal of same from any property, street or sidewalk.
§ 287-6. Snow emergency streets.
A. During the appropriate months of the year, "No Parking — Snow
Emergency" signs shall be posted on the following streets: [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24; 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15;
11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 18-08]
Cranbury Cross Road
Hermann Road
Nassau Street
Newton Street
Ridgewood Avenue
Independence Boulevard: both sides of Route 130
Aaron Road
Hartland Commons
Hidden Lake Drive
Schmidts Lane
Willowbrook Drive
Axel Avenue
Woodland Avenue from Jerome terminus at Stevens Street
Cleremont Avenue
Carlisle Road
Masoma Road
Serviss Avenue from the intersection with Stevens Street to dead end
of Serviss Avenue
Beverly Avenue from Oakwood Place to Livingston Avenue
Beechwood Place from Glenridge Avenue to Cleremont Avenue
North Oaks Boulevard
Renaissance Boulevard North
(1) Partial snow emergency streets. During the appropriate months of
the year, "No Parking Snow Emergency — Parking Prohibited Area"
signs shall be posted in areas of streets on which parking is
prohibited only in selected sections of that street during snow
emergencies:
§ 287-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 287-6
274:1166
§ 287-7. Snow emergencies; parking prohibited. [Amended
9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15; 11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 18-08]
Linwood Place: both sides of street in an area between Hermann
Road and Cranbury Cross Road intersections
Linwood Place: both sides of street in an area between Glenridge
Avenue and Woodland Avenue intersections
Wood Avenue: both sides of street beginning at Route 130
intersection continuing to the emergency access gate into
Birchwood Court at Wood Avenue terminus
Haverford Street: both sides of street in an area between Lee
Avenue and Livingston Avenue intersections
Stevens Street: both sides of street in an area between Lee Avenue
and Livingston Avenue intersections
Huron Road: both sides of street in an area between Axel Avenue
and Jersey Avenue (State Route 91) intersections
Riverbend Drive: one side of street designated by posted No
Parking — Snow Emergency signs
Village Drive East: western curb face of roadway designated by
posting No Parking — Snow Emergency signs
Village Drive South: northern curb face of roadway designated by
posted No Parking — Snow Emergency signs
Village Drive West: eastern curb face of roadway designated by
posting No Parking — Snow Emergency signs
(2) Parking prohibited area signage. In the case of streets having
partial snow emergency parking restrictions, signage shall dictate
"No Parking Snow Emergency; Parking Prohibited Area."
B. The lack of such a sign on any of the described streets shall not be
construed to mean that parking is permitted during snow emergencies.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any street
designated a "snow emergency street," nor shall any vehicle be parked
in the selected sections of a street designated "Snow Emergency No
Parking When Road Is Snow Covered Tow Away Zone."
B. The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently, and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Whenever snow accumulation is forecasted or predicted to be four
inches or more or if ice is forecasted or predicted, no person shall park,
stop, stand or leave unattended or abandoned any vehicle on any
Township street or road or Township field(s) from the first hour of
§ 287-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 287-7
274:1167
§ 287-8. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 287-9. Assessment for Township's cost of removal; lien.
Upon removal of said snow or ice, or upon undertaking the prevention
of hazardous ice conditions by the Township as provided in § 287-2, the
Director of Public Works, or his designee, shall cause such costs to be
charged as a special tax against the owner of the lands abutting such
sidewalks. The costs so charged shall be paid by the owner of said lands
within 45 days of the mailing of such notice of costs charged. Should the
property owner fail to pay the amount charged within the aforesaid fortyfive-
day period, the amount shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon
the lands of the owner and shall be added to and become part of the taxes
next to be levied and assessed upon such lands by the Tax Collector's office.
Said amount shall bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes. The
Township shall have the right to bring a summary action for collection of
such costs incurred in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division,
Middlesex County.
§ 287-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-06; 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10]
commencement of the snow or ice to 12 hours after snow or ice ceases
to fall, as determined by the National Weather Service.
D. Authorized vehicles in handicapped parking spaces pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.5 et seq., shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
E. Any resident of the Township may park his/her vehicle in a Township
Park parking lot or any parking lots so designated by the Director of the
Department of Public Works, or his designee, for the duration of the
snow/ice event. In addition, residents may park their vehicles anywhere
on properties that they own or have an interest in, provided they have
written permission from the owner of the property.
F. Any vehicle remaining on a Township street or road that is in violation
of this section may be ticketed and/or towed from the street at the
owner's expense.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except for
§ 207-2A(3)(a) and (b), shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 287-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 287-10
274:1168
Chapter 291
SOIL IMPORTATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste - See Ch. 184.
Hazardous materials - See Ch. 191.
Land use - See Ch. 205.
Soil removal - See Ch. 292.
Street excavations - See Ch. 297.
§ 291-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
ACCEPTABLE SOIL MATERIAL — Earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus,
rock or dirt, and may include soil, subsoil or topsoil. No construction debris
or contaminated material is permitted.
APPLICANT — The person requesting a soil importation permit as provided
for in this chapter.
CONTAMINANT — Any hazardous substance, hazardous constituent,
hazardous waste or pollutant.
CONTAMINATED MATERIAL — Any soil containing contaminants
exceeding the present requirements for residential direct contact pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:26E, Technical Requirements for Site Remediation.
CONTAMINATED SITE — Any property, including, but not limited to,
structures, sediment, soil and water, that contains a contaminant which is
B. The Township shall, upon a second or subsequent violation of any
provision of this chapter within the same calendar year have the right,
but not the obligation, to cause the removal of the snow and ice or
hazardous condition and to charge the costs of same against the
violator, pursuant to the terms and conditions of § 287-9 herein.
C. The imposition and collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions
of Subsection A of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the Township to collect the cost of removal as provided in § 287-9.
D. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues pursuant to § 287-10B herein.
E. Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 287-2A(3)(a) and (b)
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $500
and not exceeding $1,000 for each space that is obstructed, or, be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 287-10 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 291-1
274:1169
present at such levels of concentration as to require action pursuant to any
federal or state statutes or regulations.
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by another person or persons, or
seeks site plan approval for the construction or alteration of nonresidential
buildings or structures.
DREDGED MATERIAL — Any material removed from the bottom of a body
of water.
FILL or FILL MATERIAL — Any sand, gravel, earth, soil, dredged material
or other material of any composition whatsoever, the placement of which
upon a site results in a change of topography of the site.
GARBAGE — Meat and vegetable waste solids resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. Garbage is considered to
originate primarily in kitchens, stores, markets, restaurants, hotels and
other places where food is stored, cooked and consumed.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous substance as defined pursuant
to Section 3 of P.L.1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b), hazardous waste
as defined pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1976, c. 99 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38),
or pollutant as defined pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A.
58:10A-3).
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as by a
lawful subdivision or deed of record, survey map or by a metes and bounds
description.
PERMITTABLE EFFLUENT CONTAMINANT LEVELS — The dissolved
priority pollutant +40 contaminant levels within the effluent which are
below the groundwater quality criteria for Class IIA groundwater as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9-6.
PERMITTABLE SOIL/SEDIMENT CONTAMINANT LEVELS — Priority
pollutant +40 contaminant levels, which are below the most stringent soil
cleanup criteria as set forth by the NJDEP.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society or
partnership, or other business entity and their agents or employees.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous lots in single ownership.
PRIORITY POLLUTANT PLUS 40 OR PP+40 — The priority pollutant list of
126 compounds and elements developed by the EPA pursuant to Section
307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act and 40 nontargeted organic compounds
detected by gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) analysis. For
the purpose of this chapter, a PP-40 scan means the analysis of a sample
for all priority pollutants except those as analyzed using GC/MS analytical
methods. Nontargeted compound criteria shall be used pursuant to the
version of the EPA Contract Laboratory Program Statement of Work for
Organic Analysis, Multi-media, Multi-concentration in effect as of the date
on which the laboratory is performing the analysis.
§ 291-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 291-1
274:1170
REFUSE — Includes all miscellaneous matters, such as, but not limited
to, bottles, construction debris, rags, mattresses, worn-out furniture, old
clothes, old shoes, broken glass, leather, carpets, crockery, rubber,
newspaper, cartons, tin cans, metals, abandoned automobiles or parts
thereof.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Those actions taken at a site when hazardous
materials have been found, including the removal, treatment, containment,
transportation, the securing of or other engineering treatment measures,
including related operations and maintenance activities, whether of a
permanent nature or otherwise, designed to ensure that any discharge
or placement at the site is remediated in compliance with the applicable
remediation standards, including the sealing of or closure of wells and
groundwater supplies contaminated by the placement of hazardous
materials.
REMEDIATION — All necessary actions to investigate and clean up any
known, suspected, or threatened discharge or placement of hazardous
substances, including, as necessary, identifying areas of concern and
determining the presence of hazardous substances and the collection and
evaluation of data adequate to determine whether or not discharged or
placed hazardous substance, identifying and evaluating any problems
presented by the discharge or placement and the performance of a remedial
action.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
§ 291-2. Depositing of contaminated or unwholesome material
prohibited.
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of North Brunswick shall deposit
thereon or permit the depositing thereon of any contaminated material,
or animal or vegetable substance or garbage or refuse or dirt gathered
in cleaning sewers, or waste of mills or factories, or any materials which
are offensive to health or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render
the atmosphere impure or unwholesome, or any other environmentally
inappropriate materials as determined by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 291-3. Permit required for deposit of acceptable soil material;
exemptions.
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in the Township of North Brunswick shall deposit
thereon or permit the depositing thereon of any acceptable soil material
unless a permit is issued by the Division of Engineering. Exempt from the
provisions of this section shall be the following:
A. Select fill for septic installation and/or repair certified to be such by a
licensed New Jersey engineer; or
§ 291-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 291-3
274:1171
§ 291-4. Deposit of acceptable soil material in connection with
development approval.
Unless otherwise exempt under the terms of this chapter, no permit to
deposit approved soil material upon or used to fill up or raise the surface
or level of any lot, grounds, street, road, or alley in the Township of North
Brunswick shall be issued unless such fill operation is performed in
connection with:
§ 291-5. Proof of compliance with soil cleanup criteria.
§ 291-6. Fees.
The fee for issuance of a permit under this chapter shall be $200. No
permit shall be issued unless the applicant furnishes to the Department of
Community Development an approved plot plan, site plan or subdivision
plan, as the case may be, for the proposed filling project, the permit fee, and
a performance guarantee if not covered elsewhere. Such guarantee shall
be a certified check in the sum of $200 made payable to the Township of
North Brunswick to guarantee performance by the applicant of the terms
and conditions of this chapter, such funds to be released upon inspection
of the fill project and approval thereof by the Department of Community
Development as having met the provisions of §§ 291-5 and 291-7. The
Department of Community Development shall have a period of 30 days from
B. Routine landscaping activities that do not require an excess of 10 cubic
yards of approved soil material conducted in connection with
residential use not subject to any other permitting requirements set
forth in the ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick. Any
materials used in activities permitted herein shall nevertheless conform
to all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
A. A grading permit issued by the Department of Community
Development; or
B. Site plan or subdivision approval granted by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Unless otherwise exempt under the terms of this chapter, no permit to
deposit acceptable soil material upon or used to fill up or raise the
surface of any lot, grounds, street, road, or alley in the Township of
North Brunswick shall be issued unless the applicant submits proof that
the acceptable soil material has been tested in conformance with
§ 291-7 of this chapter and that it complies with the Technical
Requirements for Site Remediation found in N.J.A.C. 7:26E, as may be
amended from time to time.
B. Proof shall be a letter from a laboratory certified by the state to perform
soil analysis, stating that results meet or exceed the present
requirements for residential direct contact as contained above, along
with the actual test results.
§ 291-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 291-6
274:1172
receipt of the complete application within which to issue or deny the permit
application.
§ 291-7. Supplemental specifications for fill operations with
acceptable soil material.
§ 291-8. Responsibility for obtaining permits.
Responsibility for obtaining a permit for approval to deposit approved soil
material is with the property owner.
§ 291-9. Duration of permit.
Each permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be valid only for
the location(s) described in the permit and most of our permits are valid for
one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal.
§ 291-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall pay the required fees in connection with the permit as
outlined herein, plus all costs associated with having the material tested,
A. Any acceptable soil material that will be deposited within the Township
of North Brunswick, which is to be brought into the Township from
outside sources, or from sources as within the Township, must be tested
at the source for compliance with the requirements found in N.J.A.C.
7:26E, in accordance with § 291-5 of this chapter, and evaluated by a
state certified laboratory.
B. Further:
(1) All expenses connected with such testing are to be borne by the
recipient of the fill;
(2) The Department of Community Development shall have the
authority to order additional reports or inspections as it may deem
necessary and appropriate;
(3) Acceptance or rejection of any approved soil material is to be made
by the Department of Community Development according to this
chapter and any additional rules or regulations it may from time to
time enact; and
(4) A minimum of two samples are to be extracted from the source for
laboratory analysis for each 500 cubic yard lot, or fraction thereof if
from undisturbed natural ground. Testing for all other sources shall
be determined based upon the source and volume of the fill to be
imported. Samples are to be extracted, tested and evaluated by a
state certified laboratory. Samples must be biased to the location of
the highest suspected contaminated concentrations, as determined
by the laboratory professional or his duly assigned representative.
§ 291-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 291-10
274:1173
plus a cost of $5 for each and every cubic yard of material that has been
imported to the site, as determined by the Department of Community
Development. Such person, firm or corporation shall also be liable to a fine
of not more than $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, at the direction of the Municipal
Court. Every day in which such violation continues after due notice has been
served shall constitute a separate violation or offense.
Chapter 292
SOIL REMOVAL
§ 292-1. Permit required.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove any soil (and for the purposes
of this chapter, "soil" shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to,
any earth or earthy substance, sand, gravel, topsoil, fill dirt or the like)
for sale or for use other than on the premises from which the soil shall be
taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building
on such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without
first having procured a permit therefor from the Building Inspector of said
township.
§ 292-2. Filing of application and map.
The Building Inspector shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Building Inspector an application
requesting such permission, together with a map of the premises showing
the present contour lines of the premises and the proposed contour lines
and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended removal of soil
in relation to the topography of the premises, and the said proposed contour
lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Township Engineer and the Building Inspector of the Township of
North Brunswick. No such permit for soil removal shall be issued until such
map has been filed and until the proposed contour lines and grades have
been approved by the Township Engineer and the Building Inspector of the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 292-3. Manner of removal.
In the removal of soil when the permit has been duly granted, the owner
or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no
sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the area
shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to
the contour lines and grades as approved by the Township Engineer and
Building Inspector of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 291-10 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 292-4
292:1174
§ 292-4. Removal of arable soil restricted.
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil
when the permit has been duly granted shall not take away the top layer of
arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Township Engineer
and Building Inspector of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 292-5. Filing of bond.
Before any permit for soil removal shall be granted or issued, the owner or
applicant shall file with the Township Clerk a bond with satisfactory surety,
the amount to be determined after report of the Township Engineer and
the Building Inspector of the Township of North Brunswick as to necessities
and requirements in the undertaking, which bond shall be conditioned that
the work of soil removal shall comply with the ordinances and regulations
on the subject and shall be done in a proper manner in accordance with
the grades and contour lines approved by the Township Engineer and the
Building Inspector of the Township of North Brunswick, and that the top
layer of soil to a depth of six inches shall be set aside and retained, to
be thereafter respread over the area when the rest of removal has been
completed, and that repairs at the expense of the owner or applicant shall
be made to any street or streets used in transportation of soil if the Mayor
and Council shall consider repairs are necessary because of such use of
the streets, and that the work shall be done properly without detriment to
adjoining properties or detriment to the Township of North Brunswick and
without leaving any sharp declivities, pits or depressions and will be leveled
off properly and cleared of debris, and that the owner or applicant will pay
the cost of inspection and supervision incurred by the Township Engineer in
examination and inspection during the progress of the soil removal.
§ 292-6. Permit required prior to commencement of work;
conformity required.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have first been
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 292-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1977; 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-06]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
§ 292-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 292-7
292:1175
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 297
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 297-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Includes applicant's agents, servants, representatives and
any contractors employed by it.
IMPROVED ROAD — Any road surfaced with a pavement such as asphalt,
concrete, bituminous concrete under the jurisdiction of the Township of
North Brunswick.
§ 297-2. Permit required; emergencies.
No person, persons or corporation shall do any excavating or disturb any
street or road surface, shoulder or bank areas in the Township of North
Brunswick for the purpose of laying, changing, repairing or connecting any
water, gas, sewer pipe or any electric, telephone or telegraph pipes or
conduits, or for any other purpose whatever, without first having obtained
a permit from the Department of Community Development. In the event of
an emergency where repairs must be made immediately and the person,
persons or corporation charged with the responsibility for making the
repairs would be unduly delayed in seeking a permit, then and in that
event the excavation may be made for the purpose of stopping a leak or
interruption in service of the utility. As soon as the leak or interruption in
service has been repaired and an emergency no longer exists, the person,
persons or corporation having made the excavation shall forthwith apply for
a permit and comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
§ 297-3. Application for permit.
A. Any person, persons or corporation desiring such permit shall secure
from, and file with, the Department of Community Development a
signed road opening permit application on forms provided by the
Department. The application shall require the execution of a hold
harmless agreement to save the Township of North Brunswick harmless
from any loss, injury or damage whatsoever resulting from the course of
construction, whether directly or indirectly connected with the work, or
from any negligence or fault of the applicant, its agents, servants,
representatives or contractors in connection with the performance of
the work covered by the plans.
B. Except as provided in § 297-13, relative to New Jersey public utility
corporations, the applicant shall, as a part of each application, annex
§ 292-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 297-3
292:1176
§ 297-4. Adequate protection required; extent of opening.
The applicant shall keep all openings and all excavated material properly
guarded and shall place and maintain warning lights thereon of adequate
nature to warn the public from one hour before sunset to one hour after
sunrise. No greater portion of the street, road, shoulder or bank shall be left
open at any one time in excess of 25 feet. The permit holder shall conform to
the requirements in the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
Part VI, when required by the Township to provide barricades and/or signs.
§ 297-5. Streets to be open for public travel.
At all times during the course of construction, 1/2 of the street or road shall
be open for public travel.
§ 297-6. Dust and nuisances; streets to be kept clean.
If dust, dirt or other detrimental material continues to arise as a result
of the work or neglect of the applicant, its agents, contractors or
representatives, or if a nuisance is, in the opinion of the Director of
Community Development or the Township Engineer, or his designee, caused
by the actions of any of said parties, the Director of Community
Development or the Township Engineer, or his designee, may stop the
work until the issue is satisfactorily addressed. Streets and paved surfaces
must be kept broom-clean. If dust persists, the Director of Community
Development, or his designee, has the right to mandate the use of a street
sweeper.
§ 297-7. Blasting; construction work near existing pipes.
No blasting shall be allowed unless permitted by the Director of Community
Development or his designee. Work shall be so conducted as not to interfere
with the existing utilities, water mains, sewer lines, gas pipes or electrical
conduits or the service connections thereof, and in case of injury to any such
utility, it shall be the duty of the applicant, at its own expense, to properly
thereto a certificate by its liability insurance carrier acceptable to the
Township, showing that he, they or it has liability insurance during
the period required for the proposed improvement in the following
minimum amounts:
(1) For personal injury to one person: $1,000,000.
(2) For personal injury for one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For property damage: $1,000,000.
C. Except as provided in § 297-13, relative to New Jersey public utility
corporations, the applicant shall, as a part of each application, annex
thereto a certificate showing that the applicant is covered by workers'
compensation during the period required for the proposed
improvement.
§ 297-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-7
292:1177
repair or replace the same. The applicant shall not at any time come closer
than three feet to any trunk line water pipe without the permission of
the Director of Community Development, the Township Engineer, or his
designee. Such pipe shall be protected or temporarily supported as directed
by the Director of Community Development or his designee. Wherever the
construction work passes under a service line of water, sewer lines, gas
pipes, electrical conduits or the service connections thereof, the applicant
shall, where the Engineer shall deem necessary, cause the same to be
temporarily supported as directed pursuant to current construction
practices.
§ 297-8. Backfilling; restoring banks, slopes, paved surfaces.
§ 297-9. Trench work.
A. In placing backfill, the applicant or his contractor shall use a
mechanical or vibrating tamping machine. Six inches to 12 inches of
backfill shall be tamped as directed by the Director of Community
Development, the Township Engineer, or his designee. Whenever the
Engineer considers the excavated material unsuitable for backfill, the
applicant shall backfill the trench with sand or bank-run gravel or such
other material as the Director of Community Development or the
Township Engineer, or his designee, may direct to achieve acceptable
compaction as required.
B. On banks and slopes of improved or unimproved Township roads or
grass sidewalk areas, the topsoil shall be saved and carefully replaced
after the trench has been tamped properly and settled completely. The
topsoil shall be replaced after final settlement, shall be raked evenly
and shall have rye grass seed sown thereon or other means satisfactory
to prevent erosion of slopes and banks. The applicant or his contractor
shall bring in sod in order to restore slopes, banks or sidewalk areas to
a satisfactory condition.
C. Where the street is paved, the pavement surface shall be placed upon
backfill as required by § 297-8A up to within 12 inches of the existing
surface grade and shall be one of the following types: concrete;
concrete with FABC surface course; or six-inch Type 5 Class A soil
aggregate, four inches of stabilized base (Mix No. 1) and two inches of
FABC surface course (Mix No. 5). All work shall be done under the state
highway specifications or equivalent approved by the Director of
Community Development or the Township Engineer, or his designee.
A. The existing blacktop pavement shall be saw cut in a straight line prior
to any excavation being made. Excavation shall only be allowed
between the cuts so made. If the edge of the excavation is ragged or
zigzag when it comes time to repave the street or shoulder, then the
street pavement shall be cut out in a straight line as directed by the
Director of Community Development, or the Township Engineer, or his
designee, parallel to the line of the excavated trench in a width
§ 297-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 297-9
292:1178
§ 297-10. Tunneling.
In cases where it becomes necessary to resort to tunneling operations to
reach the point of connection with the main line, the backfill in such tunnel
shall be of rammed soil composed of a mixture by volume of one part cement
to six parts of coarse aggregate material such as sand or bank-run gravel.
§ 297-11. Disposal of surplus material.
Surplus material such as broken-up concrete or excavated material debris
shall be disposed of properly by the applicant.
§ 297-12. Fee deposit and permit fee for street opening.
sufficient to straighten out any rough edges, and the entire area shall
then be repaved. Pending the actual repaving operation stated above,
the contractor shall use a temporary fill over the trench of such material
as may be directed by the Director of Community Development, or his
designee, to ensure that no loose stones, mud or dirt may impede the
flow of traffic. The Director of Community Development, the Township
Engineer, or his designee may at any time require any irregularity in
the surface to be immediately repaired.
B. The applicant assumes the responsibility of maintaining the trench as it
may settle periodically and keeping it level with the elevation of the
pavement.
C. After repavement, the applicant shall be under the duty of maintaining
the trench for a period of 12 calendar months and assume the
responsibility of maintaining the trench as it may settle, as directed by
the Director of Community Development or the Township Engineer, or
his designee, and in case of undue settlement, may be required to open
the trench to ascertain the cause of the undue settlement and to remedy
the same as required by the Director of Community Development or his
designee.
D. Upon the failure of the applicant to comply with any of these
requirements, the Township may perform the necessary repairs and
charge the same to the applicant, including, but not limited to, utilizing
the cash bond provided for the opening.
A. The applicant shall deposit with the Department of Community
Development the sum of $15 per square foot with each application for
each opening on a hard surface FABC or concrete road, to be made in
the road pavement.
B. All applications for street opening permits shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $75 per each opening, which fee shall
be paid to the Department of Community Development.
§ 297-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-13
292:1179
§ 297-13. Surety bond in lieu of cash deposit.
The applicant may, in lieu of a cash deposit, submit a surety bond, which
upon approval of the Director of Community Development, or his designee,
shall have the same force and effect as a cash bond. Said bond shall by
its terms provide for payment of any damages by or from the acts of the
applicant, its agents, servants or subcontractors and save the Township
of North Brunswick harmless from any suits at law or otherwise which
may result from damages sustained by any persons or property as a result
directly or indirectly of the work performed under the permit. Public utility
corporations of the State of New Jersey may file a corporate bond on a
yearly basis in an amount of $5,000 in lieu of cash or construction bonds.
§ 297-14. Restored surfaces subject to release and acceptance.
All street or road surfaces so restored shall be subject to final release
and acceptance, in writing, by the Director of Community Development or
his designee. No deposit money shall be returned nor bond released until
18 months after the completion of the project and its acceptance by the
Director of Community Development, or his designee, and then only upon
the above written certification by the Director of Community Development,
or his designee, that the said work has remained in a satisfactory condition
for the said 18 months.
§ 297-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 307
TAXATION
§ 297-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 297-15
307:1180
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement to Homeowners' Associations
[Adopted 9-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-16217]
§ 307-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — Any condominium, cooperative, fee simple community,
or horizontal property regime comprised of a community trust or other
trust device, condominium association, homeowners' association, property
owners' association or council of homeowners wherein the cost of providing
streetlighting and of maintaining roads and streets and the water mains
beneath them is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively of
unit owners within the community.
CONDITIONALLY QUALIFIED STREETLIGHT POLE — Those poles
providing streetlighting for both qualified streets and parking areas
coincidentally and which, if removed, would eliminate necessary lighting for
a qualified street. Conditionally qualified streetlight poles shall qualify for
partial funding by the Township.
QUALIFIED STREET — A street or road located within an association and
providing access to driveways or parking areas within that association;
provided, however, that in no event shall areas used primarily as parking
areas or parking lots be considered qualified streets.
QUALIFIED STREETLIGHT POLE — Those poles providing streetlighting
which are located on or near qualified streets and which provide lighting for
qualified streets. Streetlighting poles providing lighting for areas primarily
used as parking lots shall be excluded from the definition of qualified
streetlight pole.
§ 307-2. Written agreement.
A. The Township of North Brunswick shall enter into a written agreement
to annually reimburse the association in an amount not to exceed the
cost that would be incurred by the Township in providing those services
directly.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the association shall be used by the
association to pay for the services which the Township. of North
Brunswick chooses not to provide, and that amount shall be the actual
cost to the association of providing that service, but not exceeding the
amount which the Township of North Brunswick would have expended
on that service if it were provided directly by the Township of North
Brunswick to the association.
217. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Reimbursement to Homeowner
Associations, adopted 9-21-1987.
§ 307-1 TAXATION § 307-2
307:1181
§ 307-3. Services to be reimbursed.
§ 307-4. Services to be partially reimbursed.
The Township of North Brunswick shall partially reimburse the association
for the following services:
C. This written agreement shall provide for an accounting by the
association or the use of the money paid over to it by the Township of
North Brunswick and for refunding to the Township of North Brunswick
of any payments in excess of the amounts actually expended or
contractually committed by the association during the accounting
period in order to provide for the services covered by the agreement.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, the
Township of North Brunswick shall reimburse the association for the
following services:
(1) Streetlighting of qualified streetlight poles;
(2) Removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from qualified streets;
(3) Collection of leaves, recyclable materials and garbage along the
roads and streets; and
(4) Street sweeping of qualified streets.
B. For purposes of streetlighting pursuant to Subsection A(1) above, each
association shall authorize the Township of North Brunswick to transfer
billing of qualified streetlight poles from the association to the
Township, and the Township shall assume liability for payment of
lighting said poles from the date of such transfer.
A. The Township shall provide payment for streetlighting for 50% of the
conditionally qualified streetlighting poles; and
B. The association shall authorize the Township of North Brunswick to
transfer billing for 50% of the conditionally qualified streetlighting
poles from the association to the Township, and the Township shall
assume liability for payment of streetlighting for said poles from the
date of such transfer.
§ 307-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 307-4
307:1182
Chapter 311
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic management — See Ch. 316.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 334.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 337.
§ 307-4 TAXATION § 307-4
307:1183

ARTICLE I
General Regulations and Definitions
§ 311-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "North Brunswick Taxi
Ordinance."
§ 311-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted, pursuant to law, in order to promote the provision
of affordable, safe and convenient taxi service within the Township of North
Brunswick.
§ 311-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
CRUISING — The driving of a taxi without passengers at a slow rate of
speed in order to solicit prospective passengers for hire, regardless of
whether the taxi is operating within public streets, private roads or parking
lots of commercial establishments. When not picking up or discharging a
passenger or attending to other lawful business of the owner or driver,
the parking of a taxi in a commercial establishment in any area other
than a designated public taxi stand shall also constitute cruising. Any taxi
operating without a passenger which is not en route to a definite destination
to pick up a passenger, or not returning by the most direct route to either a
public taxi stand or its fixed place of business, shall be prima facie evidence
of cruising.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — A person who possesses a disabled person
identification card.
LOITERING — A condition that results when an individual who is neither a
holder of a North Brunswick taxi license nor a passenger in a taxi remains
in a taxi or in the area of a public taxi stand for no obvious reason associated
with the provision of taxi service. However, a driver may be accompanied by
an adult companion for security purposes while on duty between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
MANIFEST — A written record prepared daily by a taxicab driver of all trips
made by the driver that day showing the time and place each passenger was
picked up, the number of passengers, the destination and the amount of fare
charged for each trip, as well as the taxi stand identification numbers and
times of the day said stands were occupied.
MEDALLION or DECAL — A permit issued by the Township to operate a
taxicab, represented by a decal to be displayed on the taxicab as described
in § 311-20 of this chapter.
PUBLIC TAXI STAND — Any parking space reserved exclusively for use
of taxis licensed by the Township of North Brunswick and signed as a
§ 311-1 TAXATION § 311-3
307:1185
"public taxi stand." Said parking space must be located on a commercial
property where public taxi stands are permitted by the Township Council
and must have received written approval from the Township Planner or
Zoning Officer.
RATE SCHEDULE — A printed schedule of the maximum rates permitted
hereunder to be charged to passengers for hire.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Any person 62 years of age or over.
TAXI DRIVER'S LICENSE — A license issued by the Township Council under
the terms of this chapter to a taxi driver, permitting the licensee to drive a
taxi licensed by the Township.
TAXI OWNER'S LICENSE — A license issued by the Township Council under
the terms of this chapter to the owner of a taxi, permitting the licensee to
operate a taxi licensed by the Township.
TAXI, TAXICAB or AUTOCAB — Any motor vehicle other than a bus or
limousine offered for the transportation of passengers for hire at a
stipulated fare or for a fare based upon time or distance.
§ 311-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-3
307:1186
ARTICLE II
License Required
§ 311-4. License required.
§ 311-5. Establishment of central place of business; local phone
number required.
A. No person shall operate a taxi indicating that it has been licensed by the
Township of North Brunswick unless both the owner and the driver of
the taxi are licensed under this chapter. However, a North Brunswick
license shall not be required of either the taxi owner or driver if the taxi
is licensed by some other municipality.
B. There shall be established two classes of taxi licenses, to be known as a
"taxi driver's license" and a "taxi owner's license," respectively.
C. A taxi owner's license shall be issued for a specific vehicle, and each
owner is required to have a taxi owner's license for each taxi operating
in the Township.
A. Central place of business.
(1) Every owner holding a North Brunswick taxi owner's license shall
demonstrate that he or she maintains a central place of business in
which to park his or her taxi(s).
(2) If the central place of business is located outside of the Township,
the owner must provide a letter from the owner of the premises to
be used as the central place of business confirming that the
licensee shall be permitted to use the premises as a central place of
business to park licensees' taxis on site for a minimum of 12
months.
(3) If the central place of business is to be located in the Township of
North Brunswick, the owner shall provide a letter from the owner
of the premises to be used as the central place of business
confirming that, upon approval from the Township Zoning Officer
that the parking of taxis in such location shall be in accordance
with the provisions of § 311-9E, the licensee shall be permitted to
use the premises as a central place of business to park licensees'
taxis on site for a minimum of 12 months.
(4) While on duty, taxis licensed in North Brunswick may only park at
the central place of business or at designated public taxi stands. No
taxi, regardless of where it is licensed, shall be operated from a
residential use.
B. Every owner operating a taxi licensed by the Township shall have a
telephone number that is local or no cost to all exchanges that serve
North Brunswick. This number shall not be the same number utilized to
dispatch taxis licensed by any other municipality. Any taxi dispatched in
§ 311-4 TAXATION § 311-5
307:1187
response to a call to this phone number shall be a North Brunswick
licensed and medallioned vehicle operated by a North Brunswick
licensed taxi driver, subject to the maximum rates specified herein.
§ 311-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-5
307:1188
ARTICLE III
Limit on Taxi Owner's Licenses; Nonrenewal of Existing Licenses
§ 311-6. Limit on taxi owner's licenses; authorization of additional
taxi owner's licenses; auctions.
§ 311-7. Nonrenewal of existing taxi owner's licenses.
All existing taxi owner's licenses shall expire and shall be null and void by
operation of law as of 11:59 p.m., December 31, 2013. All owners desiring
to obtain a taxi owner's license within the Township of North Brunswick
must bid for same by public action as set forth in §§ 311-8 and 311-9 of
this chapter. Any owners operating taxis within the Township of North
Brunswick without a valid taxi owner's license shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter and shall be subject to the punishments and fines set forth in
§ 311-30A of this chapter.
A. The number of taxi owner's licenses to be issued by the Township
Council shall not exceed 25. The Township Council, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.3, is authorized to issue licenses to the highest
qualified bidder therefor at a sale by public auction conducted or
supervised by the Municipal Clerk.
B. As of 2010, the Township's population is 40,742. Upon reaching 43,000,
the Township Council may authorize one additional taxi owner's license
and may add an additional taxi owner's license for each increase in
Township population of 2,000, thereafter, in accordance with state law.
C. Each new taxi owner's license or taxi owner's license that has been
revoked and surrendered to the Township and available for sale shall be
issued pursuant to the public auction procedures set forth in this
chapter.
§ 311-6 TAXATION § 311-7
307:1189

ARTICLE IV
Public Auctions for Taxi Owner's Licenses; Procedures and
Requirements
§ 311-8. Public auctions for taxi owner's licenses.
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized to advertise for the sale of 25
taxi owner's licenses in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.3.
Such licenses shall be offered for sale at public auction, after advertising
therefor in the Home News Tribune, or any other designated official
newspaper of the Township of North Brunswick, as follows:
§ 311-9. Application process.
A. The minimum bid price shall be $5,000, 10% of which shall be paid to
the Township Clerk at the conclusion of the bidding as a nonrefundable
bid deposit. The balance shall be paid to the Township Clerk within 72
hours of the later of:
(1) Township Council resolution accepting a bid.
(2) Issuance of an owner's license pursuant to this chapter.
B. The award of licenses shall be conditioned upon the successful bidder
or bidders reimbursing the Township for any and all costs incurred by
the Township for the Township's compliance with the public notice
requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1.
C. The Township reserves the right to reject all bids where the highest bid
is not accepted.
D. No license may be transferred within two years after issuance unless
such transfer is approved on the basis of death, disability, serious illness
or severe financial hardship as authorized by resolution of the Township
Council after a public hearing.
E. All bidders must comply with the application process set forth in
§ 311-9, Application process, herein, in addition to complying with the
insurance requirements set forth in § 311-11, Insurance requirements,
herein. If such requirements are not met within 15 days of the award of
bid, the award shall be deemed null and void.
A. Upon this chapter taking effect, applications for taxi owner's licenses
must be completed and returned to the Township Clerk's Office within
10 days of the award of bid for a taxi owner's license.
B. Applications shall be available in the Township Clerk's office and shall
be designed to elicit information relevant to the identification of
vehicles to be licensed and the law-abiding habits of the applicant.
C. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant for completion
and will be processed like new applications when they are submitted
complete.
§ 311-8 TAXATION § 311-9
307:1191
D. A completed application shall contain all applicable information, and
shall be accompanied by three passport-size photographs of the
applicant, the required fee in accordance with § 311-10 herein and a
parking authorization letter (See § 311-9E(1) below.), and shall be
sworn to by oath or affirmation. If information on the vehicle is
unknown at the time the taxi owner's license is applied for, it shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk's office prior to the issuance of the
license.
E. A completed application shall also include the following:
(1) If the central place of business is located outside of the Township,
the owner must provide a letter from the owner of the premises to
be used as the central place of business confirming that the
licensee shall be permitted to use the premises as a central place of
business to park licensees' taxis on site for a minimum of 12
months.
(2) If the central place of business is to be located in the Township of
North Brunswick, the owner shall provide a letter from the owner
of the premises to be used as the central place of business
confirming that, upon approval from the Township Zoning Officer,
the parking of taxis in such location shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 311-9E, and the licensee shall be permitted to use
the premises as a central place of business to park licensee's taxis
on site for a minimum of 12 months.
F. The applicant shall sign the necessary forms for the Director of Public
Safety to secure a criminal history record from the State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. If the applicant is a partnership or
corporation, each and every person with any ownership interest in the
company must sign the necessary forms authorizing the Director of
Public Safety to receive a criminal history record. The applicant shall
also submit the additional fee required to cover the cost of
fingerprinting and the SCIC/NCIC check for each person having an
ownership interest. If the applicant has already been fingerprinted as
part of a prior application, an additional fee to update the criminal
history record shall be required every three years.
G. The Clerk shall forward the application to the Township Zoning Officer
for written certification of the following:
(1) That the central place of business indicated on the application, if
located in the Township, is not located in a residential zone.
(2) That the central place of business indicated on the application, if
located in the Township, has adequate off-street parking to
accommodate the number of taxis applied for during all hours of
the day or night.
(3) That the parking area to be used as the central place of business, if
located in the Township, is screened from adjacent residential uses
§ 311-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-9
307:1192
§ 311-10. License fees; renewal.
§ 311-11. Insurance requirements.
by means of a solid fence or landscaping which provides a solid
screen and measures a minimum of six feet in height.
H. Upon receipt of written approval from the Township Zoning Officer, the
Clerk shall forward the application to the Director of Public Safety.
I. The Director of Public Safety shall conduct an investigation into the
applicant's background.
J. The Director of Public Safety shall issue a report to the Township
Council recommending either approval or denial of the application
within 10 days of receipt of the background information requested from
the State Police and/or Federal Bureau of Investigation.
K. The Township Council shall either approve or deny the application by
resolution.
L. Upon approval of the Township Council and receipt of required
insurance, power of attorney and all relevant information on the vehicle
to be licensed, the Township Clerk shall issue a taxi owner's license to
the applicant. The Police Department shall inspect each car to
determine if it has a valid New Jersey motor vehicle inspection sticker
prior to award of the license.
A. Taxi owner's license. Each application for the issuance or renewal of a
taxi owner's license shall be accompanied by an application fee of $250
for each calendar year or portion of a year for which the license is
issued. Such fee shall not be prorated, nor shall any portion of said fee
be refunded for any reason.
B. Renewal of taxi owner's license.
(1) All taxi owner's licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the year in
which it was issued, unless said taxi driver's license is surrendered,
suspended or revoked on a sooner date.
(2) Applications for renewal shall be accepted beginning October 1 of
each year. However, if an application for renewal is not filed by
November 15 at the latest, the license applied for may not be ready
for issuance before the end of the calendar year, resulting in the
applicant not being able to legally operate the taxi until such
renewal license is issued. A renewal application fee of $250 shall
accompany each renewal application.
A. Insurance required. No license shall be issued by the Township Clerk
until the owner of the taxi owner's license shall have filed with the
Township Clerk a bodily injury and property damage combined single
§ 311-9 TAXATION § 311-11
307:1193
§ 311-12. Issuance of taxi owner's licenses; transfers.
limit liability insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of New Jersey in the sum of not less
than $100,000. Said insurance shall be a blanket insurance covering all
taxis operated by the owner which have been issued a North Brunswick
taxi owner's license and shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance or use of every taxi owned by the licensee which is
licensed by the Township, or any fault in respect thereto, and shall
be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
B. Statement of purpose. The insurance policy shall specifically state that
the owner is insured for doing business in the Township of North
Brunswick.
C. Power of attorney required. The owner of a taxi owner's license shall
execute and deliver to the Township Clerk concurrently with the filing
of the required insurance policy a power of attorney, wherein and
whereby the owner shall appoint the Township Chief Financial Officer
the owner's true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging
service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be
served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the
insurance policy.
A. Upon approval of the Township Council and submission to the Township
Clerk's office of the required insurance, power of attorney and
identification information on the vehicle to be licensed, the Township
Clerk shall issue a taxi owner's license for a specific vehicle.
B. The taxi owner's license shall state the following:
(1) The taxi owner's name, address and business telephone number.
(2) The number of the taxi owner's license issued for the vehicle.
(3) The make, model, year, license plate number and vehicle
identification number of the licensed vehicle.
(4) The maximum permitted occupancy of the taxi.
(5) A statement indicating that passengers may call the Township Code
Enforcement Office with complaints.
(6) The decal or medallion number issued for the taxi owner's license.
C. A taxi owner's license may be transferred from person to person upon
compliance with all procedures and provisions of this chapter. At least
10 days prior to the proposed transfer of the taxi owner's license, the
current license holder must provide full disclosure, in writing, to the
proposed license holder, of any and all violations of this Chapter 311 by
the current license holder during the last three calendar years and
§ 311-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-12
307:1194
§ 311-13. Reasons for denial.
provide a copy of the written disclosure statement to the Municipal
Clerk's office. Failure to provide such written disclosure may be cause
for the denial of the transfer of the taxi owner's license. [Amended
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20218]
A. Taxi owner's licenses may be denied if any part of the application
cannot be verified.
B. Taxi owner's licenses may also be denied if the Director of Public Safety
recommends denial of an application because the applicant has been
convicted of a crime that raises serious questions about the applicant's
moral character.
C. A transfer of an existing taxi owner's license may be denied if a written
disclosure statement detailing violations of this Chapter 311 of the
North Brunswick Code has not been provided to the proposed license
holder with a copy to the Municipal Clerk's office at least 10 days prior
to the transfer of the taxi owner's license. [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-20219]
D. All violations of the North Brunswick Code Chapter 311, Taxicabs, shall
attach to and follow the taxi owner's license for a period of three
calendar years. More than six such violations in that three-year period
may be cause for denial of the transfer of the taxi owner's license.
[Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20220]
218. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
219. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
220. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
§ 311-12 TAXATION § 311-13
307:1195

ARTICLE V
Taxi Driver's Licenses; Procedures and Requirements
§ 311-14. Application process.
A. Upon this chapter taking effect, applications shall be processed on a
first-come, first-served basis in accordance with the following
procedure:
(1) Applications will be handed out on a first-come, first-served basis,
with each application having an application distribution number.
(2) The first application handed out will have a distribution number of
No. 1, and all other applications distributed shall be numbered
consecutively.
(3) All complete applications submitted on a given day shall be
processed in the order of their application distribution number.
(4) Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant for
completion and will be processed like a new applications when they
are submitted complete.
B. Applications shall be available in the Township Clerk's office and shall
be designed to elicit information relevant to the identification of
vehicles to be licensed and the law-abiding habits of the applicant.
C. A completed application shall contain all applicable information, and
shall be accompanied by three passport-size photographs of the
applicant, the required fee in accordance with § 311-15 herein and a
parking authorization letter, and shall be sworn to by oath or
affirmation. If information on the vehicle is unknown at the time the taxi
driver's license is applied for, it shall be submitted to the Township
Clerk's office prior to the issuance of the license.
D. If the application is the applicant's first application for a taxi driver's
license, the applicant shall also sign the necessary forms for the
Director of Public Safety to secure a criminal history record from the
State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. If the applicant is
a partnership or corporation, each and every person with any
ownership interest in the company must sign the necessary forms
authorizing the Director of Public Safety to receive a criminal history
record. The applicant shall also submit the additional fee required to
cover the cost of fingerprinting and the SCIC/NCIC check for each
person having an ownership interest. If the applicant has already been
fingerprinted as part of a prior application, an additional fee to update
the criminal history record shall be required every three years.
E. Upon receipt of all required forms and fees from the applicant, the
Clerk shall forward the application to the Director of Public Safety.
§ 311-14 TAXATION § 311-14
307:1197
§ 311-15. License fees.
Taxi driver's license. Each application for the issuance or renewal of a taxi
driver's license shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100 for each
calendar year or portion of a year for which the license is issued. Such fee
shall not be prorated, nor shall any portion of said fee be refunded for any
reason.
§ 311-16. Issuance of taxi driver's licenses.
§ 311-17. Requirements; reasons for denial.
F. The Director of Public Safety shall conduct an investigation into the
applicant's background.
G. The Director of Public Safety shall issue a report to the Township Clerk
recommending either approval or denial of the application within 10
days of receipt of the background information requested from the State
Police and/or Federal Bureau of Investigation.
H. Upon receipt of the Director of Public Safety's Report, the Township
Council shall either issue or deny an applicant's taxi driver's license.
A. Upon approval of the Director of Public Safety, the Township Clerk's
office shall issue a taxi driver's license.
B. The taxi driver's license shall include the following information:
(1) A passport-size photograph of the licensee.
(2) The driver's name.
(3) The driver's signature.
(4) The number of the taxi driver's license issued to the driver.
(5) A statement indicating that passengers may call the Township Code
Enforcement Office with complaints.
A. Requirements. No license shall be issued unless the applicant meets the
following requirements:
(1) The applicant must be at least 21 years of age.
(2) The applicant must have a valid driver's license issued by the State
of New Jersey.
(3) The applicant must have submitted along with the application a
physician's certification form available from the Township Clerk's
office certifying that the applicant has been examined and has no
known affliction that might render him/her unfit for the safe
operation of a taxi and that the applicant's eyesight is corrected to
20/20 with glasses. Said physician's certification form shall be
§ 311-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-17
307:1198
§ 311-18. Expiration of taxi driver's licenses.
dated no more than 60 days prior to the date of application
submission.
(4) The applicant must not have been convicted of driving a motor
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or narcotics within five
years prior to the date of application submission.
B. Reasons for denial of a taxi driver's application. Reasons for the
Director of Public Safety to recommend denial of an application for a
taxi driver's license include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in one's any weapon enumerated in
Subdivision r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other
than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense for
the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or county is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in § 311-17B(1) hereinabove.
(3) The applicant does not comply with the requirements for issuance
of a taxi driver's license as delineated in this § 311-17A.
(4) The applicant has been convicted of a crime that raises serious
questions about the applicant's moral character.
(5) The applicant has been convicted of three or more moving
violations within two years prior to the filing of the application.
(6) The applicant has been convicted of driving under the influence of
alcohol or narcotics within five years prior to the filing of the
application.
(7) The applicant has been deemed unfit to drive a taxi for just cause
by the Director of Public Safety.
A. All taxi driver's licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the year in which
they were issued, unless said taxi driver's license is surrendered,
suspended or revoked on a sooner date.
B. Applications for renewal shall be accepted beginning October 1 of each
year. However, if an application for renewal is not filed by November 15
§ 311-17 TAXATION § 311-18
307:1199
at the latest, the license applied for may not be ready for issuance
before the end of the calendar year, resulting in the applicant not being
able to operate or drive a taxi until such renewal license is issued.
A renewal application fee of $100 shall accompany each renewal
application.
§ 311-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-18
307:1200
ARTICLE VI
Revocation; Suspension of Licenses
§ 311-19. Suspension and/or revocation of licenses.
A. Taxi owner's license.
(1) A taxi owner's license issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked or suspended by the Township Council if the
licensee has:
(a) Failed to provide taxi service under the license, utilizing
drivers holding valid taxi driver's licenses, within 120 days of
issuance or within six months after approval by the Township
Council of the application, whichever comes first, unless such
failure was caused by the unavailability of drivers holding valid
taxi driver's licenses, in which case the licensee shall be
permitted one sixty-day extension of the one-hundred-twentyday
period in which to provide taxi services under the license,
utilizing drivers holding valid taxi driver's licenses. The sixtyday
extension shall not extend the six-month period;
(b) Allowed the license to remain inactive for more than 30 days,
once operational, without providing written notification to the
Township Clerk detailing the reason that taxi service cannot be
provided. For good cause shown, the Township Council may
extend the period of license inactivity to a period greater than
30 days;
(c) Failed to maintain or keep in force the insurance policy and
power of attorney required;
(d) Made a false statement of any material fact in the application
or any record to be maintained;
(e) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter regarding safety,
rates, hours, service or operation of taxis;
(f) Committed any other act which, in the opinion of the Township
Council, renders such person unfit to hold such license; and
(g) Failed to maintain a central place of business, in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Prior to the revocation or suspension of a taxi owner's license by
the Township Council, the licensee shall be given notice of the
proposed action to be taken and the reasons therefor, and such
licensee shall have the opportunity for a hearing before the
Township Council.
(3) In the event that the Director of Public Safety believes that the
health, safety or welfare of passengers would be endangered if a
license is not immediately suspended or revoked, the Director of
§ 311-19 TAXATION § 311-19
307:1201
Public Safety is authorized to immediately suspend or revoke a
license prior to the licensee having an opportunity for a hearing
with the Township Council. In such cases of immediate suspension
or revocation, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township Council within 15 days of the Director of Public Safety's
notification of the suspension or revocation.
B. Two driver's license.
(1) A taxi driver's license issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked or suspended by the Township Council if the
licensee has:
(a) Made a false statement of any material fact in the application
or any record required to be maintained.
(b) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter regarding safety,
rates, hours, service or operation of taxis.
(c) Committed any other act which, in the opinion of the Township
Council, renders such person unfit to hold a license.
(2) Prior to the revocation or suspension of a taxi driver's license, the
licensee shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken
and the reasons therefor, and such licensee shall have the
opportunity for a hearing before the Township Council.
(3) In the event that the Director of Public Safety believes that the
health, safety or welfare of passengers would be endangered if a
license is not immediately suspended or revoked, the Director of
Public Safety is authorized to immediately suspend or revoke a
license prior to the licensee having an opportunity for a hearing
with the Township Council. In such cases of immediate suspension
or revocation, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township Council within 15 days of the Director of Public Safety's
notification of the suspension or revocation.
§ 311-19 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-19
307:1202
ARTICLE VII
Display of Medallions and Licenses
§ 311-20. Display of medallions, taxi owner's licenses, and taxi
driver's licenses.
§ 311-21. Restrictions on exterior displays.
No vehicle shall be licensed by the Township if the proposed vehicle color
scheme, taxi business name or insignia shall be in conflict with any other
taxi licensed by the Township.
A. Display of licenses required. All taxi owner's licenses and taxi driver's
licenses shall be adequately protected and prominently displayed in the
interior of all taxis licensed by the Township of North Brunswick. Such
licenses shall be displayed so that the faces of the licenses are in full
view and plainly legible to any passenger seated in the rear seat of the
taxi. The license shall at all times remain the property of the Township
and, at the direction of the Township Council or Director of Public
Safety, shall be surrendered to the Township Clerk. Permitted fares
shall also be displayed in the same manner.
B. All taxi owners shall cause to be displayed on the body of the vehicle the
taxi license number issued to that vehicle, e.g., the medallion or decal.
The number shall be three inches in height and located in the center of
the rear quarter panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear
center line of the trunk of the vehicle. Each taxi shall display on each
rear door of the vehicle "The Township of North Brunswick," as
designated by the official decal/medallion issued by the Township of
North Brunswick, and the taxi owner's license number with the
following wording: "North Brunswick License No _____." No other
lettering may be more than twice the size of the taxi owner's license
number. There shall be a fee of $50 for each replacement official decal
medallion that is requested to be issued by the Township of North
Brunswick. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20221]
C. Every vehicle licensed by the Township shall display the following
information on both sides of the outside of the vehicle. Lettering shall
be no less than three inches high, except for the information in
Subsection C(4), which may be no less than one inch high.
(1) The word "Taxi" or "Taxicab," illuminated by a dome light.
(2) The taxi company business name, if applicable.
(3) The taxi company's business telephone number.
(4) The maximum permitted taxi fares specified in § 311-25A, B and E.
221. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
§ 311-20 TAXATION § 311-21
307:1203

ARTICLE VIII
Operating Regulations
§ 311-22. Taxi operating regulations.
All of the following requirements herein pertaining to operation of taxis
shall apply to both the owners and drivers of taxis:
A. Loitering prohibited. No person other than the licensed driver or paying
passenger shall sit in the taxi while the taxi is parked at a public taxi
stand or providing service to a passenger, and no driver shall encourage
or permit loitering near his/her taxi while parked in a public taxi stand,
except that nothing shall prohibit the driver from being accompanied by
an adult companion for security purposes while on duty between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Personal appearance. All taxi drivers, when operating a taxi, shall be
clean and neatly dressed.
C. Smoking prohibited. Smoking shall be prohibited at all times in all taxis
licensed by the Township.
D. Lost articles. Every taxi driver shall, upon the completion of each and
every trip, make a search of said taxi for any property lost or
inadvertently left therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed
or delivered to the rightful owner, shall be taken to the Police
Department within six hours of the finding thereof.
E. Conveyance of passengers in safe and expeditious manner. All taxi
drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of
passengers as to speed and the route to be taken. Where such requests
are not made by the passenger, such driver shall use lawful and
reasonable speed and the most expeditious route to be taken to such
passenger's destination.
F. Misinformation to prospective passengers prohibited. No driver of any
taxi shall induce any prospective passenger to employ him/her by
misinforming or misleading any such prospective passenger, either as
to time or place of the arrival or departure of any train or motor bus, or
as to the location of any building or place, or as to the distance between
any two points.
G. Report of accidents. Any motor vehicle accident involving a taxi and
causing injury to a person or persons or damage to property in excess of
$100 shall be reported immediately by the driver to the Police
Department.
H. Illegal or immoral use of taxis prohibited. No owner or driver of any
licensed taxi shall permit the use of such taxi for any illegal or immoral
purpose.
§ 311-22 TAXATION § 311-22
307:1205
I. Reasonable response period required. All taxi licensees or their
representatives shall answer all calls received for taxi service inside the
Township limits as soon as they can do so. If such services cannot be
rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the
prospective passenger as to how long it will be before the call can be
answered and give the reason therefor.
J. Refusal to provide service. No licensee under this chapter or his/her
representative shall refuse to accept a call for taxi service anywhere
within the Township limits at any time when such licensee has a taxi
available. In particular, no licensee under this chapter or his/her
representative shall fail to or refuse to accept a call for taxi service from
the North Brunswick Police Department. More than one violation of this
section in any one calendar year may be cause for the denial of the
renewal or transfer of any taxi owner's license or taxi driver's license.
[Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20222]
K. Restriction on number of passengers; federally approved car seat
required.
(1) No driver shall permit more than the following passengers in a taxi:
(a) Any combination of five adults and children.
(b) No more than two passengers shall be permitted to ride in the
front seat of any taxi.
(2) Each passenger shall have a working seat belt available to him or
her.
(3) In accordance with the New Jersey Child Restraint Law, no child
under 18 months old shall be transported in a taxi unless the child
is secured in a federally approved car seat, and no child between
the ages of 18 months and five years shall be transported in the
front seat unless secured in a car seat. Upon request, the car seat
shall be made available to older children.
L. Fare receipts. The driver of any taxi shall, upon request of a passenger,
render to such passenger a receipt for the fare charged. The receipt
shall state the name of the driver, the taxi license number, the amount
of the fare, the points of origin and destination, and the date and time of
the transaction.
M. Recordkeeping by owners. The holder of each and every taxi license
shall record in a book kept solely for such purpose the time each
licensed vehicle is available for service, the name of the driver thereof,
the license number of the driver and the license number of the vehicle.
N. Refusal to pay legal fare. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to
pay the legal fare after having hired the taxi.
222. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
§ 311-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-22
307:1206
§ 311-23. Inspections permitted; inspection sticker required; heat
and air conditioning.
O. Demand of fare in advance. If the exact mileage from the point of origin
to point of destination is known, or if the taxi charges a flat rate for a
given trip, the taxi driver may require the passenger to pay the fare
before departure.
P. Limitation on hours worked by drivers. No taxi driver shall work more
than 12 hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
Q. Minimum hours of operation. The owner of a taxi owner's license issued
by the Township shall operate his/her taxi(s), for a minimum of 40 hours
each week.
R. Clean taxi required. The interior and exterior of a licensed taxi shall be
clean at all times.
S. No taxi shall be permitted to leak fluids. Except for trace amounts of
fluids and condensation normal to everyday operations, no taxi shall
leak fluids such as, but not limited to, gasoline, motor oil, power
steering fluid, brake fluid, transmission fluid or antifreeze upon the
streets of the Township or upon spaces designated as public taxi stands.
Condensation and trace amounts resulting from normal operations shall
not be considered a violation of this chapter.
T. Acceptance of more than one fare. No driver shall permit any other
person to ride in the taxi unless the person or persons first employing
the taxi shall consent to the acceptance of additional passengers.
U. Horns. No driver shall use the vehicle horn when arriving at a fare
destination to alert any person or persons for which the taxicab is
waiting. Horns shall only be used in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-69, wherein horns may be used when reasonably
necessary to ensure safe operation or to give an audible warning.
A. The Police Department shall have the right at any time to inspect taxis
licensed in the Township of North Brunswick to determine that said
vehicles are maintained in a safe and sanitary condition for the
transportation of passengers.
B. If inspection reveals a taxi to be in an unsafe or unsanitary condition,
the Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to immediately
suspend without prior hearing the taxi owner's license of any taxi found
to be in such condition. The owner shall be entitled to a hearing before
the Director of Public Safety within three business days of such action
and/or with the Township Council within 15 days of such action.
C. Prior to issuing the original taxi owner's license, the police shall inspect
the taxi to verify that the taxi possesses a valid motor vehicle inspection
sticker. Upon receipt of a new sticker, the taxi shall again be presented
for inspection by the police to verify that a valid sticker is in place.
§ 311-22 TAXATION § 311-23
307:1207
§ 311-24. Maintenance of manifests required.
The owner of each taxi licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
keep or cause drivers employed by the owner to keep a daily manifest
of all trips showing the date, time and place each passenger was picked
up, the number of passengers, the time and place each passenger was
discharged, the trip distance and the amount of fare charged for each trip.
Manifests must also document the number assigned to any public taxi stand
that a taxi occupies, occupy, as well as the time it arrives at the stand
and the time it departs. Such manifest shall be subject to inspection by
the Code Enforcement Office or the Township Director of Public Safety or
his or her designated representative, at their discretion. Manifests shall be
maintained for three months before they may be discarded.
§ 311-25. Maximum taxi fares permitted. [Amended 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-13; 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 17-14; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-03]
The fare to be charged by a taxi licensed by the Township for any trip
with both an origin and a destination in the Township shall not exceed the
maximum established herein.
D. No taxi shall be put in service or kept in service unless both heat and air
conditioning are operational.
A. A base fare of $4.50 shall be charged for the first two miles or part
thereof for all passengers, except senior citizens and handicapped
persons.
B. An additional fare of $1 shall be charged for each subsequent 1/2 mile
or part thereof for all passengers, except senior citizens.
C. The maximum fares established in this section shall apply to the
transportation of one or two persons from the same point of origin to
the same point of discharge. The fare for each additional passenger
above two shall be $0.50 per person.
D. An additional dispatch charge of $0.50 shall be charged for all trips in
which the origin of the trip is not a designated public taxi stand.
E. Senior citizens of 62 years of age or over and handicapped persons shall
be charged a base fare of $3.50 for the first two miles and an additional
fare of $0.75 for each subsequent 1/2 mile or part thereof.
F. An additional administrative fee of $3 shall be charged for each trip
(one-way) provided to a registered participant under the Municipal
Senior Transportation Program and for trips scheduled by a municipal
official for programs organized and administered by the Municipal
Senior Center.
G. There shall be no additional charge for up to two grocery bags, laundry
bags or packages. Each grocery bag, laundry bag or package in excess
§ 311-23 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-25
307:1208
§ 311-26. Cruising prohibited; illegal parking.
§ 311-27. Establishment of public taxi stands.
of two shall be an additional $0.25. Suitcases shall be an additional
$0.25 per suitcase.
H. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any licensee from establishing flat
rates for service between designated points as long as such flat rates do
not exceed the mileage rates established by this chapter.
A. No taxi driver shall cruise any public road, private road or commercial
facility located in the Township of North Brunswick at any time for the
purpose of soliciting passengers, regardless of whether the taxi holds a
license issued by the Township of North Brunswick. While on duty, taxis
licensed by North Brunswick Township shall be permitted to park only
in designated public taxi stands or at their central place of business.
B. While on duty, all taxis, regardless of whether they are licensed by the
Township of North Brunswick, shall be prohibited from parking to await
calls in residential driveways, in commercial parking lots or on public or
private streets in the Township.
C. All taxis must comply with the provisions of § 205-43.1, Parking and
storage of commercially registered vehicles, which provides, in part,
that there shall be no parking on any street, in any residential zone,
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. The Township Council is authorized to designate by ordinance or by
resolution such places in the Township where the location of public taxi
stands is permitted.
B. Picking spaces may be delineated as public taxi stands in the following
commercial centers, subject to approval of the location and signage by
the Township Planner:
(1) North Brunswick Shopping Center.
(2) Walmart Shopping Center.
(3) North Village Shopping Center.
(4) Carolier Lanes Shopping Center.
(5) Pathmark Shopping Center.
(6) Commerce Center.
(7) The Shoppes of North Brunswick.
(8) Main Street North Brunswick.
C. Spaces designated as public taxi stands shall be designated by metal
signs that contain wording provided by the Code Enforcement Office.
§ 311-25 TAXATION § 311-27
307:1209
The cost of fabrication and installation shall be borne by the property
owner.
D. Public taxi stands are reserved exclusively for use by taxis licensed by
the Township of North Brunswick for soliciting business, and there shall
be no parking of any other vehicles therein.
E. No taxi shall be left unattended by the driver while the vehicle is
standing at a designated public taxi stand. Drivers shall remain in or
within 50 feet of the vehicle while it is standing at a designated public
taxi stand.
F. No taxi that is not licensed in the Township of North Brunswick shall
stand at any public taxi stand.
G. Spaces at public taxi stands shall be occupied on a first-come, firstserved
basis. Passengers approaching a public taxi stand for service
shall be referred to the driver who has been stationed at the stand for
the longest period of time. However, nothing in this article shall be
construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the vehicle of his or
her choice that is parked at said stand. If a passenger selects another
taxi other than the taxi that has been stationed at the stand for the
longest period of time, the taxi driver of the chosen taxi must get out of
the taxi and indicate to the other taxi driver that the referral policy was
explained to the passenger and that the passenger declined to occupy
the referred taxi.
H. Any driver who intentionally violates this specified procedure of
referring passengers to the driver who has been at a public taxi stand
for the longest period of time shall be fined and subject to disciplinary
action, including suspension of his/her taxi driver's license in
accordance with § 311-30F.
I. Nothing herein shall require the owner of property where the
delineation of public taxi stands is permitted to actually designate
spaces as a public taxi stand; nor shall anything herein prohibit the
removal of spaces previously designated as a public taxi stand.
J. The hours that public taxi stands shall be permitted to be occupied for
the purpose of soliciting passengers shall be 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
unless the owner of a commercial property has received approval of
different hours of operation from the Township Planner.
K. Parking spaces designated as public taxi stands shall continue to be
counted as off-street parking spaces.
L. The owner of a commercial property applying to designate space as a
public taxi stand shall be permitted to establish reasonable regulations
for the operation of taxis, subject to approval of such regulations by the
Township Planner.
§ 311-27 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-27
307:1210
M. No loud music or other loud noise shall be permitted to emanate from a
taxi parked at a public taxi stand.
N. Taxi drivers and/or taxi owners may lose the right to park at designated
public taxi stands for violation of regulations in accordance with the
penalty provisions of § 311-30.
§ 311-27 TAXATION § 311-27
307:1211

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 311-28. Administration and enforcement responsibilities.
A. Responsibilities. The Township Clerk, Director of Public Safety, Zoning
Officer and Code Enforcement Officer shall be charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter in accordance with the
following description of responsibilities:
(1) The Township Clerk shall:
(a) Accept applications and application fees for taxi owner's
licenses and taxi driver's licenses;
(b) Forward applications for taxi owner's licenses to the Township
Zoning Officer for approval of the proposed central place of
businesses that is to be located within the Township;
(c) Forward applications to the Director of Public Safety;
(d) Issue taxi owner's licenses and taxi driver's licenses, as well as
any required certificates and badges, upon approval of the
Township Council;
(e) Maintain copies of required insurance coverages and power of
attorney letters; and
(f) Keep and maintain a record of all persons and vehicles licensed
or rejected for licenses under the provisions of this chapter.
Such record shall contain all information relating to ownership
and operation of such licenses and vehicles.
(2) The Director of Public Safety shall:
(a) Conduct a thorough background investigation on each
applicant, including, when required, fingerprinting and receipt
of a report from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
State of New Jersey;
(b) Recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of
applications for taxi owner's licenses and taxi driver's licenses;
(c) Inspect taxis as required;
(d) Investigate complaints from passengers, taxi drivers, taxi
owners or property owners in accordance with § 311-28B;
(e) Recommend revoking or suspending licenses as warranted to
the Township Council; and
(f) Immediately suspend any taxi owner's license if an inspection
revealed a taxi to be in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or if,
in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, the health, safety
§ 311-28 TAXATION § 311-28
307:1213
or welfare of passengers would be endangered if a license was
not immediately revoked or suspended.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall review the application and certify in
writing that the central place of business indicated, if located
within the Township, is not in a residential zone, that there is
sufficient off-street parking available during all hours of the day
and night to accommodate the number of taxis the applicant
proposes to license and that the off-street parking is adequately
buffered from adjacent residential uses in accordance with
§ 311-9G(3). If the licensee intends to occupy space in a building at
the central place of business, if located within the Township, the
Zoning Officer shall issue the required certificate of use for
occupancy.
(4) The Zoning Officer or a Code Enforcement Officer shall investigate
all complaints, with the exception of complaints relative to cruising,
loitering and illegal parking.
B. Processing of complaints.
(1) Anyone alleging a violation of this chapter may file a formal
complaint with the Code Enforcement Office or Police Department,
depending upon the nature of the complaint.
(2) Upon receipt of a complaint alleging a violation of the North
Brunswick Taxi Ordinance, the Code Enforcement Office or the
Township Police Department, depending upon the alleged violation,
shall observe the alleged violation if possible, conduct an
investigation and issue a summons if warranted.
(3) All complaints, with the exception of cruising, loitering and illegal
parking, shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Office.
Complaints may be initiated by calling the Code Enforcement
Office. If a complainant wants to file an official complaint with the
Code Enforcement Office, the complainant must appear in person
at the Code Enforcement Office and sign an official complaint form.
No investigation will begin until the complainant has signed an
official complaint form.
(4) The Code Enforcement Office shall investigate all complaints which
are not handled by the Police Department by examining records
and/or taxicabs. Upon receipt of a call from the Code Enforcement
Office, the holder of a taxi owner's license must present all
requested records to the Code Enforcement Office by 12:00 noon of
the following business day. If the complaint involves the leaking of
fluids, the driver of the taxi alleged to be in violation shall report to
the Township's Department of Public Works garage within one hour
of the Code Enforcement Office contacting the company. If the taxi
is found to be leaking, the taxi shall immediately be designated off
duty, and shall not be put back on duty until a copy of an invoice or
§ 311-28 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-28
307:1214
§ 311-29. Call boxes permitted.
A holder of an owner's license may establish a call box in a shopping center
designated for location of a public taxi stand upon consent of the property
owner and approval of the Township Planner.
repair order for correcting said leak has been filed with the Code
Enforcement Office.
(5) Complaints relative to cruising, loitering at a public taxi stand and
illegal parking shall be made directly to the Police Department
while the alleged violation is ongoing. The Police Department shall
dispatch a vehicle, if one is available at the time, to observe the
alleged cruising, loitering or illegal parking. If loitering at a public
taxi stand is observed, or if the taxi is observed to be parked or
traveling at a slow rate of speed in an effort to solicit prospective
passengers for hire, in any area other than a designated public taxi
stand, a summons shall be issued for violation of § 311-22A or
311-26, respectively. If a taxi that is not licensed in North
Brunswick is parked in a designated public taxi stand, a summons
shall be issued under § 311-30H.
(6) Complainants who call the Police Department to investigate alleged
cruising, loitering or illegal parking must identify themselves at the
time of the call, including their taxi license number if applicable. If
the complainant is a taxi owner or driver, he/she must also appear
at the police desk to sign an official complaint within 24 hours of
calling in the complaint. If a complaint is not signed, the complaint
will be dismissed.
§ 311-28 TAXATION § 311-29
307:1215

ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
§ 311-30. Violations and penalties.
A. Any owner or driver who violates or permits, aids or abets the violation
of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000, and/or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, and/or community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days; provided that the specific violations specified in this
§ 311-30A through G shall be punished as specified therein. In addition
to the maximum penalty provided in this subsection, any taxi owner's
license or taxi driver's license may be suspended or revoked as
provided in this chapter. The continuation of a violation on each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No taxi shall remain in operation if it leaks any fluid. Upon the first
violation of this subsection, the taxi owner shall be fined $100, and the
taxi owner's license shall be immediately suspended until the owner
submits certification to the Director of Public Safety from a mechanic
that the leak has been corrected. Upon a second violation within a
twelve-month period, the taxi owner shall be fined $300, and the taxi
owner's license shall be suspended for 14 days. Upon subsequent
violations within a twelve-month period, the taxi owner shall be fined
$500, the taxi owner's license shall be suspended for 30 days, and the
specific taxi which has violated this subsection shall not be permitted to
park in designated public taxi stands for one year.
C. No taxi owner or taxi driver shall charge more than the maximum
permitted fare established in § 311-25 herein. Upon a taxi driver's first
violation of this subsection, the taxi driver and the taxi owner shall both
be fined $100. Upon a taxi driver's second violation, the taxi driver and
the taxi owner shall both be fined $300, and the taxi driver's license
shall be suspended for 60 days, and the taxi owner's license shall be
suspended for 30 days. Upon subsequent violations, the taxi driver and
the taxi owner shall both be fined $500, and the taxi driver's license
shall be revoked for one year, and the taxi owner's license shall be
suspended for 90 days.
D. No taxi driver shall dispose of cigarettes or any waste upon public
streets, public taxi stands or other private roads or property. Upon the
first violation of this subsection, the taxi driver shall be fined $50. Upon
a second violation, the taxi driver shall be fined $100, and the taxi
driver's license shall be suspended for 14 days. Upon subsequent
violations, the taxi driver shall be fined $300, and the taxi driver's
license shall be suspended for 60 days.
E. No taxi, regardless of where it is licensed, shall cruise the streets of the
Township or commercial establishments for the purpose of soliciting
passengers for hire. Upon the first violation of this subsection, the taxi
driver shall be fined $50. Upon a second violation within a twelve-
§ 311-30 TAXATION § 311-30
307:1217
month period, the taxi driver shall be fined $200, and, if the taxi driver
is licensed by North Brunswick Township, the taxi driver's license
shall be suspended for 14 days. Upon subsequent violations within a
twelve month period, the taxi driver shall be fined $300, and the North
Brunswick taxi driver's license suspended for 60 days.
F. No taxi driver licensed within the Township of North Brunswick shall
violate the requirement to refer passengers at public taxi stands to the
taxi driver who has been stationed at the taxi stand for the longest
period of time. Upon the first violation of this subsection, the taxi driver
shall be fined $50. Upon a second violation within a twelve-month
period of time, the taxi driver shall be fined $200, and the taxi driver's
license shall be suspended for 14 days. Upon subsequent violations
within a twelve-month period of time, the taxi driver shall be fined
$300, the taxi driver's license shall be suspended for 60 days, and the
taxi driver shall not be permitted to park in designated public taxi
stands for one year.
G. Illegal parking of taxis while on duty, either in residential driveways, on
commercial properties or upon public or private roadways, shall be
punishable by a fine of $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second
offense, and $100 for all subsequent offenses.
H. Enforcement and fines to regulate vehicles that are not licensed by the
Township of North Brunswick.
(1) The North Brunswick Police Department and the Bureau of Fire
Safety shall have concurrent jurisdiction in policing and issuing
parking summonses to vehicles that are parked in designated taxi
stands without being licensed by the Township of North Brunswick.
(2) Violators who park or stand in an approved taxi stand shall be
subject to a minimum fine of $75 for a first offense and up to a
maximum of $1,250 for subsequent offenses. Vehicles not occupied
may be towed at the owner's expense. Said fine shall be imposed
upon complaint and conviction in the Municipal Court of the
Township of North Brunswick.
§ 311-30 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 311-30
307:1218
Chapter 314
TOBACCO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 285.
§ 311-30 TOBACCO § 311-30
314:1219

ARTICLE I
Sale of Tobacco Paraphernalia
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 314-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAILER — Any person who sells tobacco paraphernalia to individuals for
personal consumption of tobacco products.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA — Any product intended to be used for the
consumption of tobacco products.
§ 314-2. Sales restricted.
No business shall sell cigarette rolling papers, pipes or any other tobacco
paraphernalia utilized to consume tobacco to any person younger than 18
years of age.
§ 314-3. Verification required.
Prior to the sale of any such item, the retailer staff first verify by means
of photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that the
person purchasing the product is 18 years of age or older. Verification by
photographic identification staff not be required for any person over the age
of 26.
§ 314-4. Violations and penalties.
Any business that violates this article by selling cigarette paraphernalia to
a person younger than 18 years of age or by failure to verify age by means
of photographic identification shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
§ 314-1 TOBACCO § 314-4
314:1221
Chapter 316
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
§ 316-1. Applicability.
A. General. All existing businesses and proposed new developments which
meet the criteria established in Subsection B or C herein shall be
subject to the requirements of this chapter, with the exception of the
following specific uses:
(1) Eating and drinking establishments.
(2) Retail businesses.
(3) Grocery stores.
(4) Furniture and appliance stores.
(5) Shopping centers.
(6) Hotels.
(7) Security services.
(8) Other similar uses where it can be demonstrated that the nature of
the business is such that workers do not regularly report to or
depart from work during morning and afternoon rush hours.
B. Existing businesses. All existing businesses which are not exempted
uses in accordance with Subsection A and which meet both of the
criteria established herein shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) The business is located in the Township of North Brunswick.
(2) Fifty or more employees either report to work regularly or are
assigned primarily to a facility located in the Township of North
Brunswick.
C. Proposed new developments.
(1) All proposed new developments which are not exempted uses in
accordance with Subsection A and which meet the criteria
established herein shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter:
(a) Residential developments. Residential developments of 20 or
more units which have not received preliminary subdivision or
site plan approval prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(b) Nonresidential developments. Nonresidential buildings of
15,000 square feet or more of gross building area and all
complexes as defined herein which have not received
§ 314-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 316-1
316:1222
§ 316-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE WORK HOURS PROGRAM — Any system for shifting the
workday of an employee so that the workday starts and/or ends outside of
the peak periods. Such programs include, but are not limited to:
COMPLEX — Any industrial park or office park which is served by a
common circulation and access system, where buildings in the aggregate
exceed 15,000 square feet, and which can be identified by any of the
following characteristics:
preliminary site plan approval prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
(c) Planned developments. Planned developments, as defined in
the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey
1975,223 which have not received preliminary site plan
approval for the entire tract which comprises the planned
development prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2) For purposes of calculating traffic reduction goals applicable to
remaining sections of a planned development which have not yet
received site plan approval, the number of dwelling units and
square footage of nonresidential space located in sections which
have received prior site plan approval shall be considered.
(3) Traffic reduction measures necessary to meet the resulting traffic
reduction goals can either be incorporated in plans submitted for
the proposed sections alone or can be addressed through a
combination of modifications to previously approved plans and
proposed plans for the new section. Modifications which are
designed to meet traffic reduction goals in a section of a planned
development which has received prior site plan approval shall not
in and of themselves be deemed to be a substantial amendment to
the plan which would require an amended application for approval
and subsequent hearing.
(4) The submission of modifications to a previously approved plan in
order to meet traffic reduction goals shall in no way deprive a
developer of any rights which may have vested pursuant to prior
approvals.
A. Compressed work weeks.
Staggered work hours involving a shift in the set work hours of
employees at the workplace.
B.
C. Flexible work hours within guidelines established by the employer
223. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 316-1 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 316-2
316:1223
EMPLOYEE — Any salaried or hourly worker, including both full-time and
part-time workers, whether they report to work regularly or are assigned
primarily to a facility in North Brunswick Township.
NEW NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any nonresidential
development of 15,000 square feet or more which has not received
preliminary site plan approval prior to the adoption of this chapter.
NEW RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any residential development of 20
or more units which has not received preliminary subdivision or site plan
approval prior to the effective date of this chapter.
OFFICE OF TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT (OTM) — The municipal department,
agency or official appointed by the Mayor to implement the requirements of
this chapter.
PEAK HOURS — The sixty-minute periods within the a.m. and p.m. peak
periods in which the largest number of hourly vehicle trips are generated to
and from the site.
PEAK PERIODS — 7:20 to 9:10 a.m. and 3:50 to 5:40 p.m.
SINGLE-OCCUPANCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle occupied by one
employee for commute purposes.
§ 316-3. Traffic coordinators.
Every existing business and new development which is subject to the
requirements of this chapter shall designate a Traffic Coordinator to act
as a liaison to the OTM. All notices and information regarding surveys,
reports and traffic reduction plans required pursuant to this chapter shall
be directed to said Coordinator. Notices communicated to the Coordinator
shall be deemed effective as to the business or development when received
in writing by the Coordinator.
§ 316-4. Requirements for existing businesses.
A. It is known by a common name given to the project by its developer.
It is governed by a common set of covenants, conditions and
restrictions.
B.
C. It was approved or is to be approved as a single entity.
D. It is covered by a single conceptual, preliminary or final site plan.
A. Annual survey.
(1) All nonexempt businesses with 50 or more employees shall survey
their work force annually to gather data on places of residence,
working hours and commutation modes. In order to be deemed in
compliance with this section, a minimum completed survey
response rate of 75% shall be required on employee surveys.
§ 316-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 316-4
316:1224
(2) The OTM shall distribute the employee survey form annually and
shall provide a minimum of 60 days between distribution of the
annual survey forms and the deadline for its submission.
B. Annual report.
(1) The results of the annual survey shall be compiled and tabulated
into an annual report. The OTM shall determine annually whether
said tabulation shall be done by the OTM or by the affected
businesses. The annual report shall contain information as required
by the OTM.
(2) The Director of Human Resources or, in the absence of such title,
the highest ranking employee with personnel responsibilities shall
be required to certify as to the authenticity of the annual survey
and report.
C. Traffic reduction plan.
(1) In addition to requirements for an annual survey and annual report,
any existing business with 50 or more employees which meets
either of the following criteria shall be required to formulate a
traffic reduction plan:
(a) The number of automobile trips generated by employees
scheduled to begin or end work regularly during the morning
or afternoon peak periods exceeds 60% of the total workforce.
(b) In excess of 40% of the total work force is scheduled to begin
or end work regularly during any specific fifteen-minute time
slot in the morning or afternoon peak periods.
(2) The traffic reduction plan shall be designed to reduce the total peak
period vehicle trips to an amount which does not exceed 60% of the
total number of employees and to reduce the concentration of
vehicle trips in any fifteen-minute time slot to 40% or less.
Automobile trip reduction goals shall be measured against existing
data available to the OTM unless the business can substantiate
more accurate employment survey data. For purposes of
establishing traffic reduction goals, employers shall assume the
same percent distribution revealed in the survey data for the entire
workforce.
(3) The traffic reduction plan shall be formulated and submitted to the
OTM in accordance with the time schedule provided by the OTM.
(4) The prescribed format for a traffic reduction plan for existing
businesses shall be provided by the OTM, and all traffic reduction
plans shall comply as far as is practicable with the prescribed
format.
(5) The traffic reduction plan can incorporate any combination of the
following traffic mitigation initiatives:
§ 316-4 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 316-4
316:1225
§ 316-5. Requirements for new residential developments.
(a) Facilitating utilization of mass transit.
(b) Facilitating ride sharing and vanpooling.
(c) Establishing an alternative work hours program.
(d) Encouraging nonvehicular work trips.
(6) While businesses have the option of selecting traffic reduction
measures which are most appropriate to the nature of their
business, traffic reduction measures shall be designed as far as is
practicable to meet traffic reduction goals.
(7) The OTM shall review and approve traffic reduction plans within 60
days of submission unless the OTM determines that said plan as
designed cannot achieve required traffic reduction goals. If such a
determination is made, the business shall have 45 days from
receipt of a written rejection to revise and submit an acceptable
traffic reduction plan, unless extended for good cause shown. Upon
acceptance of a traffic reduction plan, the plan shall be
implemented by the business, and such implementation shall be
fully in effect within six months of acceptance.
A. Requirements applicable to developments of 20 or more units.
(1) Survey requirements.
(a) In every new residential development, the developer shall be
required to gather applicable demographic data requested on
the workplace/commutation survey provided by the OTM. Said
survey shall require such data as workplace location, normal
work hours, the frequency of overtime, whether hours are
flexible by up to 15 minutes, prospects for continuing
employment at the present location for the next 24 months and
the number of children by age. In addition, the survey shall
ascertain interest in the following:
[1] Vanpooling.
[2] Utilization of a park and ride.
[3] Shuttle bus service to and from the train station or park
and ride locations.
(2) Provisions which request prospective purchasers to complete the
questionnaire shall be contained in all contracts of sale.
(3) In any development which is subject to the requirements of the
Planned Real Estate Full Disclosure Act,224 the sponsor shall be
224. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:22A-21 et seq.
§ 316-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 316-5
316:1226
required to include a copy of the workplace/commutation survey in
the public offering statement. Said survey shall be completed by
the purchaser and tendered to the developer on or before the time
of closing. It shall be the sponsor's obligation to collect said survey
and submit the same to the OTM.
B. Additional requirements for developments of 50 to 350 units.
(1) Provision of vanpool parking areas.
(a) In addition to the requirements for completion of workplace/
commutation surveys, it shall be a condition of preliminary
subdivision or site plan approval that all new residential
developments of 50 to 350 units shall be required to construct
parking spaces to accommodate vanpool participants, based
upon the need generated by the particular development, in
accordance with the following schedule:
[1] Developments of 50 to 200 units shall provide a fifteen-car
vanpool parking lot.
[2] Developments of 201 to 350 units shall provide a thirty-car
vanpool parking lot.
(b) Vanpool parking areas can either be dedicated to the Township
of North Brunswick or maintained by the developer. If said
area is not proposed for dedication to the township, the
developer shall be required to provide assurances for
continued and perpetual maintenance of the parking facility in
a manner acceptable to the Planning Board. If maintained by
the developer, the developer shall be entitled to reserve use of
the vanpool parking area for development residents.
(c) Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for more than
50% of the units in the development until such vanpool parking
area is fully improved.
C. Additional requirements for developments which exceed 350 units.
(1) Provision of park and ride facilities.
(a) Developers of new residential developments which exceed 350
units shall be required to construct park and ride facilities
based upon the need generated by the particular development
at a ratio of one parking space for each 10 units in the
development.
(b) The park and ride shall be located with direct access off of a
designated collector road in the development and shall be
located as close as is practicable to highway jughandles and
overpasses.
§ 316-5 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 316-5
316:1227
§ 316-6. Requirements for nonresidential developments.
(c) The park and ride shall be designed to accommodate buses
which can accommodate 49 passengers and shall contain
adequate bus shelters to protect riders from the elements.
(d) Park and ride areas can either be dedicated to the Township of
North Brunswick or maintained by the developer. If said area is
not proposed for dedication to the township, the developer
shall be required to provide assurances for continued and
perpetual maintenance of the park and ride facility in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Board. If maintained by the
developer, the developer shall be entitled to reserve use of the
park and ride area for development residents.
(e) If dedicated to the township, the township shall reserve 50% of
the improved parking spaces for occupants of the
development. Two months after occupancy of the last unit, if all
of the spaces reserved for development residents are not being
utilized, then said spaces shall become available to the general
public in accordance with township priorities for operation of
park and ride facilities.
(f) Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for more than
50% of the units until such time as the park and ride lot is fully
improved.
A. Traffic reduction plan.
(1) Every new nonresidential development of 15,000 square feet or
more not exempted herein, and all complexes as defined herein,
shall be required to submit a traffic reduction plan to the Planning
Board at the time of submission for site plan approval. Said traffic
reduction plan shall be required to be submitted before an
application for site plan approval can be determined complete.
(2) Said traffic reduction plan shall be forwarded by the Planning
Board to the OTM for a nonbinding recommendation as to whether
the plan meets the traffic reduction goals of this chapter.
Submission of a traffic reduction plan acceptable to the Planning
Board shall be a requirement for site plan approval.
(3) The traffic reduction plan shall be designed, for each year after the
complex becomes occupied, to reduce that year's anticipated peak
hour automobile trips to 70% of the projected peak hour vehicle
trips, based on professionally provided trip projections as
presented in the traffic reduction plan approved at the time of site
plan approval. These maximum vehicle usage goals shall be
maintained after building occupancy commences, regardless of the
variation between projected trip generation and the actual trip
generation. Subsequent annual vehicle reduction targets shall be
§ 316-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 316-6
316:1228
calculated as the difference between the initial vehicle reduction
goal and the actual vehicle trips generated by the site employment
as revealed in the annual report.
(4) The prescribed format for a traffic reduction plan for new
nonresidential developments shall be provided by the OTM, and all
traffic reduction plans shall comply as far as is practicable with the
prescribed format.
(5) The traffic reduction plan can incorporate any combination of the
following traffic mitigation measures deemed to be appropriate by
the developer, based upon both the nature of the development and
the traffic reduction goal to be achieved:
(a) Designation of preferred parking for ridesharing and
vanpooling participants.
(b) Construction of shelters to facilitate traffic mitigation
measures.
(c) Establishment of shuttle bus service to and from the train
station in the morning and afternoon.
(d) Establishing an in-house or third party ridesharing or
vanpooling program.
(e) Establishing an information center to coordinate ridesharing
and vanpooling among smaller businesses in a complex.
(6) The OTM shall review and recommend the traffic reduction plan for
approval within 45 days of submission unless the OTM determines
that said plan as designed cannot achieve required traffic reduction
goals. If such a determination is made, the OTM shall recommend
that the Planning Board not accept the plan and require that said
plan be revised.
B. Continued existence of traffic coordinator. Any nonresidential
development which exceeds 100,000 square feet shall continue to
provide a traffic coordinator on a permanent basis.
C. Annual survey and report requirements.
(1) It shall be a condition of approval that all nonresidential
developments which exceed 100,000 square feet must provide
ongoing traffic management services and provide annual surveys to
the OTM of all businesses occupying the premises.
(2) An annual report on the effectiveness of the plan, as updated, shall
be submitted to the OTM. Failure to achieve the intended levels of
trip reduction will be grounds for review and revision of any
previously approved plans or other remedies as allowed under
§ 316-8.
§ 316-6 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 316-6
316:1229
§ 316-7. Waiver for exceptional difficulties.
Where, by reason of the nature of a particular business or operation or
the location, nature or circumstances affecting a particular proposed new
development, measures required to achieve the traffic reduction goals
specified herein would entail exceptional practical difficulties to an existing
business or developer, the OTM may grant, upon submission of a traffic
reduction plan and accompanying application for relief hereunder, a waiver
from the traffic reduction goals required herein. In granting such a waiver,
the OTM shall require a traffic reduction plan which furthers the intent and
purpose of this chapter as much as is practicable, given the circumstances.
(3) It shall be a condition of site plan approval that all new businesses
which occupy 15,000 square feet or more of gross building area be
notified that they are individually required to comply with the
survey requirements of § 316-4A of this chapter within five months
of occupancy. Subsequent occupants of 15,000 square feet or more
shall be required to submit annual reports in accordance with the
requirements of § 316-4B, unless a waiver is granted by the OTM
for good cause shown. Developers or subsequent owners shall be
required to submit the names of all businesses leasing 15,000
square feet or more in a building or complex to the OTM.
D. Transition from new development to existing business. If, upon
submission of its first required annual report, a new business owning or
leasing 15,000 square feet or more can document that it employs fewer
than 50 employees in the Township of North Brunswick, said business
shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter. Said business
shall thereafter reapply for exemption each year by March 15.
E. Maintenance of traffic reduction measures in complexes. Developers or
subsequent owners of complexes, as defined in this chapter, shall be
responsible for assuring ongoing impact on traffic reduction goals from
the facilities, services, incentives and/or activities included in the traffic
reduction plan incorporated in the site plan approval. This requirement
will not preclude the developer from providing alternate but
commensurate traffic reduction facilities, services, incentives or
activities found or expected to be more successful in meeting the
vehicle reduction requirement. Revisions to the selected facilities,
services, incentives or activities should be made via the annual report
to the OTM. Approval for the revision of the traffic reduction plan shall
not be unreasonably withheld by the OTM.
F. Special information requirements for warehousing and distribution
developments. All existing and proposed ware housing and distribution
facilities in excess of 20,000 square feet shall be required to provide an
annual report to the OTM indicating the average number of trucks
entering and leaving the site daily and during the morning and
afternoon periods of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
§ 316-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 316-8
316:1230
§ 316-8. Enforcement.
Chapter 318
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
§ 318-1. Service for Township departments and events.
Any Township of North Brunswick Department or any event sponsored or
financed by the Township of North Brunswick may request transportation
services to be provided by the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services for special programs and events. Such requests will
be granted, provided a municipal vehicle and driver or an approved vendor
procured by the Township is available. All costs will be absorbed through
the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services budget.
§ 318-2. Service for Township-based groups and organizations.
A. Monitoring of program progress. Annual reports shall be submitted to
determine whether businesses and new developments are making
progress in achieving traffic reduction goals. If progress is found by the
OTM to be inadequate, the business or developer shall be required to
amend said traffic reduction plan. Businesses and developers directed
to revise traffic reduction plans shall have 45 days to revise and
resubmit an acceptable plan unless a waiver is granted by the OTM for
good cause shown.
B. Enforcement agent. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be empowered
to issue fines and summonses pursuant to this chapter upon
certification from the OTM that businesses or developers have failed to
comply with the submission requirements established herein.
C. Failure to implement, in demonstrated good faith fashion, the required
traffic reduction plan will also constitute a violation. If evidence of good
faith intent is clearly apparent, businesses or developers shall not be
considered in violation of this chapter if the intended goals are not
achieved.
D. Failure to comply with ordinance requirements. Failure to submit
required annual surveys, annual reports, traffic reduction plans or
revisions to traffic reduction plans shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. After 30 days' written notice to remedy said infraction,
violators shall be subject to a fine of $500 per month until such time as
said violation of this chapter is abated by complying with the
submission requirements established herein.
A. North Brunswick-based groups/organizations (including public school
groups) that serve residents of North Brunswick may request
transportation services to be provided by the Department of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services for special programs and events.
All requests shall be subject to availability and approval by the
§ 316-8 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 318-2
316:1231
§ 318-3. Service for Township Senior Transportation Program.
Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services. The
Department reserves the right to deny transportation to any group/
organization/individual.
B. Groups approved for transportation services through the Department of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services will be invoiced and
responsible for the following charges:
(1) Driver time/overtime. The sponsoring group/organization will, at
least 10 days prior to the event, pay in advance to the Department
of Parks, Recreation and Community Services any/all costs
associated with securing a driver to work the program/event. This
shall include regular pay, overtime pay, or holiday pay dependent
on the time and day that the service is provided. The sponsoring
group/organization will be made aware that driver rates might vary
slightly. In the event the actual time shall exceed the advance
payment, the sponsoring group/organization shall promptly pay to
the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services any
and all such additional costs. If the actual cost shall be less than the
payment, the Department shall reimburse the excess.
(2) Mileage. The sponsoring group/organization will pay in advance to
the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services
estimated mileage at the standard IRS rate. If the actual costs for
mileage shall exceed the advance payment, the sponsoring group/
organization shall promptly pay to the Department of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services any and all such additional
costs. If the actual cost shall be less than the payment, the
Department shall reimburse the excess.
(3) Administrative fee. The sponsoring group/organization will pay in
advance to the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services a $15 administrative fee per approved request.
(4) Tolls/parking. The sponsoring group/organization is responsible for
all toll and parking fees at the time of the event.
(5) Approved vendor. When a third-party vendor is engaged by the
municipality to provide requested services it shall be the
responsibility of the sponsoring group/organization to reimburse
the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services for
all third-party costs associated with the request/event.
A. The Senior Transportation Program is available for North Brunswick
senior residents age 62 and over or bona fide disabled residents that
have no other means of transportation and do not drive. Residents must
pre-register and receive a transportation card to use services under the
Program. Approved trips and the user's cost share amount(s) shall be
§ 318-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 318-3
316:1232
§ 318-4. Insurance.
promulgated by the Department and issued within the Program
guideline.
B. Options under the Senior Transportation Program include the
following:
(1) Reimbursement. Residents that use an established transportation
network company are eligible to submit for reimbursement. For the
purpose of this chapter, a "transportation network company" shall
mean any entity that uses digital network or software mobile
applications to connect a passenger to a transportation network
driver for the purpose of providing transportation for a fee (i.e.,
Uber, Lyft). To receive reimbursement a claim shall be submitted by
the resident that must include the following information: name of
company, name of passenger, date, time, pick-up location, drop-off
location, and amount. Additional information may be requested at
the discretion of the Department. Reimbursements shall be
calculated based on the approved trips under the Senior
Transportation Program minus the cost share to the resident
outlined within the Program guideline.
(2) In-house transportation services. Residents may call the Senior
Center to request transportation services to be provided by the
Township staff or an approved vendor procured by the Township for
trips and special programs and events. Payments shall be made in
advance of scheduling a trip and requests shall be subject to
availability and approval by the Department. In-house
transportation services shall also be provided for approved food
shopping, trips to local restaurants and stores, and trips to and
from the Senior Center at a reduced rate that shall be outlined
within the Program guideline.
(3) Licensed taxi company. Residents that use a taxi cab that is
licensed, pursuant to Municipal Chapter 311, for approved trips
under the Program shall be responsible for their cost share of the
trip at the time the service is rendered. When calling a licensed taxi
company to schedule a trip the resident must identify the trip is
under the Senior Transportation Program and show the cab driver
their transportation ID card. It shall be incumbent on the taxi
owner to submit to the Township a claim for the balance due on the
fare.
A. The sponsoring group/organization shall, at least 10 days prior to the
event, deliver to the Department of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services a certificate of insurance naming the Township of North
Brunswick as a named insured and which shall contain a clause
indemnifying and saving harmless the Township of North Brunswick
and all its agents, servants and/or employees from any and all liability
of whatever nature arising from the provision of such transportation
§ 318-3 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT § 318-4
316:1233
Chapter 323
UTILITIES, REGISTRATION OF
§ 323-1. Legislative findings.
The Township Council of the Township of North Brunswick hereby finds
there is a need to establish a procedure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 et
seq. to allow the registration with the municipality of all public utilities,
cable television companies or local utilities which have a right-of-way or
easement within the municipality and allowing for a registration fee.
§ 323-2. Registration form; fee for registration; maintenance of
records.
The Township Clerk is authorized to adopt a registration form and maintain
a record of all public utilities, cable television companies or local utilities
which have registered with the municipality pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law225 and this chapter and shall charge a registration fee of $10
on any public utilities, cable television companies or local utilities which
register to receive such notice.
Chapter 330
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
§ 330-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
services by the Township. The policy shall be a comprehensive general
liability policy with minimum limits of $1,000,000 bodily injury (BI)
each occurrence and $500,000 property damage (PD) each occurrence.
The certificate of insurance must indicate coverage at the above
minimum limits for:
(1) Contractual;
(2) Independent contractors; and
(3) Completed operations.
B. The certificate shall also indicate coverage for comprehensive
automobile liability with minimum limits of $1,500,000 bodily injury
(BI) each occurrence and $1,500,000 property damage (PD) each
occurrence and shall further indicate coverage in the above limits for
hired vehicles and nonowned vehicles.
225. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 318-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 330-1
323:1234
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power and
designated to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners
or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and
shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles,
tractors, buggies and wagons.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Township which is not a street
or highway.
§ 330-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Township and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Township for a period of
time and under circumstances which cause the vehicle to appear to be
abandoned.
§ 330-3. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on streets
prohibited.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on a street or highway within the Township.
§ 330-4. Disposition of dismantled vehicles. [Amended 11-18-2002
by Ord. No. 02-40]
No person in charge or control of any property within the Township,
whether as owner, tenant occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
substantially dismantled, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or vehicles
to remain on the property longer than 14 days, and no person shall leave
any such vehicle or vehicles on any public road or right-of-way; except that
this section prohibiting parking on private property shall not apply to the
following:
A. Lawfully operated junkyards or autobody collision repair shops; or
B. To a vehicle in an enclosed building; or
C. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise;
or
D. A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Township; or
E. A vehicle that has received a motor vehicle repair permit from the Code
Enforcement Office in accordance with the following:
(1) Such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed three months.
(2) Said permit shall be issued upon receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a repair schedule submitted by the owner of the vehicle.
§ 330-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 330-4
330:1235
§ 330-4.1. Nonoperating vehicles. [Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No.
02-40]
Any owner or occupant of a property devoted to a residential use shall be
permitted to maintain on the residential premises one nonoperating vehicle
subject to the following conditions:
§ 330-5. Impounding; violations and penalties; enforcement.
(3) In no event no such vehicle shall be stored or located closer to the
street line than both the actual front building line of the dwelling on
the property and the actual front building line of the building on the
lot adjacent to such storage area.
(4) The location shall comply with all side yard and rear yard setback
requirements applicable to accessory structures for that zone.
(5) Vehicle parts, including but not limited to engines, tires and body
parts, shall not be left out uncovered overnight.
(6) Such vehicle shall be parked on an improved surface maintained in
a weed-free condition.
A. The vehicle shall be located on an improved surface maintained in a
weed-free condition.
B. There shall he no storage permitted in such vehicles of any items
whatsoever.
C. Such vehicle shall be subject to all property maintenance standards
applicable to accessory structures.
A. The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated
by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the Township which reasonably appears to be in violation
of this section, or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
applicable statutes. The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police
Department acting for him, shall notify the registered and legal owner
in writing by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known
address of the owner, of the removal of the vehicle, the reason for its
removal and the location of the vehicle. The vehicle shall be retained
and impounded until the owner or his duly authorized agent pays the
cost of the taking and removal, together with a garage charge of $2 for
each day the vehicle is retained and impounded.
B. Penalties. In addition to the revisions set forth in the Subsection A of
this section, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $1,250 or by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the judge for each day of the violation. For any subsequent conviction
§ 330-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 330-5
330:1236
Chapter 334
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Safety Committee — See Ch. 91.
Automotive and farm equipment sales — See
Ch. 119.
Fire lanes and fire zones — See Ch. 173.
Parking — See Ch. 227.
Traffic management — See Ch. 316.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 337.
Wreckers — See Ch. 356.
within one year of a prior conviction for a violation of this chapter,
the minimum fine for such subsequent violation shall be $600. The
continuation of a violation on each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense and may be the basis for punishment as provided for
each separate offense. [Added 5-17-1976; amended 11-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-40]
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Division of Code Enforcement to
enforce the provisions of this chapter if the vehicle is located an private
property and the responsibility of the Department of Public Safety to
enforce this chapter as to vehicles located an public streets. [Added
11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 02-40]
§ 330-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 330-5
330:1237

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 334-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
herein.
§ 334-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-1
330:1239

ARTICLE II
Parking; Stopping or Standing; Time Limit Parking
§ 334-2. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, or any other New Jersey statute or
as hereinafter provided.
§ 334-3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 334-30) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 334-3.1. Parking authorized. [Added 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
The 21 parking spaces associated with a commercial enterprise situated
at 1007 Livingston Avenue and located at 90° perpendicular along 16th
Street on its southwesterly side, beginning from the corner of the property
line approximately 60 feet from Livingston Avenue, are hereby authorized
to extend approximately four feet into the municipal right-of-way, pursuant
to the requirements of the Township of North Brunswick Planning Board
Resolution adopted on June 11, 2013, and the requirements of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Approval for the modification of the
intersection of Livingston Avenue and 16th Street.
§ 334-4. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 334-31) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II attached and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 334-5. Stopping or standing prohibited during specified times on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle for the times specified in Schedule
III (§ 334-32) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 334-6. Stopping or standing prohibited at certain public buildings
and Board of Education parking lots.
Stopping or standing is prohibited at all times at public buildings and
Board of Education parking lots, unless within a marked authorized parking
space.226
§ 334-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-7
330:1241
§ 334-7. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 334-34) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 334-8. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his or her
absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of "EMERGENCY NO PARKING"
signs when weather conditions, accidents, fire, public celebrations,
etc., dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that
"EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are being or will be posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked
prior to the posting of the signs.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper
regulations of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
226. Editor's Note: See § 334-33, Schedule IIIA: No Stopping or Standing at Public Buildings or
Board of Education Parking Lots.
§ 334-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-8
330:1242
ARTICLE III
Limiting Use of Streets to Certain Class of Vehicles
§ 334-9. Trucks over 8,000 pounds excluded from certain streets.
All trucks having a combined, registered gross weight of vehicle plus load
in excess of 8,000 pounds are hereby excluded from all streets or parts of
streets except for those described in Schedule VI (§ 334-36). School buses,
public transit buses, emergency vehicles, utility vehicles governed by the
Public Utilities Commission and vehicles making pickups and deliveries on
said streets are exempted from this limitation.
§ 334-10. Trucks over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicle over the gross weight described in Schedule XXIV (§ 334-54) are
hereby excluded, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets.
§ 334-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-10
330:1243

ARTICLE IV
Route for Trucks Over Four Tons
§ 334-11. Truck routes.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
in Schedule VI (§ 334-36), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as routes for trucks having a combined, registered gross
weight of vehicle plus load in excess of 8,000 pounds.
§ 334-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-11
330:1245

ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
§ 334-12. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 334-37) attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 334-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-12
330:1247

ARTICLE VI
Through Streets, Stop Intersections, Yield Intersections and
Pedestrian Crosswalks
§ 334-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 334-38) attached to and made a part
of this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 334-14. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 334-39) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 334-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 334-40) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 334-16. Pedestrian crosswalks designated.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 334-51) shall be striped and
signed as pedestrian crosswalks, and all vehicles shall yield to pedestrians
either entering or occupying said crosswalks.
§ 334-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-16
330:1249

ARTICLE VII
Loading Zones
§ 334-17. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 334-41) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 334-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-17
330:1251

ARTICLE VIII
Taxi Stands
§ 334-18. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 334-42) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 334-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-18
330:1253

ARTICLE IX
Bus Stops
§ 334-19. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 334-43) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 334-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-19
330:1255

ARTICLE X
Turn Prohibitions
§ 334-20. Left turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIV (§ 334-44) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 334-21. U-turn prohibition.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XV (§ 334-45) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 334-22. No turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVI (§ 334-46) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 334-23. Right turn prohibition.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XX (§ 334-50), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 334-24. Right turn only.
No person shall make a left turn or proceed to travel straight ahead at any
of the locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 334-52) attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 334-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-24
330:1257

ARTICLE XI
Lane Use
§ 334-25. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XVII (§ 334-47) attached to and
made a part of this chapter are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move only as directed.
§ 334-26. No-passing zones.
Passing shall be prohibited on the roadways described in Schedule XIX
(§ 334-49).
§ 334-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-26
330:1259

ARTICLE XII
Violations and Penalties; Fines; Repealer
§ 334-27. Violations and penalties; fines.
§ 334-28. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of North Brunswick covered in
this traffic regulation are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not
effect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act
done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to
the taking effect of this chapter.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable for a penalty in accordance with
the following schedule of fines:
(1) Parking exceeding time limit: $5.
(2) Parking-bus stop: $20.
(3) No parking this side of street: $20.
(4) Parking in prohibited zone: $20.
(5) Parking-taxi stand: $10.
(6) Permit parking: $10.
(7) Double parked: $20.
(8) Parking-loading zone: $20.
(9) Parking-prohibited by emergency: $25.
(10) Moving violations (Articles III, V, VI, X and XI): $50.
B. Any person who fails to make payment of the appropriate fine by the
date listed on the issued summons shall be required to pay an additional
penalty of $10.
§ 334-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-28
330:1261

ARTICLE XIII
Official Time Standard
§ 334-29. Designated time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time as may be in current
use in the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 334-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-29
330:1263

ARTICLE XIV
Schedules
§ 334-30. Schedule I: No Parking.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 334-3, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
16th Street
[Added 8-5-2013
by Ord. No.
13-11]
Northeast From Livingston Avenue through the
commercial driveway associated
with Block 97, Lot 2.
Ashland Place South From Georges Road to Maple
Avenue
Beverly Avenue North From Livingston Avenue to Oakwood
Place
Calvert Road
[Added 2-5-2018
by Ord. No.
18-03]
Both From the southern curbline of Route
130 to a point 90 feet in a westerly
direction along Calvert Road
Chrome Street East From the southeast corner of
Chrome Street at Milltown Road to
point 130 feet in a easterly direction
along Chrome Street
Chrome Street West From the northwest corner of
Chrome Street at Milltown Road to a
point 120 feet in a easterly direction
along Chrome Street
Corporate Road
[Added 5-2-2011
by Ord. No.
11-10]
Both From Jersey Avenue through
terminus
Cranbury Cross
Road
South From Livingston Avenue to Newton
Street
Cypress Avenue West From the northerly line of Hermann
Road to a point 62 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Hermann Road
Elmwood Place Both From Georges Road to Maple
Avenue
Hartland Commons East From Commerce Boulevard to
Cozzens Lane
Hartland Commons West From Aaron Road to Cozzens Lane
§ 334-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-30
330:1265
Name of Street Side Location
Hermann Road North From Evergreen Court to Georges
Road
Hermann Road North From Livingston Avenue to Newton
Street
Laurel Place North From Route 171 west to Maple
Avenue
Linwood Place Both From Hermann Road to Glenridge
Avenue
Maple Avenue East From the southerly line of Ashland
Place to a point 250 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Ashland Place
Milltown Road Both From the North Brunswick-Milltown
line to Georges Road
Morris Drive
[Added 2-3-2020
by Ord. No.
20-01]
East From Renaissance Boulevard North
to Marc Drive
Nassau Street Both From 200 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Remsen Avenue to a
point 200 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Remsen Avenue
Nassau Street
[Added 3-16-2015
by Ord. No.
15-03]
North From Georges Road east through its
terminus
Nassau Street North From Livingston Avenue to a point
100 feet east of the easterly curbline
of Livingston Avenue
Nassau Street South From Livingston Avenue to Georges
Road
Old Georges Road Both From milepost 80.36 to milepost
81.44
Raider Road
Remsen Avenue Both From 200 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Nassau Street to a point
200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Nassau Street
Renaissance
Boulevard East
[Added 2-3-2020
by Ord. No.
20-01]
Both From Route 130 to Renaissance
Boulevard North
§ 334-30 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-30
330:1266
Name of Street Side Location
Renaissance
Boulevard North
[Added 2-3-2020
by Ord. No.
20-01]
Both From Route 130 to Jared Drive
Renaissance
Boulevard West
[Added 2-3-2020
by Ord. No.
20-01]
Both From Route 130 to Morris Drive
Roosevelt Avenue West From Halsey Road to Raider Road
Schmidt Lane Northeast
entrance to
Belcourt
Condominium
parking lot
From the easterly curbline to a point
50 feet in an easterly direction along
Schmidt Lane and from the westerly
curbline to a point 50 feet in a
westerly direction along Schmidt
Lane
Schmidt Lane Northwest
entrance to
Belcourt
Condominium
parking lot
From the easterly curbline to a point
50 feet in an easterly direction along
Schmidt Lane and from the westerly
direction along Schmidt Lane
Schmidt Lane South From 150 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Riverbend Drive to a
point 150 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Riverbend Drive
Sutter Avenue
[Added 7-1-2013
by Ord. No.
13-08]
Both From Route 27 through the existing
terminus and barrier of the street
known as Sutter Avenue, only
through the portion of the roadway
that is 24 feet in length serving
Block 1, Lot 9.02
Thomas Avenue
[Added 2-4-2013
by Ord. No.
13-01]
Both From Route 1 through the easterly
terminus of the undeveloped street
known as Gardenia Drive
Willowbrook Drive Both Between the two entrance curb
openings to the Hidden Lake Towne
Center
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.6, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Regulations, parking shall be prohibited as follows: [Added 5-2-2011
by Ord. No. 11-10]
§ 334-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-30
330:1267
§ 334-31. Schedule II: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-4, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in the following:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
12th Street South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
From Livingston Avenue to
Joyce Kilmer Avenue
Fillmore Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Magnolia Road to
Spruce Road
Fillmore Drive Opposite
side of
Arthur Judd
Elementary
School
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Between Dewey Road and
Myrtle Road
Hollywood
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Cleremont Avenue to
a point 125 feet west of
Cleremont Avenue, no
parking here to corner
Hollywood
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Cleremont Avenue to
a point 600 feet north of
Cleremont Avenue
John Adams
School
-- 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
At the school bus stop area
in front of the school from
its southerly entrance from
Redmond Street to its
northerly exit onto
Redmond Street
approximately 450 feet in
length, including the
easterly curbline of the
grass island in front of the
school approximately 350
feet in length
Name of Street Location
Lenox Avenue [Added
5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-10]
25 feet prior to the intersection for
Lenox Avenue approaches (left arrow
pointing toward stop sign)
Stelle Avenue [Added
5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-10]
50 feet prior to the intersection for
Stelle Avenue approaches (left arrow
pointing toward stop sign)
§ 334-30 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-31
330:1268
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Livingston Park
School
-- 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
At the school bus stop area
in front of the school from
its westerly entrance off
Ridgewood Avenue to its
easterly exit onto
Ridgewood Avenue
approximately 450 feet in
length, including the
southerly curbline of the
grass island in front of the
school approximately 250
feet in length
Redmond Street
[Added
3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-03]
West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Between Osage Road and
Omaha Road
Redmond Street Opposite
side of John
Adams
Elementary
School
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Between Osage Road and
Omaha Road
Redmond Street
[Added
3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-03]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Osage Road north to
50 feet north of Huron Road
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Livingston Avenue to
Riverton Street
Roosevelt
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
school days
From Taylor Place to Halsey
Road
§ 334-32. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-5, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts of streets described:
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Lane (County
Road 4-R-8)
Both From Old Georges Road to
Cozzens Lane
Cozzens Lane (County
Road 4-R-8)
North From Route No. 1 to Route No. 27
Cozzens Lane (County
Road 4-R-8)
South From Crocus Avenue to Route No.
27
§ 334-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-32
330:1269
Name of Street Side Location
Davidson Mill Road North From a point 400 feet west to
Route No. 130
Davidson Mill Road South From a point at Route No. 130 east
400 feet
Cozzens Lane (County
Road 4-R-8)
South From Route No. 1 to Noah Road
Finnegans Lane Both Counterclockwise from its
northerly intersection with Route
No. 130 to its southerly
intersection with Route No. 130
Finnegans Lane (County
Road 4-R-10)
North From Route No. 1 to Route No. 27
Finnegans Lane North From a point at Route No. 130
west to the terminus of Finnegans
Lane
Finnegans Lane South From the terminus of Finnegans
Lane east to Route No. 130
Jersey Avenue (State
Route 91)
Both From How Lane to Orchard Street
Laurel Place North From Route 171 to a point 75 feet
west
Laurel Place North,
10:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.,
Monday to
Friday,
except
legal
holidays
From a point 75 feet west of Route
171 to Maple Avenue
Linwood Place Both From the southerly curbline of
Hermann Road to a point 100 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Hermann Road
Livingston Avenue South From Walnut Street to Cranbury
Cross Road
Old Georges Road Both From Edly's Lane north to Route
No. 130
Old Georges Road Both From Route No. 130 south to
Blackhorse Lane
Redmond Street
[Repealed 3-16-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
§ 334-32 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-32
330:1270
Name of Street Side Location
Sabella Park Drive East From Cozzens Lane, 426 feet north
Sabella Park parking lot
access Road
Both From Sabella Park Drive to the
parking lot
§ 334-33. Schedule IIIA: No Stopping or Standing at Public
Buildings or Board of Education Parking Lots.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-6, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle at all times at public buildings and Board of Education parking lots
as herein described.
Name of Municipal
Property Sides Location
Board of Education
parking lots
-- --
Library Building North and
East
From the driveway entrance from
Newton Street along the entire
length of the driveway until it
exits onto Hermann Road,
including the service roads
immediately in front of, and
adjacent to, the south side of the
building
§ 334-34. Schedule IV: Parking Time Limited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-7, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time shown on any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Time Limit Hours Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 334-35. Schedule V: Staff-Only Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of Article II, Parking; Stopping or
Standing; Time Limit Parking, § 334-3, Parking prohibited at all times on
certain streets, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the
following described streets or parts of streets, public buildings and/or Board
of Education parking lots which have been designated as staff-only parking
areas:
Name of Street or
Location Side Location
North Brunswick Public
Library
Rear of facility,
east side
880 Hermann Road
§ 334-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-36
330:1271
§ 334-36. Schedule VI: Truck Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-11, all trucks which have a gross
weight of an excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets except
those streets or parts of streets that shall form a part of the system of truck
routes.
Name of Streets Location
16th Street From Route No. 26 (Livingston Avenue) to
Joyce Kilmer Avenue
Adams Lane [Repealed
6-26-2017 by Ord. No.
17-06]
Church Lane (County Road
4-R-12)
Cozzens Lane (County Road
4-R-8)
Entire length
Davidson Mill Road
[Repealed 6-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-06]
Finnegans Lane (County Road
4-R-10)
From Route No. 1 to Route No. 27
How Lane (County Road
3-R-21)
Entire length
Joyce Kilmer Avenue From 14th Street to the New Brunswick
corporate line (12th Street)
Main Street Entire length
Milltown Road (County Road
3-R-9)
Entire length
Old Georges Road (County
Road 4-R-11)
From its intersection with Route No. 130
north of Adams Lane to its intersection
with Route No. 130 south of Church Lane
Ryders Lane Entire length
§ 334-37. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets:
Name of Street Direction Location
Cleremont Avenue East Between Edgewood Place and
Hollywood Place; parking permitted on
both sides
Elmer Place East From Livingston Avenue to Jerome
Place
§ 334-36 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-37
330:1272
Name of Street Direction Location
Finnegans Lane Counterclockwise
From its northerly intersection with
Route No. 130 to its southerly
intersection with Route No. 130
Hollywood Place North Between Cleremont Avenue and
Remsen Avenue; parking permitted on
both sides
LaRose Avenue West From Hudson Drive to Route No. 27
Old Georges Road South From Deerbrook Boulevard to Black
Horse Lane
§ 334-38. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designed as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Location
Aaron Road Between Route No. 1 and its westerly
terminus
Adams Lane (County Road
4-R-8)
Between Route No. 1 and Route No. 130
Arlington Avenue Between Cozzens Lane and Ottowa Street
Axel Avenue Between Omaha Road and Poplar Avenue
Chrome Street Between Milltown Road and Allgair Avenue
Church Lane (County Road
4-R-12)
From Old Georges Road to municipal
boundary line of East Brunswick Township
Cleremont Avenue – Jerome
Place
A. Between Linwood Place and Hollywood
Street
B. Between Livingston Avenue (Route No.
26) and Linwood Place
Commerce Boulevard Route No. 1 to Hartland Commons
Cozzens Lane (County Road
4-R-8)
Between Route No. 1 and Route No. 27
Cranbury Cross Road A. From Georges Road (Route No. 171) to
Linwood Place
B. From Linwood Place to Newton Street
Edgewood Place-Laurel Place Between Georges Road (Route No. 171)
and Cleremont Avenue
Farrington Boulevard Between Route No. 130 and Hoover Drive
(southerly leg)
Filmore Drive Between Wood Avenue and Dewey Road
§ 334-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-38
330:1273
Name of Street Location
Finnegans Lane (County Road
4-R-10)
Between Route No. 1 and Route No. 27
Glenridge Avenue A. Between Linwood Place and Edgewood
Place
B. Between Oakwood Place and Linwood
Place
Halsey Road Between Route No. 130 and Roosevelt Ave
Hartland Commons Between Aaron Road and Cozzens Lane
Hedges Street-Linwood Place A. Between Cranbury Cross Road and
Ridgewood Avenue
B. Between Hermann Road and Cranbury
Cross Road
C. Between Livingston Avenue and
Hermann Road
Hermann Road Between Georges Road (Route No. 171)
and Livingston Avenue (Route No. 26)
Hidden Lake Drive Between Route No. 27 and Aaron Road
Holly Lane-Holly Road Between Oak Road and Dewey Road
How Lane Between Route No. 27 and Jersey Avenue
(Route No. 91)
Huron Road Between Jersey Avenue (Route No. 91) and
Axel Avenue
Joyce Kilmer Avenue-Weber
Road
Between the City of New Brunswick
corporate line and Livingston Avenue
(Route No. 26)
LaRose Avenue Route No. 27 to White Drive
McKinley Place-Taylor Place Between Halsey Road and Filmore Drive
Miriam Drive Between Edlys Lane and Washington Place
Nassau Street Between Livingston Avenue (Route No. 26)
and Georges Road (Route No. 171)
Nathan Drive Between Hidden Lake Drive and
Willowbrook Drive
Newton Street Between Ridgewood Avenue and Patton
Street
North Oaks Boulevard Between U.S. Route No. 1 and U.S. Route
No. 26
Old Georges Road Between its intersection with Route No.
130 north of Adams Lane and its
intersection with Route No. 130 south of
Church Lane
§ 334-38 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-38
330:1274
Name of Street Location
Omaha Road Between Route No. 27 and Columbia Drive
Otis Road Between US Route 130 and its intersection
with Revere Road
Patton Street Between Livingston Avenue and Douglas
Avenue
Pine Street Between Georges Road and a point 100
feet west of Willow Street
Pine Street Between US Route 171 and its most
westernmost terminus
Remsen Avenue A. Between Nassau Street and the City of
New Brunswick corporate line
B. Between Woodland Avenue and Nassau
Street
Renaissance Boulevard East
[Added 2-3-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-01]
Between Route 130 and Renaissance
Boulevard North
Renaissance Boulevard North
[Added 2-3-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-01]
Between Route 130 and Jared Drive
Revere Road – Independence
Boulevard
Between US Route 130 and Otis Road
Ridgewood Avenue Between Livingston Avenue (Route No. 26)
and its easterly terminus
Schmidt Lane Between U.S. Route No. 27 and Nathan
Drive
Seneca Road Between Route No. 27 and Axel Avenue
Tulip Drive Between Finnegans Lane and Thomas
Avenue
Washington Place Between Route No. 130 and the Township
of East Brunswick corporate line
Williamson Road Between Wheeler Road and Revere Road
Willowbrook Drive Between Hidden Lake Drive and Cozzens
Lane
Wood Avenue Between Route No. 130 and Holly Road
Wood Avenue – Miriam Drive Between Wood Avenue and Washington
Place
Woodland Avenue Between Linwood Place and Stevens Street
§ 334-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-39
330:1275
§ 334-39. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-14, of the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign On At Intersection Of
Alden Way Alden Way and Gerry Road
Axel Avenue Poplar Drive
Barrymore Place [Added
2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-01]
Arthur Avenue
Barton Place [Added
2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-01]
McKinley Avenue
Beecher Place [Added
2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-01]
Arthur Avenue
Beechwood Place Evergreen Court
Calvert Road Taylor Drive
Cedar Avenue Elmwood Place
Center Street First Avenue
Center Street Fourth Avenue
Center Street Second Avenue
Center Street Third Avenue
Chrome Street Milltown Road
Cornell Street Lee Avenue
David Drive Wood Avenue
Erik Drive Fourth Avenue
Georges Road Black Horse Lane
Halsey Road Roosevelt Avenue
Hickory Lane Poplar Drive
Holly Lane Oak Road
Jefferson Avenue Wilson Street
Joseph Street Huron Road
Joseph Street Osage Road
Kearney Drive Colfax Road
Kearney Drive Dallas Road
Kearney Drive Franklin Boulevard
Kearney Drive Franklin Road
Kearney Drive Independence Boulevard
§ 334-39 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-39
330:1276
Stop Sign On At Intersection Of
Lee Avenue Haverford Street
Lee Avenue Hollywood Street
Lee Avenue Stevens Street
Lenox Place Main Street
Maple Avenue Ashland Place
Maple Avenue Elmwood Place
Municipal Drive East Hermann Road
Municipal Drive West Hermann Road
Newton Street Bergen Avenue
Oakwood Place Evergreen Court
Orchard Street Jersey Avenue
Orchard Street Princess Drive
Petrich Place [Added
2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-01]
Hollywood Street
Riverton Street Cranbury Cross Road
Schweitzer Place [Added
3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
15-03]
Hoover Drive
Serviss Avenue Hollywood Street
Serviss Avenue Stevens Street
Stelle Avenue [Added
5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-10]
Lenox Avenue
Taylor Place [Added
2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-01]
Arthur Avenue
Tulip Drive Thomas Avenue
Van Buren Drive Edly's Lane and Van Buren Drive
West Lawrence Street Main Street
West Lawrence Street Prospect Avenue
Willow Avenue Cypress Avenue
Wilson Street Nassau Street
Woodland Avenue Lee Avenue
§ 334-40. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
§ 334-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-40
330:1277
Yield Sign On At Intersection Of
(Reserved)
§ 334-41. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-17, the following locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Names of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 334-42. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 334-43. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, pickup up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said locations between the hours indicated.
Name of
Street Side Location Hours
Hermann Road Eastbound, on
the southerly
side
Beginning 408 east of the
easterly curbline of
Linwood Place, and
extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom; all
hours
All
Hermann Road Westbound, on
the northerly
side
Beginning 408 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
Linwood Place, and
extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom
All
North Oaks
Boulevard
East Beginning 35 feet from
the intersection of the
driveway designated No.
1701-2206 and extending
135 feet southerly
therefrom
All
§ 334-40 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-43
330:1278
Name of
Street Side Location Hours
North Oaks
Boulevard
West Beginning at the
southerly curbline of the
driveway designated No.
4501-5006 and extending
100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Remsen Avenue Northbound,
on the easterly
side
Beginning at a point 225
feet from the intersection
of the northerly curbline
of Nassau Street and
along the east curbline of
Remsen Avenue and
extending 105 feet north
therefrom
All
Remsen Avenue Northbound,
on the
westerly side
Beginning at a point 243
feet north from the
intersection of the
northerly curbline of
Nassau Street and along
the west curbline of
Remsen Avenue,
extending 105 feet north
therefrom
All
§ 334-44. Schedule XIV: Left Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-20, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
At Intersection
Of Exceptions
Aaron Road
[Repealed
12-17-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-19]
Deerbrook
Boulevard
East Old Georges
Road
LaRose Avenue West Route No. 27
§ 334-45. Schedule XV: U-Turns Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-21, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
§ 334-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-45
330:1279
Name of Street Location
North Oaks Boulevard,
westbound, and US Route 1
southbound
Westbound on North Oaks Boulevard onto
eastbound North Oaks Boulevard
§ 334-46. Schedule XVI: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-22, no person shall make a turn
at any of the following intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 334-47. Schedule XVII: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-25, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Lane
Reserved Purpose
Hermann Road and
Linwood Place
East Left Left turn only
Hermann Road and
Linwood Place
East Right Straight ahead and
right turn only
Hermann Road and
Linwood Place
West Center Straight ahead only
Hermann Road and
Linwood Place
West Left Left turn only
Hermann Road and
Linwood Place
West Right Right turn only
North Main Street
and Highland Drive
East Left Left turn only
§ 334-48. Schedule XVIII: Speed Limits.
The following speed limits shall be established in the Township of North
Brunswick as follows:
Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Raider Road [Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-12]
30
Along Ryders Lane
Zone 5, between U.S. Route 1 (northbound)
and Westons Mill Road
50
§ 334-45 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-48
330:1280
Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 6, between U.S. Route 1 (northbound)
and Clifton Avenue
45
§ 334-49. Schedule XIX: No-Passing Zones.
Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Arlington Avenue Both Cozzens Lane to Orchard Street
Black Horse Lane Both Entire length
Church Lane Both From the East Brunswick boundary
to Old Georges Road
Cleremont Avenue Both Jerome Place to Hollywood Avenue
Cranbury Cross
Road
Both Entire length
Davidson Mill Road Both Entire length
Hartland Commons Both Aaron Road to Cozzens Lane
Hermann Road Both Livingston Avenue to Georges Road
Huron Drive Both Axel Avenue to Jersey Avenue
Joyce Kilmer
Avenue/Weber Road
Both Between 12th Street and Livingston
Avenue
Linwood Place-
Hedges Street
Both Entire length
Nassau Street Both Entire length
North Oaks
Boulevard
Both Livingston Avenue to Route No. 1
Raider Road Both Entire length
Renaissance
Boulevard North
[Added 2-3-2020
by Ord. No. 20-01]
Both Entire length
Washington Place Both Entire length
Willowbrook Drive Both Hidden Lake Drive to Cozzens Lane
§ 334-50. Schedule XX: Right Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-23, no person shall make a right
turn at the following intersections:
§ 334-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-50
330:1281
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
At
Intersection
Of Exceptions
Hartland
Commons
[Repealed
12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
§ 334-51. Schedule XXI: Pedestrian Crosswalks.
Name of Street Location of Pedestrian Crosswalk
Hermann Road Beginning 373 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Linwood Place and extending 10 feet easterly
therefrom
Hollywood Street From a point 780 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Remsen Avenue and extending 12 feet
southerly therefrom
Linwood Place From a point 417.00 feet north of the northwest
curbline of Hermann Road and extending 8 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 334-52. Schedule XXII: Right Turn Only.
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-24, no person shall make a left
turn or proceed to travel straight ahead at any of the following locations:
Intersection Location
Route 130 northbound near
milepost 81.9 and Old
Georges Road
Right turn only, Old Georges Road
southbound to Route 130 northbound
§ 334-53. Schedule XXIII: Mid-Block Crosswalks.
Name of Street Location of Pedestrian Crosswalk
Hermann Road Beginning 373 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Linwood Place and extending 10 feet easterly
therefrom
Linwood Place Beginning at a point 285 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Hermann Road and extending 10 feet
northerly therefrom
Linwood Place Beginning at a point 295 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Hermann Road and extending 10 feet
northerly therefrom
Linwood Place Beginning at a point 500 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Hermann Road and extending 10 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 334-50 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-54
330:1282
§ 334-54. Schedule XXIV: Trucks Over Designated Weight.
[Amended 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
In accordance with the provisions of § 334-10, vehicles over the registered
gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets
described herein except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
Adams Lane 13 tons From Route 1 to Route 130
Aaron Road 4 tons Hartland Commons to Hidden
Lake Drive
Cranbury Cross Road 4 tons Entire length
Davidson Mill Road 4 tons Entire length
Hartland Commons 4 tons Entire length
Hermann Road 4 tons Entire length
Hidden Lake Drive 4 tons Entire length
Huron Road 4 tons From Jersey Avenue to Axel
Avenue
Nassau Street 4 tons From Route 171 (Georges Road)
to Route 26 (Livingston Avenue)
Orchard Street 4 tons From Jersey Avenue to Arlington
Avenue
Washington Place 4 tons Entire length
Willowbrook Drive 4 tons Entire length
§ 334-54.1. Speed humps. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05]
The following street or parts of streets are hereby designated for speed
humps as enumerated:
Street Name
Speed Hump(s)
Location
Number of Speed
Humps
Axel Avenue Between Carlisle Road
and Seneca Road
2
Axel Avenue Between Ute Road and
Sioux Road
2
Bergen Avenue Between Livingston
Avenue and Newton
Street
1
Chrome Street Between First Avenue and
Second Avenue
1
Chrome Street Between Milltown Road
and Fourth Avenue
1
§ 334-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-54.1
330:1283
Street Name
Speed Hump(s)
Location
Number of Speed
Humps
Chrome Street Between Second Avenue
and Third Avenue
1
Fillmore Drive Between Myrtle Road and
Dewey Road
2
Halsey Road Between McKinley
Avenue and Taylor Drive
1
Halsey Road Between Route 130 and
McKinley Avenue
1
Halsey Road Between Taylor Drive and
Roosevelt Avenue
1
Hedges Street Between Lee Avenue and
Woodland Avenue
1
Huff Road Between Route 130 and
Williamson Road
1
Huron Road Between Jersey Avenue
and Axel Avenue
2
Independence
Boulevard
Between Farrington Blvd
and Kearney Drive
1
Independence
Boulevard
Between Kearney Drive
and Route 130
2
Independence
Boulevard
Between Route 130 and
South Boyd Parkway
1
Joyce Kilmer Avenue Between 14th and 15th
Streets
1
Kearney Drive Between Alden Way and
Gerry Road
1
Laurel Place Between Willow Avenue
and Locust Avenue
1
Linwood Place Between Cranbury Cross
Road and Ridgewood
Avenue
2
Linwood Place Between Glenridge
Avenue and Hermann
Road
1
Linwood Place Between Hermann Road
and Cranbury Cross Road
2
Masoma Road Between Axel Avenue and
Ohio Avenue
1
Masoma Road Between Ohio Avenue and
Route 27
1
§ 334-54.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-54.1
330:1284
Street Name
Speed Hump(s)
Location
Number of Speed
Humps
Miriam Drive Between Dawes Road and
Edly's Lane
1
Nathan Dive Between Willowbrook
Drive and Schmidt Lane
1
Omaha Road Between Axel Avenue and
Redmond Street
1
Omaha Road Between Joseph Street
and Route 27
1
Patton Street Between Bell Avenue and
Newton Street
1
Patton Street Between Livingston
Avenue and Bell Avenue
1
Princess Drive
[Added 10-20-2014
by Ord. No. 14-11]
Between Earl Court and
Orchard Street
1
Princess Drive
[Added 10-20-2014
by Ord. No. 14-11]
Between Regal Court and
Earl Court
1
Roosevelt Avenue Between Taylor Place and
Raider Road
3
Schmidt Lane Between Riverbend Drive
and Wedgewood Drive
2
Schmidt Lane Between Wedgewood
Drive and Route 27
1
Seneca Road Between Axel Avenue and
Ohio Avenue
1
Seneca Road Between Ohio Avenue and
Route 27
1
Thomas Avenue Between Tulip Drive and
Route 27
1
Thomas Avenue Between Violet Drive and
Tulip Drive
1
Wedgewood Drive Between Cozzens Lane
and Quince Place
1
Wedgewood Drive Between Quince Place
and Schmidt Lane
1
Williamson Road Between Huff Road and
Franklin Road
1
Willowbrook Drive Between Cozzens Lane
and Nathan Drive
1
§ 334-54.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-54.1
330:1285
Street Name
Speed Hump(s)
Location
Number of Speed
Humps
Willowbrook Drive Between Nathan Drive
and Hidden Lake Drive
1
§ 334-54.1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-54.1
330:1286
ARTICLE XV
Control for Movement and Parking of Traffic on Private Property
[Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03227]
§ 334-55. Title 39 regulations.
The organizations identified herein have filed written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick and in accordance with and pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 are
hereby made applicable, and the regulations shall be enforceable, to the
public and semipublic roads, streets, driveways, and parking lots to the
properties listed alphabetically herein.
Belcourt at Hidden Lake
Belcourt at Hidden Lake Condominium Association has filed a written
consent with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots
at Belcourt at Hidden Lake located in the Township of North Brunswick,
County of Middlesex, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Schmidt Lane Entire length from Nathan Drive to
terminus
(3) Speed limit. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the below-designated speed limits authorized by
the New Jersey Department of Transportation. The speed limit for both
directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be 15 miles per hour. The
speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
227. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XV, Fashion Plaza; Art. XVI,
Renaissance at North Brunswick; Art. XVII, Deerbrook Village; Art. XVIII, Georgetown
Apartments; and Art. XIX Oak Leaf Village.
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1287
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
Deerbrook Village
Deerbrook Village, LLC has filed a written consent with the Township of
North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Deerbrook Village, located in
the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All cul-de-sac
areas
Inner
roadway
All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Deerbrook Boulevard Entire length
Dickens Road Entire length
Emerson Road Entire length
Poe Road Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Deerbrook Boulevard and
Finnegans Lane
Deerbrook Boulevard
Emerson Road and Burns Road Emerson Road
Hugo Road and Whitman Road Hugo Road
Shelley Drive and Steinbeck Road Shelley Drive
Steinbeck Road and Keats Road Steinbeck Road
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1288
(4) Speed limit. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the below-designated speed limits authorized by
the New Jersey Department of Transportation. The speed limit for both
directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be 15 miles per hour. The
speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads 20 Entire length
(5) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction and Limits
Office Road East and counterclockwise for the entire
length
Georgetown Apartments
Georgetown LLC has filed a written consent with the Township of North
Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at Georgetown Apartments located in the
Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Oak Tree Drive Entire length within the limits of
Georgetown
Road "A" Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1289
Intersection Stop Sign On
Road "B" and Aisle 10 Road "B"
Road "C" and Aisle 8 Road "C"
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
(5) Loading zones. The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods
and materials.
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Aisle 8 North All As indicated on site plan
Aisle 10 South All As indicated on site plan
Aisle 11 East All As indicated on site plan
Governor's Pointe I
Governor's Pointe I Condo Association has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Governor's Pointe I located in
the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1290
Name of Street Limits
Albury Way Entire length
Hartland Commons Entire length from Aaron Road to
corporate line
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Albury Way and Hartland
Commons
Albury Way
Hadleigh Lane and Northam Drive Hadleigh Lane
Hartland Commons and Aaron
Road
Hartland Commons
Pool Drive and Wimbeldon Court Pool Drive
Witney Court and Hadleigh Lane Witney Court
Witney Court and Northam Drive Witney Court
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both directions of
travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Albury Way 15 Entire length
Darwin Lane 15 Entire length
Hadleigh Lane 15 Entire length
Hartland Commons 25 Entire length
Kempsey Drive 15 Entire length
Northam Drive 15 Entire length
Pool Drive 15 Entire length
Wimbeldon Court 15 Entire length
Witney Court 15 Entire length
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Albury Way Both Entire length
Darwin Lane Both Entire length
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1291
Name of Street Side Location
Hadleigh Lane Both Entire length
Hartland Commons Both Entire length
Kempsey Drive Both Entire length
Northam Drive Both Entire length
Pool Drive Both Entire length
Wimbeldon Court Both Entire length
Witney Court Both Entire length
Governor's Pointe II
Governor's Pointe II Condo Association has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Governor's Pointe II located in
the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Clay Street Entire length from the prolongation of the south
curb of Pembrook Avenue to the north curb of
Kingston Run
Goodwin Drive Entire length from the prolongation of the south
curb of Pembrook Avenue to the north curb of
Kingston Run
Hartland Commons Entire length from Cozzens Lane to corporate
line of Governor's Pointe I Condo Association
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1292
Intersection Stop Sign On
Clay Street and Kingston Run Clay Street
Clay Street and Pembrook
Avenue
Clay Street
Goodwin Drive and Kingston Run Kingston Run
Goodwin Drive and Pembrook
Avenue
Goodwin Drive
Hartland Commons and Cozzens
Lane
Hartland Commons
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Brighton Way 15 Entire length
Bristol Drive 15 Entire length
Clay Street 15 Entire length
Dartmouth Lane 15 Entire length
Folkstone Court 15 Entire length
Goodwin Drive 15 Entire length
Hartland Commons 25 Entire length
Kingston Run 15 Entire length
Pembrook Way 15 Entire length
Sheffield Court 15 Entire length
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Brighton Way Both Entire length
Bristol Drive Both Entire length
Clay Street Both Entire length
Dartmouth Lane Both Entire length
Folkstone Court Both Entire length
Goodwin Drive Both Entire length
Hartland Commons Both Entire length
Kingston Run Both Entire length
Pembrook Way Both Entire length
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1293
Name of Street Side Location
Sheffield Court Both Entire length
Indian Head North
Indian Head North has filed a written consent with the Township of North
Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at Indian Head North located in the Township of
North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following regulations shall
be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads, drives
and courts
Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Aspen Drive Entire length
Sassafras Court Entire length
Staghorn Drive Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Court "G" and Thomas Avenue Court "G"
Court "K" and Thomas Avenue Court "K"
Court "L" and Thomas Avenue Court "L"
Road "A" and Court "D" Road "A"
Tupelo Court and Thomas Avenue Tupelo Court
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1294
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads, drives and
courts
15 Entire length
Kendall Court
Kendall Court (formerly Indian Head Gardens) has filed a written consent
with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to
the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Kensington
Gardens located in the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex,
and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Kendall Court
Drive
Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Kendall Court Drive Entire length from Schmidt Lane
(3) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 25 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
Main Street North Brunswick
North Brunswick TOD Associates, LLC, has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Main Street North Brunswick,
and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1295
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Audley Street South All As indicated on site plan
Bond Street South All As indicated on site plan
Cannon Street South All As indicated on site plan
Central Avenue Both All As indicated on site plan
Chambers
Street
South All As indicated on site plan
East End
Avenue (E)
East All As indicated on site plan
Fleet Street South All As indicated on site plan
Green Street South All As indicated on site plan
High Street West and
north
All As indicated on site plan
Main Street
eastbound
Both All As indicated on site plan
Main Street
westbound
Both All As indicated on site plan
Mayfair Street North All As indicated on site plan
Mount Street South All As indicated on site plan
North End
Avenue
East All As indicated on site plan
North Terrace
Street
North All As indicated on site plan
Plaza Circle Both All As indicated on site plan
Preston Place Both All As indicated on site plan
Prospect Street North All As indicated on site plan
South Drive North All As indicated on site plan
Tenth Avenue
(N)
Both All As indicated on site plan
Tenth Avenue
(S)
West All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1296
Name of Street Limits
Central Avenue Main Street to North Terrace Street
Commerce Boulevard Entire length
Division Street Entire length
East End Avenue Entire length
Grand Avenue Entire length
Green Street Entire length
High Street Low Street to Central Avenue
Low Street Tenth Avenue to Central Avenue
Main Street Entire length
Mayfair Street High Street to Central Avenue
Mount Street Tenth Avenue to Central Avenue
North End Avenue Entire length
Plaza Circle Entire length
Prospect Street Tenth Avenue to Central Avenue
South Drive Entire length
Station Avenue Entire length
Sunset Street Entire length
Tenth Avenue (northbound) Main Street to North Terrace Street
Tenth Avenue (southbound) Division Street to Main Street
Tenth Avenue (southbound) South Drive to Division Street
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Division Street and Tenth Avenue Tenth Avenue
Grand Avenue and Division Street Division Street
Grand Avenue and Sunset Street Sunset Street
Green Street and East End
Avenue
East End Avenue
High Street and Mayfair Street Mayfair Street
Low Street and High Street High Street
Main Street and Central Avenue Central Avenue
Main Street and Green Street Main Street and Green Street
Main Street and Plaza Circle
egress
Main Street and Plaza Circle
egress
Main Street and Tenth Avenue Tenth Avenue
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1297
Intersection Stop Sign On
South Drive and Grand Avenue Grand Avenue
South Drive and Tenth Avenue Tenth Avenue
Station Avenue and North End
Avenue
North End Avenue
(4) Yield intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as yield intersections:
Intersection Yield Sign On
Commerce Boulevard, Station
Avenue, and Grand Avenue
Commerce Boulevard, Station
Avenue, and Grand Avenue
Main Street and Grand Avenue Main Street and Grand Avenue
(5) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction and Limits
Plaza Circle Entire length
(6) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 25 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
(7) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
All roads Both Entire length
(8) Loading zone. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods
and materials. The following described locations are hereby
designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Main Street Eastbound All Due south of Tenth
Avenue
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1298
(9) Multipurpose dropoff/pickup/loading zone. No person shall park a
vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than for the
dropping off and/or picking up of passengers or small goods. The
following described locations are hereby designated as multipurpose
dropoff/pickup/loading zones.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Main Street Westbound All 100 feet east of
Grand Avenue
(10) Bus stop. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any
of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Costco north/south internal aisle
(southbound)
300 feet south of Main Street
Grand Avenue (northbound) Just south of Commerce
Boulevard
Grand Avenue (northbound) 820 feet north of Main Street
Grand Avenue (northbound) 120 feet north of South Drive
Green Street (northbound) 110 feet south of Main Street
North Brunswick Commerce Center
North Center, LLC has filed a written consent with the Township of North
Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at North Brunswick Commerce Center located
in the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the
following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site
plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "A" Entire length
Road "B" Between Road "A" and Aisle "B"
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1299
Name of Street Limits
Road "B" Between Road "A" (north intersect) and
Road "A" (south intersect)
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Aisle "B" and North Center Drive Road "B"
Road "A" and North Center Drive Road "A"
Road "B" and Aisle "B" Road "B" (both approaches)
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
(5) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction; Limits
Aisle "C" North; Entire length
CVS drive-through lane North; Entire length
(6) Loading zone. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods
and materials. The following described locations are hereby
designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Aisle "C" East All As indicated on site
plan
Road "B" North All As indicated on site
plan
Road "B" South All As indicated on site
plan
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1300
North Brunswick Crescent
North Brunswick Crescent Urban Renewal, LLC, has filed a written consent
with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the
semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at North Brunswick
Crescent, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site
plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Crescent Court Entire length within the limits of North
Brunswick Crescent
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Crescent Court (northwest) and
Crescent Court (northeast/
southwest)
Crescent Court (northwest)
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1301
Name of Street Side Location
Aisle (previously referred
to as "Aisle G")
Both Between Buildings C and D
on site plan
Aisle (previously referred
to as "Service Road A")
Both Between Buildings I, J and K
on site plan
Roadway (previously
referred to as "Westway
Drive")
North side
only
Roadway north of Buildings
K, L and M on site plan
North Brunswick Manor
North Brunswick Realty, LLC, has filed a written consent with the Township
of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at North Brunswick Manor, and
the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Bishop Boulevard Both All Entire length
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Birchwood Court Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Bishop Boulevard and Birchwood
Court
Bishop Boulevard
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1302
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
Birchwood Court 25 Entire length
North Brunswick Plaza
Kimco North Brunswick 617, Inc., has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at North Brunswick Plaza, and
the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Main Drive Entire length from Route 1 to Truck
Lane
Plaza Extension North Drive Entire length from Route 1 to Plaza
Outer Ring Roadway
Plaza Outer Ring Roadway Entire length from Fashion Plaza
Extension North Drive to Truck Lane
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Main Drive and Plaza Outer Ring
Roadway on both northbound and
southbound directions
Plaza Outer Ring Roadway
Main Drive and Truck Lane Truck Lane
Plaza Extension North Drive and
Truck Lane
Truck Lane
Plaza Outer Ring Roadway and Plaza
Extension North Drive on both north
and south intersects
Plaza Outer Ring Roadway
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1303
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
North Brunswick Plaza 25 Entire length
North Brunswick Plaza,
North Drive
15 Entire length
(5) Loading zone. The following described location is hereby designated
as a loading zone:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Entire perimeter Both All Rear of Plaza
North Village Shopping Center
North Village Shopping Center has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at North Village Shopping
Center located in the Township of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex,
and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "B" Entire length
Road "C" Between Entrance "A" and Road "D" and
between Exit "A" and westernmost
terminus
Road "D" Entire length
Road "E" Entire length
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1304
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Entrance "A" and Road "C" Road "C"
Exit "A" and Road "C" Road "C"
(4) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limit for both
directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
(5) Loading zones. The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods
and materials.
Name of Street Time/Hours Location
Road "B" All As indicated on site plan
Road "F" All As indicated on site plan
(6) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Time Limit/Hours Location
Aisle "D" 10 minutes/All As indicated on site plan
(7) Overnight parking. No person shall park a vehicle overnight upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described Sunday through Saturday,
including holidays:
Name of Street Location
All roads and lots Entire property
Northwoods Estates
Northwoods LLC has filed a written consent with the Township of North
Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at Northwood Estates located in the Township
of North Brunswick, County of Middlesex, and the following regulations
shall be enforceable:
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1305
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site
plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Main Drive Entire length
(3) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
The Oaks, Oak Hollow, Oak Hollow North
Oak Hollow Homeowners Association has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Oak Hollow, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site
plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
North Oaks Boulevard Entire length
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1306
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Pond Way and Road "A" Road "A"
Pond Way and Road "B" Road "B"
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Pond Drive 15 Entire length
Pond Way 15 Entire length
Roads "A", "B", "C", "D",
"E"
15 Entire length
Renaissance Meadows, Section 1 [Added 11-19-2018 by Ord. No.
18-17]
The Meadows at Renaissance Condominium Association, Inc. has filed a
written consent with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions
of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots
at the Meadows at Renaissance, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Renaissance Boulevard North and
Jared Drive
Renaissance Boulevard North
Jared Drive and Amy Drive Jared Drive
Amy Drive and Jared Drive Amy Drive
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1307
Intersection Stop Sign On
Jared Drive and Renaissance
Boulevard North
Jared Drive
(3) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Amy Drive 15 Entire length
Jared Drive 15 Entire length
Renaissance Walk, Section 1
Renaissance Walk Homeowners Association, Inc. has filed a written
consent with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots
at Renaissance Walk, Section 1, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Beacon Hill Way East All Entire length to an
easterly point 250 feet
past the intersection of
Plymouth Road
Renaissance
Boulevard
Both All Entire length
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Intersection Limits
Beacon Hill Way Entire length
Hampshire Drive Entire length
Plymouth Road Entire length
Renaissance Boulevard Between Route 130 and a point 50 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Springfield Road
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1308
Intersection Limits
Salem Road Entire length
Springfield Road Entire length
(3) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Renaissance
Boulevard
25 Entire length
All other roads 15 Entire length
Renaissance Wellington, Section 2
Renaissance Wellington, Section 2 has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Renaissance Wellington,
Section 2, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site
plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Intersection Limits
Pin Oak Drive and Renaissance
Boulevard both north and south
intersect
Entire length
(3) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1309
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Pin Oak Drive 15 Entire length
Riverbend At Hidden Lake
Riverbend Townhouse Owners Association, Inc. has filed a written consent
with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to
the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Riverbend in
Hidden Lake, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Intersection Limits
Riverbend Drive From Schmidt Lane to Hidden Lake
Drive
Schmidt Lane Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Riverbend Drive and Hidden Lake
Drive
Riverbend Drive
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Riverbend Drive 25 Entire length
Schmidt Lane 25 Entire length
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1310
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Schmidt Lane South From Nathan Drive to a point 200
feet west of Riverbend Drive
Society Hill North
Society Hill Condo Association has filed a written consent with the
Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Society Hill North, and the
following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Intersection Limits
Society Way Entire length
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Society Way 25 Entire length
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-55
330:1311
Name of Street Side Location
Society Way Both Entire length
(6) Bus stop. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any
of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Society Way Society Hill North Clubhouse
Willowbrook at Hidden Lake
Willowbrook at Hidden Lake Condominium Association has filed a written
consent with the Township of North Brunswick that the provisions of
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots
at Willowbrook at Hidden Lake, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
(1) General parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site plan
(2) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Intersection Limits
Nathan Drive Entire length from Willowbrook Drive to
Hidden Lake Drive
Willowbrook Drive Entire length from Cozzens Lane to Hidden
Lake Drive
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Hidden Lake Drive and Nathan
Drive
Nathan Drive
Willowbrook Drive and Hidden
Lake Drive
Willowbrook Drive
§ 334-55 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-55
330:1312
(4) Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the
parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. The speed limits for both
directions of travel on the following roads shall be:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Limits
Nathan Drive 25 Entire length
Willowbrook Drive 25 Entire length
(5) No parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Willowbrook Drive Both From the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Nathan Drive
outlet to the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of the Towne
Center parking lot
§ 334-56. Handicapped parking.228
All stalls be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan229 and signed
with R7-8 (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 334-57. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, dropoff or pickup areas,
any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic
hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's
expense, within the discretion of the North Brunswick Police Department
pursuant to Title 39, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 334-58. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
The owners of the premises under Title 39 authority shall provide and install
signs and pavement markings as required, which shall be in accordance
and conform with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and 39:4-183.27. The cost of procurement and
installation of the signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility
of the owner of said property. The owner shall, subsequently to all initial
procurement and installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings
in good condition at all times.
228. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 227, Art. I, Parking for the Handicapped.
229. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 334-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-59
330:1313
§ 334-59. Enforcement.
The appropriate officers and employees of the Township are authorized to
direct and require the property owner to place, replace, change, and to
maintain all signs, curb and road markings, etc., and to take any and all
steps necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. The enforcement
of Title 39 as adopted and assigned to the properties herein shall be by
the North Brunswick Police Department. Any police officer of the Township
shall enforce this chapter on the basis of personal observation or
investigation or on the basis of a signed complaint, under oath, of any
owner or user of private property affected by a violation of this chapter,
and such police officer shall issue the appropriate summons to effectuate
such enforcement and may tow the subject vehicle as more fully provided
by § 334-57.
§ 334-60. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 334-61. through § 334-65. (Reserved)
§ 334-59 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-61
330:1314
ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)
§ 334-66. through § 334-72. (Reserved)
§ 334-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-66
330:1315

ARTICLE XVII
(Reserved)
§ 334-73. through § 334-80. (Reserved)
§ 334-73 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-73
330:1317

ARTICLE XVIII
(Reserved)
§ 334-81. through § 334-86. (Reserved)
§ 334-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-81
330:1319

ARTICLE XIX
(Reserved)
§ 334-87. through § 334-92. (Reserved)
§ 334-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-87
330:1321

ARTICLE XX
Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System
[Added 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-19]
§ 334-93. Installation.
§ 334-94. Issuance of summons.
A law enforcement official of the Township of North Brunswick Police
Department shall review the recorded images produced by the traffic
control signal monitoring system to determine whether sufficient evidence
exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has occurred. If
determined a violation occurred, the law enforcement official shall issue a
summons, within 90 days from the date on which the violation occurred.
§ 334-95. Use of recorded images.
A. The Township of North Brunswick hereby determines to install and
utilize a traffic control signal monitoring system ("system") at various
intersections within the Township of North Brunswick as approved by
the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Act.
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the governing body by
resolution.
C. The Township of North Brunswick has entered into a contract, following
a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the system. Any
contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act shall not be
deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the Municipal Engineer and shall be placed on each street
converging into the affected intersection as required by the Act.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
Police Department for the purpose of discharging its duties under P.L.
2007, c. 348.230
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq. or common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
230. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq.
§ 334-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 334-95
330:1323
§ 334-96. Owner's liability.
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control
signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint subject to
provisions of the Act.
§ 334-97. Fines.
The fine for any person liable of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-81, the evidence
of which was captured by a traffic control signal monitoring system, shall
be assessed by the Municipal Court.
§ 334-98. Payment of fine distribution.
Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5-41, in the case of a violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:4-81, the evidence of which was captured by a traffic control
signal monitoring system installed pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 2007, c. 348
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.14), the full amount of a fine assessed by a municipal court
shall be paid to the financial officer of the municipality in which the offense
occurred, unless the governing body of the county has elected to pay 1/2 of
the cost of the installation, maintenance, and administration of the traffic
control signal monitoring system, in which case, 1/2 of the fine amount
shall be distributed to the financial officer of the county where the offense
occurred. Any change in this distribution of revenue shall be applicable only
to fines attributable to complaints filed with the Municipal Court after the
date on which applicable notice under Subsection b231 of this section shall
have been received by the administrative office of the courts.
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
traffic control signal monitoring system pertaining to a specific
violation shall be purged and not retained later than 60 days after the
collection of any fine or penalty. If a law enforcement official does not
issue a summons for a traffic control signal violation within 90 days, all
recorded images and information collected pertaining to that alleged
violation shall be purged within three days.
D. The Township of North Brunswick shall certify compliance of this
section by filing a report to the Commissioner of Transportation in
accordance with the Act.
231. Editor's Note: "Subsection b" here refers to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.20.
§ 334-95 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 334-98
330:1324
Chapter 337
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
§ 337-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE — Includes but shall not be limited to minibikes,
motorcycles, trail bikes, motor scooters, go-carts and snowmobiles.
§ 337-2. Vehicles prohibited under certain circumstances.
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor-driven vehicle of the type
described in § 337-1 of this chapter within the Township of North Brunswick
under the following circumstances:
§ 337-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person of the age of 18 years or upwards who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 337-4. Municipal and governmental vehicles exempted.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to municipal
or other governmental vehicles being used for public purposes.
A. On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of said property.
B. On any private street or right-of-way.
C. On public grounds within the Township of North Brunswick without the
express permission or approval of the public authority having charge or
control thereof and then only in accordance with such rules and
regulations as such public authority may impose.
D. In such manner as to create loud unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
E. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of any person or persons or the property of
any person or persons.
F. Wherever permission of an owner is required by this chapter, then the
burden of establishing such permission shall rest with the alleged
violator and, until said burden is met, it shall be presumed that the
operation was without permission.
§ 334-98 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 337-5
337:1325
§ 337-5. Violations by minors.232
Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed to be a juvenile delinquent and shall be
proceeded against as such.
Chapter 342
VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED
232. Editor's Note: Original Section 5, Penalty, which preceded this section was repealed
7-15-1974.
§ 337-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 337-5
342:1326
ARTICLE I
Confectionaries, Nonperishables
[Adopted 2-6-1961]
§ 342-1. License required. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership, association, firm
or corporation to engage in the business of selling or dispensing any candy,
gum, nuts, crackers, cookies, beverages or ice cubes from a coin-operated
vending device or machine in the Township of North Brunswick unless and
until the same is licensed as hereinafter provided.
§ 342-2. Applications obtainable from Clerk.
Applications for licenses to engage in the business of selling or dispensing
candy, gum, nuts, crackers, cookies, bottled soda or ice cubes from a coinoperated
vending device or machine shall be obtained from the Township
Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 342-3. Application information.
The following information shall be required to be furnished by each
applicant on the form provided:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of person or firm who will clean and service the
device or machines.
C. Name and address of manufacturer of the coin-operated vending device
and serial number of said device or machine.
D. General description of the coin-operated device or machine,
particularly with reference to its construction, operation, method of
temperature control and cleaning.
E. Days or dates on which the product or products in said device or
machine will be restocked, replaced or replenished.
F. Days or dates on which the machine will be cleaned and serviced.
G. Name and address of the owner of the premises and a scaled sketch of
the location where the machine will be installed if license is granted.
H. Whether or not the electrical wiring and motor or other operating
mechanism of the machine have been approved by the National Board
of Fire Underwriters.
I. The temperature maintained in the storage section of said device or
machine where the candy, gum, nuts, crackers, cookies, beverages or
ice cubes are located or stored. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
02-22]
§ 342-1 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 342-3
342:1327
§ 342-4. Certificates required.
Attached to each application shall be a certificate from the following officers
or departments of the Township of North Brunswick:
§ 342-5. Expiration date of license; renewal.
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and must be renewed
on or before said date. Applicants for renewal of licenses need not repeat
answers in applications previously submitted, unless such answer would be
different from that in the original application.
§ 342-6. License fees. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
Fees to operate vending machines are specified in Chapter 212, Licensed
Occupations.
§ 342-7. Issuance of license. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Upon completion of the application, the certificates and payment of the fee
as specified in Chapter 212, License Occupations, the Township Clerk shall
issue the proper license.
§ 342-8. Requirements for operation.
All licensed coin-operated vending devices or machines shall:
J. Any such other information as may be necessary and proper to facilitate
the regulation of the business of vending candy, gum, nuts, crackers,
cookies, beverages or ice cubes from a coin-operated vending device or
machine. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22]
K. Name and description of the product or products to be sold from the
vending device or machine.
A. Chief of Police certifying that the proposed location of the coinoperated
vending device or machine will not create a traffic hazard nor
endanger the lives or safety of pedestrians using the sidewalk in the
vicinity of said device or machine.
B. Zoning Officer, certifying that the proposed site of the coin-operated
vending device or machine is a permitted use at that location and that
no part or portion of the said device or machine will extend or protrude
beyond the building line for said zone.
C. Department of Health, certifying that the coin-operated vending device
or machine is sanitary and that the product or products vended
therefrom are properly packaged, bottled or otherwise protected from
contamination or foreign substance.
§ 342-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 342-8
342:1328
§ 342-9. Transfer of license. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
02-22]
A license to engage in the business of vending candy, gum, nuts, crackers,
cookies, beverages or ice cubes from a coin-operated vending device or
machine shall not be transferable from place to place or person to person
without the consent of the Mayor and Council.
§ 342-10. Inspections. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22]
The licensed device or machine shall be subject at all times to inspection by
an authorized agent of the Department of Health of the Township of North
Brunswick. Whenever an agent of the Department of Health shall find or
has probable cause to believe that any candy, gum, nuts, crackers, cookies,
beverages or ice cubes sold or dispensed from a mechanical vending device
is not free from dust, contamination or foreign substances, he shall affix
to such mechanical vending device or machine a tag or other appropriate
marking, giving notice that such vending machine or device is suspected
of being in violation of this article or any other ordinance and has been
detained or embargoed, and warning all persons not to remove or dispose
of the articles in said vending machine or device by sale or otherwise until
permission for removal or disposal is given by the Department of Health.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or dispose of such detained
or embargoed articles by sale or otherwise without first obtaining such
permission.
§ 342-11. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to coin-operated
vending machines dispensing food, beverages or refreshments as set forth
and covered by separate ordinances.233
A. Have the license displayed in a prominent place on the face of the
machine.
B. Have the name, address and telephone number of the operator or
owner affixed thereto.
C. Be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
D. Maintain such temperature as shall keep the product or products
therein from spoiling and as may be required by any statute or
ordinance concerning the perishable product or products vended.
E. Have the serial number in plain view.
F. Not rely upon frozen water, dry ice or other similar substances to
maintain the required temperature.
233. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 342-8 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 342-12
342:1329
§ 342-12. Refunds.
In the event a licensee shall discontinue operation of the business of
vending any candy, gum, nuts, crackers, cookies, bottled soda or ice cubes
from a coin-operated device or machine at any time during the year for
which a license is obtained, no refund or return of the license fee shall be
made.
§ 342-13. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect
any other ordinance in the Township of North Brunswick, but shall be in
addition thereto.
§ 342-14. Enforcement, violations and penalties. [Amended
9-6-1977; 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-06]
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Department of
Health.
B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Court.
The continuation of such violation on each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
§ 342-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 342-14
342:1330
ARTICLE II
Perishable Food, Beverages or Refreshments
[Adopted 2-6-1961]
§ 342-15. License required.
§ 342-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
READILY PERISHABLE — Any food or beverage or ingredients consisting
in whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, fish, poultry or other
food capable of supporting the growth of microorganisms which can cause
food infections or food intoxication. However, products in hermetically
sealed containers, processed by heat to prevent spoilage, and dehydrated,
dry or powdered or vacuum-packed canned products so low in moisture
content as to preclude development of microorganisms, are excluded from
the terms of this definition.[Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22]
§ 342-17. Applications.
Applications for a license to engage in the business of selling or dispensing
food, beverages or refreshments from a coin-operated vending device or
machine shall be obtained from the Township Clerk of the Township of
North Brunswick.
§ 342-18. Required information.
The following information shall be required to be furnished by each
applicant on the form provided:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership, association,
firm or corporation to engage in the business of selling or dispensing
any readily perishable food, beverages or refreshments from a coinoperated
vending device or machine in the Township of North
Brunswick unless and until the same is licensed as hereinafter
provided.
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of person or firm who will clean and service the
machine or device.
C. Name and address of manufacturer of the coin-operated vending
machine or device and the serial number of said device or machine.
D. Name and description of the product or products to be sold from the
vending device or machine.
E. General description of the coin-operated device or machine,
particularly with reference to its construction, operation, method of
temperature control and cleaning.
§ 342-15 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 342-18
342:1331
§ 342-19. Required certificates.
Attached to each application there shall be a certificate from the following
officers or departments of the Township of North Brunswick:
§ 342-20. Expiration date of license.
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and must be renewed
on or before said date. Applicants for renewal of licenses need not repeat
answers in applications previously submitted, unless such answers would
be different from the original application.
F. Days or dates on which the product or products in the said device or
machine will be restocked, replaced or replenished.
G. Days or dates on which the machine will be cleaned and serviced.
H. Name and address of the owner of the premises and a scale sketch of
the location where machine will be installed, if license is granted.
I. Whether or not the electrical wiring and motor or other operating
mechanism of the machine have been approved by the National Board
of Fire Underwriters.
J. The temperature maintained in the store section of said device or
machine where the food, beverages or refreshments are located or
stored.
K. Such other information as may be necessary and proper to facilitate the
regulation of the business of vending food, beverages and refreshments
from a coin-operated vending device or machine.
A. Chief of Police, certifying that the proposed location of the coinoperated
vending device or machine will not create a traffic hazard nor
endanger the lives or safety of pedestrians using the sidewalk in the
vicinity of said device or machine.
B. Zoning Officer, certifying that the proposed site of the coin-operated
vending device or machine is a permitted use at that location and that
no part or portion of the said device or machine will extend or protrude
beyond the building line established for said zone.
C. Department of Health, certifying that the coin-operated vending device
or machine is sanitary and that the product or products vended
therefrom are properly packaged, bottled or otherwise protected from
contamination or foreign substance. All food products in all vending
machines shall be obtained from sources that comply with all laws
related to food and food labeling. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
02-22]
§ 342-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 342-21
342:1332
§ 342-21. Fees. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
Fees to operate vending machines are specified in Chapter 212, Licensed
Occupations.
§ 342-22. Issuance of license. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Upon completion of the application, the certificates and payment of the fee
as specified in Chapter 212, Licensed Occupations, the Township Clerk shall
issue the proper license.
§ 342-23. Requirements for operation.
All licensed coin-operated vending devices or machines shall:
§ 342-24. Transfer of license.
A license to engage in the business of vending food, beverages or
refreshments from a coin-operated device or machine shall not be
transferable from place to place or person to person without the consent of
the Mayor and Council.
§ 342-25. Inspections.
The licensed device or machine shall be subject at all times to inspection
by an authorized agent of the Department of Health of the Township of
North Brunswick. Whenever an agent of the Department of Health shall find
or has probable cause to believe that any food, beverage or refreshment
sold or dispensed from a mechanical vending device is not free from dust,
contamination or foreign substances, he shall affix to such mechanical
vending device or machine a tag or other appropriate marking, giving notice
that such vending machine or device is suspected of being in violation of
this article or any other ordinance and has been detained or embargoed,
and warning all persons not to remove or dispose of the articles in said
vending device or machine by sale or otherwise until permission for removal
or disposal is given by the Department of Health. It shall be unlawful for any
A. Have the name, address and telephone number of the operator or
owner affixed thereto.
B. Be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
C. Maintain such temperature as shall keep the product or products
therein from spoiling and as may be required by any statute or
ordinance concerning the perishable product or products vended.
D. Have the serial number in plain view.
E. Not rely upon frozen water, dry ice or other similar substances to
maintain the required temperature.
§ 342-21 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 342-25
342:1333
person to remove or dispose of such detained or embargoed article by sale
or otherwise without first obtaining such permission.
§ 342-26. Nonapplicability.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to coin-operated
vending machines selling or dispensing candy, gum, nuts, crackers, cookies,
soda or ice cubes.234
§ 342-27. Refunds.
In the event that the licensee shall discontinue operation of the business of
vending any food, beverage or refreshments from a coin-operated device or
machine at any time during the year for which a license was obtained, no
refund or return of the license fee shall be made.
§ 342-28. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect any
other fees as now provided for in any other ordinance in the Township of
North Brunswick, but shall be in addition thereto.
§ 342-29. Enforcement, violations and penalties. [Amended
9-6-1977; 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-06]
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Department of
Health.
B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Court.
The continuation of such violation on each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
234. Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
§ 342-25 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 342-29
342:1334
ARTICLE III
Cigarette Vending Machines
[Adopted 6-6-1994]
§ 342-30. Prohibited sales.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors by automatic
vending machines, all cigarette vending machines are hereby prohibited in
the Township of North Brunswick, with the exception of vending machines
where the operation of the machine to vend tobacco products is possible
only by the activation of an electronic lockout switch or other device, which
switch or device is controlled by the tobacco retailer or his designated
employee, and only after the tobacco retailer or his employee has made
a reasonable determination that the person wishing to use the tobacco
vending machine is 18 years of age or older.
§ 342-31. Removal of machines.
All cigarette vending machines located in the Township of North Brunswick,
with the exception of those specifically permitted in § 342-30 herein, shall
be removed from the premises within 45 days of the adoption of this article.
§ 342-32. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a
cigarette vending machine on premises under his or her control, other
than those permitted in § 342-30 above, shall be subject to a fine of
$250. Each day on which such a machine is owned, operated, rented or
permitted on the premises shall result in an additional fine.
B. Upon a second conviction for selling tobacco products to someone
under 18 years of age from a cigarette vending machine utilizing a
lockout switch, all cigarette vending machines shall be prohibited on
the premises.
§ 342-30 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 342-32
342:1335
Chapter 352
WATER UTILITY
§ 352-1. Water Utility established.
There is hereby established in and for the Township of North Brunswick
a Water Utility, to be known as the "Township of North Brunswick Water
Utility," which, within this Chapter 352, may be referred to as the "Utility."
Any reference to the Utility shall include, by definition, authorized
employees or agents of the Township or Utility.
§ 352-2. Supervision of water service and supply.
Water for the usual domestic and manufacturing purposes shall be supplied
by the Township of North Brunswick to the inhabitants thereof under the
supervision of said Utility, subject to the ultimate control of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 352-3. Water Utility management.
There shall be designated by the Mayor of the Township of North Brunswick
members of the professional staff who shall have responsibility for the
management of Water Utility operations, which shall be primarily based in
the Department of Community Development.
§ 352-4. Contracts with water users.
The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person who uses water, and the fact of using water shall be
considered as expressing assent on the part of the user to be bound thereby.
§ 352-5. Applications for use of water.
All applications for the use of water must be made at the office of the Utility
in the form prescribed and must state fully and truly the various uses to
which the water is to be applied; should it subsequently be required for
other purposes, notice must be given before the desired change is made.
§ 352-6. Tapping; tapping fee.
A. Where a tap for a service connection to any water main is required,
application therefor shall be made either by the property owner or
contractor. Tapping of the Township water main shall only be completed
by pre-approved contractors. All excavation and trenchwork shall be
done by the plumber. No backfilling shall be done until after inspection
of work by the Water Utility or the Plumbing Subcode Official has been
made. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
§ 342-32 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-6
342:1336
§ 352-7. Ownership and maintenance of water service lines, water
pipes and fixtures. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
§ 352-8. Opening of curb valves.
B. The cost to perform all tapping of water mains shall be paid by the
property owner or authorized agent. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
19-17]
C. All water taps shall be inspected and approved by the Water Utility or
its agents, and all service lines and connections shall be approved by
the Plumbing Subcode Official prior to turning on the water.
D. The inspection and approval of all tapping of water mains as required
and described herein shall incur an inspection fee of $50 payable to the
Water Utility or its agents.
A. All persons owning property with water service shall own and be
responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of the water
service line from the water main to the water meter and downstream of
the water meter. All maintenance, repair, and replacement of the water
service line shall be done only by a Township pre-approved contractor.
A list of approved contractors can be obtained by contacting the water
dept. A water service line may be for domestic water service, fire
service or combined domestic water and fire service. The water service
line includes the water main tap, corporation and tapping valves, pipe,
curb valves and valve boxes, valve upstream of the meter, valve
downstream of the meter, test tee (if required), reduced-pressure zone
backflow preventer and its isolation valves (if required), meter pit (if
approved), check valve (if required), fire line detector check (fire
service, as required), and all other ancillary equipment. The Utility
owns and shall repair and replace the water meter, strainer (if
required), transmitter, touchpad, meter-to-touchpad wire, and tamper
security devices and other associated equipment. The owner is
responsible for keeping the Utility-owned equipment accessible,
unobstructed, clean and protected from damage. If the owner tampers
with or otherwise causes or allows to be caused damage to the Utilityowned
equipment, the Utility shall repair or replace the damaged
equipment and charge the owner for same.
B. The utility department may find it necessary to install a meter pit and
Utility-owned meter on the water service line. All other fixtures, except
for the water meter equipment, shall remain the responsibility of the
property owner.
A. Valves at the curb shall be maintained by the property owner, and the
Utility shall not be responsible for opening and closing curb valves. The
Utility or its authorized agents shall have the right to shut off the water
to make extensions, alterations or repairs. [Amended 8-5-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-17]
§ 352-6 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-8
342:1337
§ 352-9. Nonliability for damage.
The Township and Utility shall not be liable for any damage resulting from
failure to observe these regulations.
§ 352-10. Running water restricted.
In no case shall water be left running without a special permit from the
Utility.
§ 352-11. Multiple parties served through one pipe.
When two or more parties take water through one service pipe, provisions
in regard to the cutting off of the supply pipe shall be applicable to all
parties, although one or more of them may be innocent of any cause of
offense.
§ 352-12. Responsibility for rents.
Owners of premises will be held responsible for the rents of their tenants.
§ 352-13. Special permission to supply water.
No water taker shall supply water to parties not entitled to its use, except
upon permission from the Utility given in writing.
§ 352-14. Nonliability for stoppage; right to shut off water.
Consumers shall not be entitled to damage, nor will any part of a payment
be refunded, for any stoppage of supply occasioned by an accident to any
portion of the works, nor for stoppage for the purpose of additions or
repairs. The Utility or its authorized agents shall have the right to shut off
the water to make extensions, alterations or repairs.
§ 352-15. Accessibility for inspections.
All apparatus and places supplied with water must be accessible and open
to inspection by the Utility at all times, and all pipes and fixtures shall be
subject to rejection by said Utility if considered unsuitable for the purpose.
The Utility shall have unobstructed access to all water meters and other
Utility-owned equipment (See § 352-7 for definition.) for the purposes of
inspection, reading, testing, repair and replacement.
§ 352-16. Use of fire hydrant water.
No one will be allowed to use water through fire hydrants for any purpose
other than fire, except upon written permission from the Utility. Any person
B. Any persons turning on the water when it has been turned off at the
curb by the Utility shall be subject to the penalties contained in
§ 352-35 of this chapter.
§ 352-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-16
342:1338
wishing to use water from a fire hydrant other than for fire must follow
the following procedures: They must be approved by the Utility, withdraw
the water through a reduced-pressure-zone backflow preventer and meter
provided by the Utility, pay for the water consumed based on the Utility's
highest current retail rate, and use either the fire hydrant specifically
designated for such use at the Utility of Public Works or a fire hydrant
specifically approved for their use by written permission of the Utility.
Persons using the fire hydrant equipped with a backflow preventer-meter
designated for such use at the Utility of Public Works shall pay for the
water consumed and shall not be charged for use of the hydrant or backflow
preventer-meter. Persons using water through another fire hydrant
specifically approved for their use by the Utility shall pay for the water
consumed, pay a deposit of $2,000 for use of a Utility-provided backflow
preventer-meter, and pay a rental charge of $150 for use of the backflow
preventer-meter for up to three months. After three months, the user must
renew his deposit of $2,000 and pay an additional rental charge of $150 for
use of the backflow preventer-meter for up to another three months. The
deposit of $2,000 shall be returned, minus the cost of repair for any damage
to the backflow preventer-meter incurred during its use, upon return of the
backflow preventer-meter.
§ 352-17. Two-family houses and multiunit buildings treated
separately.
Each two-family house or multiunit building where there is more than one
owner shall be treated as individual units with each unit requiring its
own water service and meter. This provision shall not apply to multifamily
housing under single ownership, such as apartment buildings, but shall
apply to properties that are subdivided or converted to condominiums that
are or could be owned by more than one owner.
§ 352-18. Meters furnished by Utility.
A. All water meters shall be purchased by and provided by the Utility or its
authorized agents, and the standard for such meters and ancillary
equipment shall be approved by the Mayor and Council. All water
meters shall be compatible with the meter-reading system, software,
and equipment currently used or planned to be used by the Utility. All
water meters shall meet or exceed the minimum standards of accuracy
established by American Water Works Association, Manual M6, Water
Meters, Selection, Installation, Testing, and Maintenance. All water
meters located in pits outside the building must be in a location that is
easily accessed by Utility personnel for reading, inspection, calibration,
repair, or replacement in a location that does not accumulate
stormwater or debris or snow from snow clearing. All water meters
located inside of buildings must be in a location that can be easily
accessed by Utility personnel for reading the inside meter, for repairs,
calibration, inspection, or replacement. All water meters must be
installed with an operable valve on both sides of the meter within 24
inches from the meter. The Township of North Brunswick shall own all
§ 352-16 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-18
342:1339
water meters. The property owner shall protect and care for the water
meter, valves, piping, meter pit, wiring, and touchpad, including
protection from freezing and water, including flooding, clearing of
water or debris, and prevention of damage or interference by any
person or persons. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
B. From time to time the Township may find it necessary to replace said
water meters. Replacement shall be completed by Township staff and/or
approved contractors with initial cost being borne by the Township. The
property owner shall provide access for replacement. After three failed
attempts to schedule meter replacement, the property owner/renter
will receive a notice, and the Township will install a submersible pittype
meter, and the additional expense shall be borne by the property
owner and included in the utility bill. In addition, any observations or
repairs of code violations which are not included in Township project
may be charged to the property owner. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
19-17235]
C. Water meter fees.
(1) The property owner shall be charged for each meter supplied and
for the initial installation of a new connection or for the
replacement of an inadequately functioning existing meter whose
inadequate functioning is the result of the actions or neglect of the
property owner. The Utility shall determine the property owner's
fee to purchase each new meter. The fee for purchasing meters up
to two inches in size shall be:
Schedule of New Water Meter Fees
Meter Size
(inches)
Meter Installation
Fees Pit-Set Meter Fees
5/8 x 3/4 $56.50 $181.33
1 $56.50 $262.15
1 1/2 $115 $405.53
2 $115 $490.08
(2) For meters greater than two inches in size, the fee shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis in the following manner: the fee
shall be equal to the delivered purchase price of the meter as
determined by the Utility or its water supply operator.
D. A second water meter for irrigation and outside uses may be purchased
by a property owner upon approval of the Utility. A written application
shall be submitted to the Utility, which shall specify the need for a
second meter and the purpose for which it is to be utilized. The misuse
of a second meter shall constitute a violation, and the property owner
235. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B through E as
Subsections C through F, respectively.
§ 352-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-18
342:1340
§ 352-19. New service: expenses paid prior to use.
In case of any new service, the bills for work done or materials furnished by
the Utility must be paid before the water is turned on.
§ 352-20. Payment of bills; water for building purposes.
shall be subject to the fines and penalties specified in § 352-35 of this
chapter.
E. Customers of the system shall be charged an annual facility service
charge in accordance with the frequency of scheduled meter reads and
based upon the size of the meter as follows:
Meter Size
(inches)
Annual Cost for
Quarterly Read Meters
Annual Cost for
Monthly Read Meters
0.625 $34.80 $66.84
0.75 $39.60 $71.64
1 $48.28 $80.28
1.5 $75.20 $107.16
2 $151.52 $183.48
3 $370.80 $402.84
4 $533.52 $565.56
6 $677.32 $709.32
8 $1,042.36 $1,074.36
10 $1,469.12 $1,501.08
F. If an account has more than one meter at the same service address, the
portion of the annual facility service charge which represents the cost
of meter reading shall be assessed only on the first meter of the
account. Additional meters on the same account with the same service
address shall only pay that portion of the facility charge representing
the eventual replacement cost of the meter and not the meter reading
portion of the facility service charge.
A. All bills for water rents, fees, and other charges, except under building
permits, shall be owing to the Township of North Brunswick upon the
bill date. All rents, fees and charges that have not been paid within 30
days from the bill date shall bear interest at a rate of 8% per annum for
principal amounts of $1,500 or less and at the rate of 18% per annum
for principal amounts in excess of $1,500 or the maximum interest
rate(s) allowed by state law. Interest shall be charged from the 31st day
after the bill date until payment is made. Senior citizens, which shall be
defined for these purposes as those customers of the system who have
reached their 65th birthday and provided legitimate verifiable evidence
of their qualifying age, shall be entitled to a seven-day grace period for
the receipt of the payment of their water bills beyond the due date for
§ 352-18 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-20
342:1341
§ 352-21. Claims for deductions.
All claims for deductions from water bills shall be made in writing to the
Business Administrator of the Township of North Brunswick, who has full
power to determine such claims, subject to the review and approval of the
Township Council.
§ 352-22. Water rates and charges; bulk water. [Amended 8-5-2019
by Ord. No. 19-17]
payment shown on their bill, which will also be deemed to be the
38th day after the bill date, before such interest and penalties begin
to accrue. Payments shall be credited to the amounts owed in the
following sequence: [Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
(1) Interest on sewer rents;
(2) Interest on water rents;
(3) Miscellaneous charges;
(4) Sewer rents; and
(5) Water rents.
B. All users with meters larger than one inch shall be billed on a monthly
basis, except for meters dedicated to fire service or irrigation (lawn
sprinklers), which shall be billed quarterly. Users with meters one inch
or smaller may also be billed on a monthly basis if the Utility determines
it is necessary for meter reading efficiency.
C. For each reading of the meter requested in connection with the transfer
of title of real property, there is hereby imposed a fee of $20 in addition
to all other fees and charges.
A. The following rates and charges shall be paid for water consumption.
The Township Council of North Brunswick deems it necessary and
proper that the following water fees and charges be paid to the Utility
for the use of the potable water system within the Township.
Water Consumption Range
Rate per 1,000 Cubic Feet per Quarter
Effective date 0 to 1,200 CF
1,201 to 3,600
CF
More than
3,600 CF
July 1,2016 $2.628 $4.729 $5.254
July 1,2017 $2.706 $4.871 $5.412
July 1,2018 $2.788 $5.017 $5.574
July 1,2019 $2.871 $5.167 $5.741
§ 352-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-22
342:1342
For charges after September 1, 2019, on accounts that have received
a new meter that is now read in gallons, the charge for metered water
consumption shall be calculated upon the rate set forth hereinbelow
using the following conversion to estimate consumption: one cubic foot
equals 7.4805 gallons.
Water Rates Based on Water Consumption Range
Rate per 748 Gallons (Gal)
Effective date 0 to 9,000 Gal
9,000 to
27,000 Gal
More than
27,000 Gal
July 1, 2018 $2.788 $5.017 $5.574
July 1, 2019 $2.871 $5.167 $5.741
B. The monthly rate for fire service lines will be as follows:
Service Pipe Diameter in
Inches Monthly Rate
2 $9
3 $21
4 $35
6 $75
8 $130
10 $200
12 $295
C. A second meter connected in accordance with § 352-18C of this chapter
shall be billed quarterly based on actual water usage recorded by that
meter. The rate shall be the same as specified in Subsection A of this
section.
D. Connection fees.
(1) Residential properties. The applicant shall pay a connection charge
of $1,525 at the time of the application for each service connection
to the Utility water system.
(2) Commercial and industrial properties. Connection fees on
connections made by owners of commercial and industrial
properties shall be based on the schedule of fees as set forth below
for each building unit connected based on the size of connection:
Size Connection Fees
1 inch $1,525
1 1/2 inches $3,400
2 inches $5,625
§ 352-22 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-22
342:1343
§ 352-23. Meter charge for consumers of other water sources.
[Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
Any consumer using water in excess of 185,000 gallons per quarter who
shall discontinue such use by reason of arrangements for a water supply
from sources other than the Utility shall pay a service charge of $4 per
meter per month.
§ 352-24. Specifications for installation of water services.
A water service is the connection of a property owner's water system to the
Township of North Brunswick's water system for the purpose of supplying
potable water to the property owner. A water service includes the water
service line and water meter, including all connections, devices, fixtures and
appurtenances, from the connection to the Township's water main through
the water meter to the operating valve and backflow preventer on the
Size Connection Fees
3 inches $12,375
4 inches $21,250
6 inches $33,000
8 inches $47,475
10 inches $64,625
12 inches $84,350
(3) All connection fees shall be collected at the time the construction
permit is issued.
E. Bulk water rate.
(1) An entity who purchases water in bulk for resale to other
customers outside the geographic limits of the Township shall pay
$1,897 per million gallons per day for such purchase.
(2) This rate shall be indexed annually thereafter to the implicit price
deflator for state and local government as promulgated by the
United States Department of Labor. The indexed adjustment shall
take effect January 1 of each year.
(3) Service to such customers shall be provided only at metered
locations as approved by the Water Utility or its agents. All meters
shall be read and billed monthly. Payments shall become delinquent
if unpaid 30 days after billing. Any delinquent balance shall bear
interest at 1.5% per month for any unpaid balance.
(4) Meters shall be calibrated in accordance with industry standards
under the auspices of the Township. Upon written request and at
the expense of the customer, meters may be calibrated more
frequently.
§ 352-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-24
342:1344
downstream side of the water meter. There are two types of water services:
Domestic service provides water for domestic, commercial or industrial use
other than for fire suppression, and fire service provides water for fire
suppression. The installation of water service lines and water meters shall
use the construction materials specified herein and shall be constructed as
follows, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Utility:
A. Submission of plans and records. The applicant for a new water service
or change in size of water service must provide the Utility with a copy of
the design drawing and design details of the installation. Installation of
the service line must be in accordance with the submitted drawing. Any
changes in the service line's design, such as due to underground
obstructions, must be approved by the Utility and a record drawing of
the final design submitted to the Utility. The location of the tap and
service line from the water main up to the curbline or property edge
must be accurately shown (within one foot) on the design drawing or, if
the installation is different from the design drawing, on the final record
drawing.
B. Taps and service line size. The domestic water service line and fire
service line to a property may be separate or combined (separate taps
and service lines from the water main or a single tap and combined fire
and domestic service line from the water main that splits into separate
fire service and domestic service lines prior to and near the building
line). Taps for two-inch and smaller lines should be made 60° above
horizontal. The minimum tap size is one inch. Fire lines must be two
inches (minimum size) or four inches and larger. Fire service and
domestic service lines of three inches are not permitted. The service
line from the water main must be equal to or larger than the size of the
tap and remain that size to the fire meter, if a combined fire and
domestic service line is used, or the fire meter or domestic meter, as
applicable, if separate service lines are used. The property owner is
responsible for having a qualified professional determine the sizes of
the fire and domestic service lines, or the combined fire and domestic
service line, in accordance with all applicable regulations, codes and
insurance or other requirements.
C. Curb valves; valve box covers. For service lines that provide only
domestic service or only fire service, install the curb valve 18 inches
behind the curb or edge of the property. For combined fire and domestic
service lines, install both the domestic service curb valve and fire
service curb valve within six feet of the building line and within six feet
of each other, following the connection tee to split the domestic and fire
services. The valve boxes of tapping valves, gate valves and curb valves
on service lines or portions thereof providing only domestic service or
combined fire and domestic service shall have metal valve box covers
with the word "Water" cast into them. The valve boxes of tapping valves,
gate valves and curb valves on service lines providing only fire service
shall have valve box covers with the word "Fire" cast into them,
§ 352-24 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-24
342:1345
including the curb valve on a fire service line after it splits off of a
combined fire and domestic service line.
D. Service line connections and fittings. There may be no connections to
any water service line prior to any water meter used for billing
consumption with the one exception of the connection tee to split fire
and domestic services off of a combined fire and domestic service line.
There may be no bypasses of domestic water meters, detector checks
(other than the required bypass meter) or fire meters without written
approval of the Utility. Victaulic fittings are not allowed. Copper service
lines must be continuous from valve to valve (no connections or fittings
except the connection tee to split fire and domestic service off of a twoinch
combined fire and domestic service line) up to the maximum length
commercially available.
E. Domestic water service lines up to two inches.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
(a) Service saddle;
(b) Corporation valve;
(c) Use only soft K copper pipe from the tap to the most upstream
indoor ball valve; thereafter, use Schedule L straight copper
pipe to either the backflow preventer's downstream ball valve,
if a backflow preventer is required, or the meter's downstream
ball valve, whichever is farther downstream;
(d) Curb valve and valve box; and valve box with a valve box cover
located within five feet of the curb or road edge but not in
sidewalk. (If the property has a separate fire service line to the
main, the valve box cover must say "WATER" and be located
within six feet of the fire service line curb gate valve);
(e) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Ball valve upstream of water meter;
[2] Strainer, if required by Utility (purchased from Utility);
[3] Water meter (purchased from Utility). Leave at least six
inches of straight copper pipe on either side of the water
meter as space allows;
[4] Downstream ball valve;
[5] Backflow preventer (if required by the Construction
Office).
F. Fire service line of up to two inches.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
§ 352-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-24
342:1346
(a) Service saddle;
(b) Corporation valve. Use only soft K copper pipe from the tap
through to the most upstream indoor ball valve; thereafter, use
Schedule L straight copper pipe to the backflow preventer's
downstream ball valve;
(c) Curb valve and valve box, with a valve box cover that says
"FIRE" that is located within five feet of the curb or road edge
but not in sidewalk;
(d) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Ball valve upstream of meter;
[2] A two-inch fire meter approved by the utility with a ball
valve on the upstream side of the bypass meter and a
check valve followed by a ball valve on the downstream
side of the bypass meter;
[3] Downstream ball valve;
[4] Backflow preventer.
G. Combined fire and domestic water service line of up to two inches.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
(a) Service saddle;
(b) Corporation valve. Use only soft K copper pipe from the tap
through to the connection tee that splits the domestic water off
of the combined fire and domestic service line; thereafter, use
Schedule L straight copper pipe to the fire service line
backflow preventer's downstream ball valve and the domestic
service line meter's downstream ball valve;
(c) Connection tee to split the combined service line into separate
fire and domestic service lines.
(2) Fire service line downstream of the connection tee;
(a) Curb valve and valve box with a valve box cover that says
"FIRE" that is located within five feet of the curb or road edge
but not in sidewalk and is within six feet of the water service
curb gate valve;
(b) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Ball valve upstream of meter;
[2] A two-inch fire meter approved by the utility with a ball
valve on the upstream side of the bypass meter and a
§ 352-24 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-24
342:1347
check valve followed by a ball valve on the downstream
side of the bypass meter;
[3] Downstream ball valve;
[4] Backflow preventer.
(3) Water service line downstream of the connection tee:
(a) Curb gate valve and valve box with a valve box cover that says
"WATER" that is located within five feet of the curb or road
edge but not in sidewalk and is within six feet of the fire service
curb gate valve;
(b) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Ball valve upstream of meter;
[2] Strainer, if required, by the Utility (purchased from
Utility);
[3] Water meter (purchased from the Utility). Leave at least
six inches of straight copper pipe on either side of the
meter;
[4] Downstream ball valve;
[5] Backflow preventer, if required by the Construction Office.
H. Domestic water lines of four inches and greater.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
(a) Tapping sleeve;
(b) Tapping valve and valve box;
(c) Gate valve and valve box immediately after the tapping valve if
the water main is 16 inches or larger;
(d) Curb gate valve and valve box located within five feet of the
curb or road edge but not in sidewalk. (If the property has a
separate fire service line to the main, the valve box cover must
say "WATER" and be located within six feet of the fire service
line curb gate valve);
(e) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Gate valve upstream of the water meter;
[2] Strainer, if required by Utility (purchased from Utility);
[3] Water meter (purchased from Utility);
§ 352-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-24
342:1348
[4] Mechanical coupling;
[5] Test tee with a two-inch brass gate valve with a plug;
[6] Downstream gate valve;
[7] Backflow preventer, if required by the Construction Office.
(2) Use only ductile iron pipe with specified push-on or flanged
connections.
I. Fire lines of four inches and greater.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
(a) Tapping sleeve;
(b) Tapping valve and valve box;
(c) Gate valve and valve box immediately after the tapping valve if
the water main is 16 inches or larger;
(d) Curb gate valve and valve box located within five feet of the
curb or road edge but not in sidewalk. (If the property has a
separate domestic water service line to the main, the valve box
cover must say "FIRE" and be located within six feet of the
domestic water service line curb gate valve);
(e) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] OS&Y gate valve upstream of fire meter;
[2] Neptune High Performance Fire Meter;
[3] Mechanical coupling;
[4] Downstream OS&Y gate valve;
[5] Backflow preventer.
(2) Use only ductile iron pipe with specified push-on or flanged
connections.
J. Combined fire service and domestic water service lines of four inches
and greater.
(1) Starting from the water main tap:
(a) Tapping sleeve;
(b) Tapping valve and valve box;
(c) Gate valve and valve box immediately after the tapping valve if
the water main to be tapped is 16 inches or larger;
§ 352-24 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-24
342:1349
(d) Connection tee to split the combined service line into separate
fire service and domestic water service lines.
(2) Fire service line downstream from the connection tee:
(a) Curb gate valve and valve box with a valve box cover that says
"FIRE" that is located within five feet of the curb or road edge
but not in sidewalk and is within six feet of the domestic water
service curb gate valve;
(b) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] OS&Y gate valve upstream of fire meter;
[2] Neptune High Performance Fire Meter;
[3] Mechanical coupling;
[4] Downstream OS&Y gate valve;
[5] Backflow preventer.
(3) Domestic service line of four inches or greater downstream from
the connection tee (if the water service is two inches or less, follow
the requirements for those sized lines):
(a) Curb gate valve and valve box with a valve box cover that says
"WATER" that is located within five feet of the curb or road
edge but not in sidewalk and is within six feet of the fire service
curb gate valve;
(b) Following components to be installed inside a heated building
or, if approved by the Utility, a meter pit:
[1] Gate valve upstream of the water meter;
[2] Strainer, if required by Utility (purchased from Utility);
[3] Water meter (purchased from Utility);
[4] Mechanical coupling;
[5] Test tee with a two-inch brass gate valve with a plug;
[6] Downstream gate valve;
[7] Backflow preventer, if required by the Construction Office.
(4) Use only ductile iron pipe with specified push-on or flanged
connections.
K. Internal domestic service piping. Internal piping is also subject to
plumbing code requirements.
§ 352-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-24
342:1350
L. Fire line service piping. Fire service lines are also subject to fire code
requirements.
M. Irrigation meters and service lines. Water meters used solely for
irrigation (watering of outdoor lawns and plants) must be purchased
from the Utility and must be installed through a connection tee on the
domestic water service line (not a fire service line or combined water
and fire service line) upstream from the domestic water meter's
upstream valve and downstream of any connection tee that splits the
domestic water service line from a combined fire and domestic water
service line. The irrigation water meter service line must have both an
upstream and downstream ball valves (two inches and below) or gate
valves (four inches and above) located at least six inches away from the
irrigation water meter. If the service line from the water main is a
combined fire and domestic water service line, there must also be a ball
valve (two-inch and below) or gate valve (four-inch and above) on the
domestic service line downstream of the connection tee splitting the
domestic service line off of the combined fire and domestic service line
and upstream of the connection tee splitting the irrigation water
service line off of the domestic water service line. Irrigation water
meters may not be installed on the same service line that flows through
the domestic water meter (upstream or downstream of the domestic
water meter).
N. Meters; strainers; touch pads; meter-to-touch-pad wires. All water
meters, strainers and fire meters shall be purchased from the Utility.
Strainers are required for all compound meters, all turbine meters of
six inches or greater and any other meter the Utility feels a strainer is
needed for. Touch pads must be located on the outside of the building in
an unobstructed location that is easily accessible to the Utility. The
meter-to-touch-pad wire must be exposed and accessible or run in
electrical conduit to facilitate its replacement. Meters for waterirrigation
systems must be connected to the domestic water service line
prior to the domestic water meter, which connection must be visible for
inspection at all times.
O. Testing. Every newly installed water service line shall be subjected by
the plumber to a water test under the main pressure for a period of at
least 10 minutes. All pipes and appurtenances shall remain uncovered
for the duration of the test, and shall show no sign of leakage, and are
subject to inspection by the Township of North Brunswick. Upon
completion of installation and pressure testing, the service pipe shall be
flushed for a period of 30 minutes.
P. Installation of water service line. The water service line shall be laid at
a depth of at least four feet below grade. The water service line must be
run in a straight line from the water main to its entry into the building
and, if physically possible, perpendicular to the water main. Except
where the subsurface conditions make it impracticable, the water
service line may be otherwise laid, upon the approval of the Utility of a
revised plan showing the proposed location of the water service line.
§ 352-24 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-24
342:1351
Copper water service lines shall be laid with no connections between
any valves and the building foundation or meter-pit entry except for the
connection tee to split the fire and domestic services of a combined fire
and domestic service line. Copper connections may only be by approved
flare or compression fittings. All service pipe from one inch up to two
inches shall be bedded and backfilled to 12 inches over the pipe with
sand before placing the remainder of trench backfill. All service pipe
four inches and larger shall be bedded on three-quarter-inch clean
crushed stone and select fill placed to 12 inches over the pipe before
placing the remainder of trench backfill.
Q. Replacement of a service line. When an existing water service line (fire,
domestic or combined) is replaced, the abandoned water service line
must be cut and capped at the water main by turning off the corporation
valve or tapping valve, disconnecting the abandoned water service line,
capping the outflow of the corporation valve or tapping valve, and
removing all valve boxes on the abandoned water service line.
R. The Utility or Department of Community Development may provide
diagrams (Figures 1, 2 and 3)236 of the water and fire service line
specifications provided herein. Should any discrepancy between those
diagrams and this section occur, this section shall have precedence.
S. All construction materials specified below must be used, but Utilityapproved
equivalents may be substituted:
(1) Tapping sleeves for four-inch and larger taps: Mueller H-615 (fourinch
to twenty-four-inch D.I., non-pitcast C.I.), H-619 (four-inch to
twelve-inch A.C.), H-616 (ten-inch to twenty-four-inch pitcast C.I.).
(2) Resilient wedge gate tapping valve: Mueller T2360-16, Flange x
M.J. with accessories; S.S. bolts and nuts with gland with bonding
set screws and low zinc bronze valve stem, open counter clockwise.
(3) Resilient wedge gate valve: Mueller A-2360-20, M.J x M.J. with
accessories; S.S. bolts and nuts with gland with bonding set screws
and low zinc bronze valve stem, open counter clockwise.
(4) Resilient wedge gate valve OS&Y: Mueller A-2360-20, MJ x M.J.
with accessories; S.S. bolts and nuts with gland with bonding set
screws and low zinc bronze valve stem, open counter clockwise.
(5) Hydrant: Mueller Super Centurian 250, A-423, three-way, five-andone-
fourth-inch main valve, open left, two two-and-one-half-inch
hose nozzles and one four-and-one-fourth-inch pumper nozzle,
National Standards Threads, six-inch inlet with gland with bonding
set screws.
(6) Ductile iron (D.I.) pipe, U.S. Pipe, Class 52 or equivalent Pressure
Class Cement Lined Ductile Iron Pipe, Tyton Joint® with FIELD
236. Editor's Note: Said figures are on file in the Township offices.
§ 352-24 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-24
342:1352
§ 352-25. Estimated charges where meters fail to register.
If a meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumption will be
charged at the rate of the average daily consumption as shown by the meter
when in order.
§ 352-26. All metered water to be charged for.
All water which passes through a meter will be charged for, whether used
or wasted.
LOK 350 gaskets. The minimum size D.I. pipe for water mains is
eight inches.
(7) Ductile iron fittings: U.S. Pipe, Trim Tyton® fittings with FIELD
LOK 350 gaskets.
(8) Two-inch detector check: Hersey Weighted Lever Detector Check
Valve Model DC with trim kit. Purchase the bypass meter from the
Utility.
(9) Service saddles: For one-inch and two-inch taps: Mueller BR2RB
series, Bronze, Double Strap for C.I., D.I., and A.C. pipe with AWWA
taper thread (Mueller "CC"); for larger taps: as specified by the
Utility.
(10) Corporation valve: Mueller B-2508 300tm.
(11) Curb gate valve (one-inch and two-inch): Mueller B-25209. Mueller,
110 Conductive, Compression Connections; for larger sizes as
specified by the Utility.
(12) Copper service pipe (one-inch and two-inch): any national brand of
soft-rolled K copper.
(13) Service fittings (one-inch and two-inch): Mueller, 110 Conductive,
Compression Connections. Victaulic fittings may not be used.
(14) Ball valve (one-inch and two-inch): American Valve, T200C Brass
Full Port with compression ends.
(15) Valve box: Bingham & Taylor, Cast Iron (C.I.) three-piece, five-andone-
fourth-inch shaft with C.I. ring and cover, adjustment 20 inches
to 84 inches, screw type, No. 8 round base with the word specified
herein on the round cover.
(16) Service curb box (curb gate valve box): Bingham & Taylor, Plastic,
two-inch to two-and-one-half-inch shaft, screw type, including base
plate, adjustment 38 inches to 60 inches, with the word specified
herein on the round cover.
(17) Four-inch and larger fire meter: Neptune High Performance Fire
Service Turbine Meter.
§ 352-24 VENDING MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED § 352-27
342:1353
§ 352-27. Plumbers and pipe fitters to make written reports.
Plumbers and pipe fitters shall make full written return for each service,
upon blanks furnished by the Utility, of the ordinary and special uses
to which water is to be applied, whether for new works, alterations or
additions, with a full description of all apparatus and arrangements for
using the water. The return shall be made within 48 hours after the
completion of the work. The water will in no case be turned on until such
return is made.
§ 352-28. Plumbers prohibited from turning on water.
No plumber or pipe fitter shall be allowed to turn on the water.
§ 352-29. Strength of plumbing and piping subject to approval.
The strength of all plumbing and piping will be subject to the approval of
the proper officers of the Utility.
§ 352-30. Permission required for certain water connections.
No water connection over 100 feet away from any water main shall be made
unless permission therefor is obtained from the Mayor and Council.
§ 352-31. Outside hydrants and faucets.
No outside hydrants or faucets will be permitted except for sprinkling and
fire protection unless permission therefor is obtained from the Utility.
§ 352-32. Sewer permit required with certain tapping permits.
At the time that a permit is granted for tapping a water main, a sewer
permit must be obtained for the same premises, if not already connected
therewith, if such premises are located on a street wherein both water and
sewer pipes are laid, and an inspection must be made and approval secured
of such water connection by the Utility and of such sewer connection by the
Plumbing Subcode Official before the work is covered.
§ 352-33. Check valve on inlet pipes required.
Whenever an apparatus is installed to back water, there must be a check
valve on the inlet pipe thereof to prevent the water from flowing back
through the meter caused by a decreased pressure in the street main.
§ 352-34. Temporary restrictions in emergencies.
In case of emergency when, by reason of drought or otherwise, the available
supply of water becomes dangerously low, the Mayor may, by proclamation,
adopt such temporary restrictions upon the use of water as are necessary
to conserve the available supply.
§ 352-27 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 352-35
342:1354
§ 352-35. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Director of the Department
of Community Development, or his designees and agents of the Utility,
specifically including but not limited to the Plumbing Subcode Official
and the Township Engineer, to concurrently enforce the provisions of this
chapter as herein provided.
§ 352-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 353
WILDLIFE FEEDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Feeding of waterfowl — See Ch. A434.
§ 353-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned, controlled or operated
by the Township of North Brunswick and to protect the public health, safety
and welfare and to prescribe the penalties for failure to comply therefor.
§ 353-2. Definitions.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting such as the legal baiting of fish and/or
game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 353-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned,
controlled or operated by the Township of North Brunswick, any wildlife,
§ 352-35 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 353-3
353:1355
excluding confined wildlife (e.g., wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation centers or unconfined wildlife at environmental educational
centers).
§ 353-4. Enforcement.
§ 353-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 356
WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 330.
§ 356-1. License required.
No person shall be authorized to provide wrecker service within the
Township of North Brunswick without first obtaining a license from the
Township Clerk in accordance with this chapter.
§ 356-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — An individual or a legally formed business entity which seeks
to obtain a license from the Township to furnish wrecker services within the
Township pursuant to this chapter.
BUSINESS LOCATION — A base of operation within the Township which
is staffed during the normal business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
excluding holidays. Such storage facility shall be a secure facility, and if
an outdoor facility, be lighted from dusk to dawn. The business must be
clearly marked with signs identifying the name of the business and the
hours of operation. The applicant must be the owner or principal tenant at
the location, which shall include a permanent facility with an office, a patron
waiting area, a restroom for patron use and a secured vehicle storage area
which is contained within an enclosed building and/or a fenced-in area,
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the
Department of Public Works.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 353-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-2
353:1356
as described in §§ 356-3C and 356-14 hereof, which shall be used for the
storage of towed vehicles.
DEAD STORAGE — The storage by an operator of a towed vehicle which
was delivered to the storage yard by a wrecker as a result of the provision
of wrecker services for the vehicle, where such storage continues overnight
or for more than 12 hours from the time that a vehicle is removed from
the scene from which it was towed, whichever is longer (i.e., there will be
no storage charge for the same-day removal of a towed vehicle), and such
storage is unrelated to either any repairs or continuing services which are
being rendered by the operator at the request of the vehicle's owner.
DECOUPLING FEE — A charge by a towing company for releasing a motor
vehicle to its owner or operator when the vehicle has been, or is about to
be, hooked or lifted by a wrecker, but prior to the vehicle actually having
been moved or removed from the property.
GARAGE — A nonresidential building where motor vehicles can be
sheltered, stored, repaired and made ready for use.
LICENSE — The permit to perform wrecker services as hereinafter
described. The license is granted to a wrecker operator to provide these
services with those vehicles specified on the application for that wrecker
operator.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and
motorized skateboards.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
OPERATOR or WRECKER OPERATOR — Anyone who engages in the
business of providing wrecker services pursuant to this chapter or who
operates a licensed wrecker.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER — The owner or lessee of private property, or
an agent of such owner or lessee, but shall not include a private property
towing company acting as an agent of such owner or lessee.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING — The nonconsensual towing from private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
motor vehicle that is parked illegally, parking during a time at which such
parking is not permitted, or otherwise parked without authorization, or the
immobilization of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor
vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either directly or indirectly.
This term shall not include the towing of a motor vehicle that has been
abandoned on private property in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5, provided
that the abandoned vehicle is reported to the appropriate law enforcement
agency prior to removal and the vehicle is removed in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6.
WAITING TIME — The period of time between the arrival of a wrecker
on the scene to which it was called by the police and the time at which
§ 356-2 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-2
353:1357
the wrecker is actually permitted to commence its efforts to render any
required wrecker services. Waiting time shall not start earlier than the 15th
minute after the wrecker service arrives at the scene.
WRECKER — A vehicle licensed pursuant to this chapter which is used to
tow or remove other vehicles usually so damaged or disabled or impounded
that they cannot proceed under their own power and further described
herein.
WRECKER SERVICE — Such roadside assistance as vehicle towing,
transport, conveyance or removal and/or storage services as are to be
provided by a licensed operator pursuant to this chapter.
§ 356-3. License; duration; application.
A. No person operating a wrecker shall operate a wrecker within the
Township of North Brunswick nor engage in the business of operating
or offering the services of a wrecker within the Township without first
obtaining the necessary licenses as hereinafter provided from the
Township Clerk. Every vehicle operating as a wrecker shall have its own
separate license, even though it is owned or operated by a person
having other validly licensed wreckers.
B. Duration of license. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire
on the last day of December of the year of issue.
C. Application of license; required information; affidavit. Applications for
licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon printed forms prepared
and made available in the Township Clerk's office and shall state:
(1) The complete legal name, trade name (if any), home address and
proposed or actual business address of the applicant, and whether
the applicant is the owner, lessee or bailee. In the event the
applicant is a corporation, the names, addressees and home
telephone numbers of every person owning 10% or more of said
corporation shall be listed.
(2) An abstract of the driving history of each operator of a licensed
wrecker and a listing of each criminal conviction of any such
operator; a statement of any denial of any license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle or a towing service for any person listed in
Subsection C(1) by any other governmental body.
(3) Evidence that the applicant has at least three years' experience of
providing properly insured towing services with references
available.
(4) Evidence that the applicant has a business location within the
Township of North Brunswick on which there is situated a
permanent facility and a secured, vehicle storage area which is
contained within an outside area surrounded by a chain link,
stockade or other such type restrictive fencing which is at least six
feet in height. The storage area shall be adequate for properly
§ 356-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-3
353:1358
§ 356-4. Investigation of applicant.
accommodating and protecting all motor vehicles which may be
towed. No operator will be permitted to store, place or otherwise
cause or permit any towed vehicles to be stored, placed, parked or
otherwise located upon any public property or any Township street
or any property which is not zoned for such storage, except as may
be specifically directed by the Township police in the course of
clearing a collision scene or in regard to an official investigation or
vehicle seizure. The entire storage area must be lighted during the
hours of darkness so that the interior of the storage area is visible.
(5) A certification from the Township's Zoning Officer that the business
location is a permitted use pursuant to Township ordinances.
(6) A description of each vehicle operated as a wrecker, including year,
make, model, type, serial number and any other information which
is necessary or proper to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and
to determine whether the terms of this chapter have been satisfied.
A. Investigation and inspection; approval or denial of application. Upon
receipt of an application as provided for herein, the Township Clerk's
office shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and of the
subject business location. Inspection of the business location shall be
made by both assigned police officers and code enforcement officials of
the Township. Said inspection shall be completed within 30 days. The
Township Clerk's office may request assistance from the Police
Department through the Deputy Chief of Police or his or her designee
for the making and completion of such investigation and inspections, or
may delegate the inspections of the vehicles to an independent person,
who is not a wrecker operator, and who shall be qualified by experience
and training to make such inspection. An inspection report for each
vehicle shall be filed with the Township Clerk's office and shall clearly
indicate whether each vehicle complies with the requirements and
standards of this chapter as set forth herein.
B. The Police Department of the Township of North Brunswick shall
conduct a thorough background check of the licensee, its officers,
principals and employees prior to the granting of a license within 30
days after receipt of a completed application. A conviction for a
disorderly persons offense and/or a motor vehicle violation evidencing
unsafe driving habits or a disregard for the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Laws will be considered ample reason to disqualify any applicant or a
particular employee. Each prospective licensee shall furnish with its
application executed background check waivers for all officers,
principals and employees in the form provided by the Police
Department.
C. A report shall be made to the Director of Police as to whether the
wrecker is in compliance with the requirements and standards of this
chapter.
§ 356-3 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-4
353:1359
§ 356-5. Insurance requirements.
The licensee must, prior to the issuance of any license, deposit with the
Township Clerk the following insurance polices or certificates, specifically
naming the Township as an additional insured:
D. Upon completion of the investigation and inspection, the Director of
Police shall forward a report of his or her findings and a proposed
classification of the applicant as light-duty motor vehicle accident, lightduty
miscellaneous, heavy-duty motor vehicle accident, heavy-duty
miscellaneous or not qualified for the call list in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter. The Township Clerk shall either
refuse to approve the application or shall classify and refer the
application to the governing body for approval pursuant to § 356-6
hereof and shall inform the applicant of his/her decision. If the
application is approved, the applicant shall supply the Township Clerk
with the insurance policies or certificates as required.
A. Each operator shall maintain, during the term of its license, the
following minimum insurance coverages:
(1) Public liability insurance covering personal injury and property
damage in the minimum amount of $750,000, each accident, single
limit, for light-medium-duty trucks.
(2) Public liability insurance covering personal injury and property
damage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000, each accident,
single limit for heavy-duty trucks.
(3) Workmen's compensation insurance, as required by the State of
New Jersey, including employer's liability coverage with a limit of at
least $100,000.
(4) Comprehensive general liability insurance, in an amount of not less
than $1,000,000 for personal injuries, per occurrence, and $1,000
for property damage, per occurrence, including premises
operations and products/completed operations.
(5) Garage-keepers' and garage liability insurance, in an amount not
less than $100,000.
(6) All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing for
collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
B. All policies of insurance shall contain an endorsement requiring that at
least 15 days' notice shall be given to the Township Clerk in the event of
any material change in or cancellation of the policy.
C. All policies of insurance shall be issued by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and shall remain in
full force and effect during the entire term of the license.
§ 356-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-5
353:1360
§ 356-6. Approval.
The Clerk shall classify and refer an application to the governing body for
approval only when the following requirements have been met:
D. No license shall be issued until an approved applicant files insurance
certificates verifying all of the above requirements. The insurance
certificates shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
E. Any licensee who has a lapse in any insurance policy, for any reason
whatsoever, shall have his/her license immediately suspended. Upon
notice of lapse of coverage, the Township Clerk shall immediately serve
notice of suspension upon the licensee, with copy of said notice
provided to the Police Chief/designee. The suspension shall remain in
effect until such time as the insurance is restored.
F. All wreckers on the Township's rotating call list shall name the
Township of North Brunswick as an additional insured and shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Township of North Brunswick from
any claims for injury or property damage arising out of, or in any way
related to, the operation of any tow truck, towing service or storage
yard, pursuant to this chapter. Proof of compliance with the
requirements of this section shall be evidenced by a certificate of
insurance issued by the insurance carrier at the time of application for
the license. The operator shall further defend the Township of North
Brunswick, at the operator's expense, in connection with any claim, suit
or action brought against the Township of North Brunswick, and arising
out of the operation of any tow truck, towing service or towing yard,
pursuant to this chapter.
A. The wreckers to be used, on inspection, meet with the required
minimum standards for the light-duty motor vehicle accident, light-duty
miscellaneous or heavy-duty motor vehicle accident or heavy-duty
miscellaneous.
B. Adequate proof of the applicant's ability to produce insurance policies
as required herein has been submitted.
C. The applicant and proposed operators are properly qualified to operate
and conduct a wrecker service in the Township in accordance with the
requirements as are set forth in this chapter.
D. All wrecker operators are currently licensed drivers by the State of New
Jersey and such license(s) is (are) not presently revoked or suspended
for any reason.
E. The applicant is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and
all other governing laws, statutes and ordinances.
F. Each wrecker has been properly licensed and inspected by the State of
New Jersey and has the necessary stickers affixed thereto. No vehicle
§ 356-5 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-6
353:1361
§ 356-7. Denial.
If the Township Clerk denies an application, a letter setting forth the
reasons for the denial shall be sent by the Township Clerk's office by
certified mail to the applicant within 72 hours of such decision. The
applicant may thereafter request a hearing pursuant to § 356-25 hereof.
§ 356-8. Indemnification of Township.
The application of any operator for a license pursuant to this chapter
shall imply an agreement by the operator that, upon the issuance of a
license, the licensee shall indemnify the Township of North Brunswick
against all statutory, common law or contractual claims of third parties
relating to any acts or services performed or rendered or which failed to
be performed or rendered by the licensee. Any formal agreement to provide
said indemnification shall be in such form as is approved by the Township
Attorney and shall be properly executed by the operator and attested to by
an authorized notary of the State of New Jersey.
§ 356-9. Cancellation of license.
As previously stated herein, the termination or expiration of any of the
insurance coverages which are required herein shall be cause for the
immediate suspension of a wrecker's license unless renewal or replacement
of such coverage is timely made in compliance with the applicable
requirements as are set forth hereinabove.
§ 356-10. Confusing vehicle color schemes or name prohibited.
No licensee may use a color scheme or name, monogram or insignia that
would conflict with or, in the opinion of the Deputy Chief of Police/designee,
imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by any other
person, firm, or corporation operating a tow truck or a towing agency in
such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
§ 356-11. Light duty.
shall be licensed as a wrecker which is using dealer's license plates or
which has failed the state inspection.
A. Any person may apply for a license to provide light-duty wrecker
services as defined herein. The licensee must own/lease at least three
vehicles to qualify under this chapter, two of which must be flatbed
trucks and the third a conventional hydraulic wrecker.
B. A light-duty wrecker shall be able to handle all makes of passenger
vehicles and small trucks, such as pickup, small-panel trucks and small
dump trucks (up to 12,000 pounds), and must have or be equipped with
the following:
§ 356-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-11
353:1362
§ 356-12. Heavy duty.
Any person may apply for a license to provide heavy-duty wrecker services
as defined herein. The licensee must own/lease at least three heavy-duty
tow vehicles that are hydraulic in nature to qualify under this chapter. In
addition, the following equipment is also required:
(1) A valid Motor Vehicles Commission ("MVC") registration and, if
required, a valid inspection certificate.
(2) A valid MVC amber light permit.
(3) Dual rear wheels.
(4) The garage within the licensee's business location must be
equipped with a "Go Jacks" or a comparable device.
(5) A power takeoff controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 3/8 inch or equivalent.
(6) A comparable weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a
minimum of 5,500 pounds.
(7) A three-eighths-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety
chain are not to be attached in any form or manner to the same part
of the wrecker.
(8) All towing vehicles must have amber emergency lights mounted on
each wrecker so as to warn approaching traffic of their presence.
The size and locations of these amber lights must conform to the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission standards.
(9) All emergency flashing lights shall be such candlepower in
intensity as to be visible 1/4 mile away.
(10) One fire extinguisher (five-pound carbon dioxide or dry powder).
(11) One broom, a debris container and a shovel.
(12) A minimum of five gallons of absorbent granules for cleaning up
fluid spills.
(13) All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees are
required to wear reflectorized traffic safety vests when working at
the scene.
(14) Detachable light bar with running, stop and turn lights.
(15) Dual rear wheels.
(16) Mirrors on the wrecker must extend beyond the width of the
vehicle being towed to provide a clear line of sight.
A. Dual rear wheels.
§ 356-11 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-12
353:1363
B. Manufactured rating gross vehicle weight of 40,000 pounds.
Manufactured rating may be obtained from the factory where the truck
originates. Other written evidence of gross vehicle weight may be
accepted, if verified.
C. Power takeoff controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness of 5/8
of an inch.
D. All towing vehicles must have amber emergency lights mounted on
each wrecker so as to warn approaching traffic of their presence. The
size and locations of these amber lights must conform to the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicle standards.
E. All lights shall be of such candlepower in intensity as to be visible 1/4 of
a mile away.
F. One-half-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety chain are not to
be attached in any form or manner on the same part of the wrecker.
G. Air brakes.
H. Connecting air lines for connection with the air compressor and air
brake lines of the towed vehicle.
I. Detachable light bar with running, stop and turn lights.
J. One fire extinguisher (five-pound carbon dioxide or dry powder).
K. One broom, shovel and debris container.
L. A minimum of 10 gallons of absorbent granules for cleaning up fluid
spills.
M. Must be equipped with portable lighting equipment when required.
N. All wrecker operators and their agents and/or employees are required
to wear reflectorized traffic safety vests when working at the scene.
O. In the event that a recovery of a heavy-duty vehicle is warranted, the
responding tow company shall assign a recovery supervisor to the
scene who must have obtained a Level 3 national driver license
certification or equivalent within nine months of availability and must
have received training in an industry-recognized course. Although all
personnel on the recovery scene do not need recovery training, each
recovery supervisor must meet the listed requirements.
P. One three-stage hydraulic crane with a minimum lifting capacity of 45
tons, one hydraulic low-boy trailer capable of holding trucks or buses
with a minimum of 46 feet in length, one fifth-wheel unit and one
enclosed trailer at least 40 feet in length along with air cushion
recovery system, including starter cushions, with motor-driven air
pump, with a lifting capacity of 100,000 pounds. This provision shall not
apply to any tower exempt from these requirements pursuant to a court
order or stipulation previously executed.
§ 356-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-13
353:1364
§ 356-13. Right of inspection.
The Director shall maintain due vigilance over all wreckers to see that
they are kept in a safe condition for transporting and towing vehicles
and shall have the right at all times to inspect all licensed wreckers and
shall maintain a record, in writing, of the report of all inspections. If
at any time the Director of Police or his or her designee shall find the
equipment inadequate or unsafe, or that the licensee has violated any
subsections of this chapter, including, without limit, the charging of fees or
the requirements relative to the type of facilities or the amount of space
which is to be available for accommodating and storing motor vehicles, the
Director of Police or his or her designee shall have the power to demand
immediate correction, and if not corrected promptly and properly, shall then
have the power to issue a notice of violation and violation in accordance
with § 356-25 hereof.
§ 356-14. Protection and storage of towed vehicles.
A. The wrecker shall be responsible for any damages occurring to a
vehicle due to the wrecker's negligence after the wrecker has taken
possession of same and until the owner or his or her representative
reassumes possession.
B. Each light-duty storage facility must be of sufficient size to
accommodate at least 15 vehicles at the business location. Each
business location must contain at least 3,000 square feet of usable
vehicle storage space, whether indoors or within a secured fenced-in
area, or both. Each heavy-duty storage facility must be of sufficient size
to accommodate at least three tractor trailers at the business location.
C. All storage facilities must have office personnel normally available on
site to arrange for the release and return of stored vehicles from 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, excluding holidays. A
wrecker shall provide reasonable accommodations for after-hours
release of stored vehicles and, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.7(c), a
wrecker that does not release a vehicle to its owner during normal
business hours (i.e., 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) shall not charge a fee for
after-hours release.
D. It is recognized by the Township that the wrecker's yard may be utilized
for purposes other than the needs of the Township. However, the
wrecker will be required to keep available enough space to meet the
prescribed license requirements at all times.
E. When the Township directs the wrecker company to tow and place in
storage a motor vehicle found abandoned, the rules and regulations
prescribed in N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 shall apply. The Township will use its
best efforts to assist in the disposal of the abandoned vehicle within the
time frames prescribed under state statute. Fees for the storage of such
abandoned vehicles towed at the direction of the Township shall be paid
§ 356-13 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-14
353:1365
§ 356-15. Public auction of abandoned motor vehicles; vehicle
inspections.
in accordance with § 356-21A(1)(d) hereinbelow in accordance with the
rates established by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50.
A. The Township of North Brunswick shall hold public auctions of towed
and stored motor vehicles that have been deemed abandoned pursuant
to the terms and regulations set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 at least three
times in given calendar year.
B. Prior to the time of any public auction, operators of facilities storing
towed vehicles shall allow the public to inspect the vehicles to be sold at
such public auction. Any operators of a facility storing towed vehicles
who takes any actions to impede, delay, defer, prohibit or interfere with
the inspection of such vehicles for public auction shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 356-15D hereinbelow.
C. Operators of facilities storing towed vehicles shall cooperate and
comply with all noticing provisions promulgated by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 as
follows:
(1) When the Township shall have noticed the owner of a towed
vehicle, after verification of the owner from the Chief Administrator
of the Motor Vehicle Commission, the Township shall also notify the
operator of the facility storing the said abandoned motor vehicle,
which notice shall be given by telephone, mail, facsimile or
electronic notification, and such notice shall include the name and
address of the owner of record and the holder of any security
interest in the stored motor vehicle.
(2) Upon receipt of such notice from the Township, the operator of the
facility storing the abandoned vehicle shall provide notice to the
owner of record and to any security interest holder in the following
manner:
(a) The notice shall be by first class mail, with a certificate of
mailing, and shall include a schedule of the costs imposed for
storing the motor vehicle and instructions explaining how the
owner of record or the security interest holder may claim the
stored motor vehicle.
(b) Storage fees.
[1] Except as provided in § 356-15C(2)(c) below, if the
operator of a facility storing such abandoned motor vehicle
fails to provide such notice to the owner of record and to
the security interest holder within 30 days of the date on
which the storer of the vehicle received the notice
required from the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1(4), the maximum amount that operator of a
storage facility may charge the owner of record or the
§ 356-14 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-15
353:1366
security interest holder for storing such motor vehicle
shall be $750 for private towing, provided that the owner
of record or security interest holder submits a proper
claim for the vehicle not later than the 30th day following
the date the notice is delivered from the Township to the
operator of a facility storing such motor vehicle.
[2] Storage fees to be paid by the Township for towing and
storage of vehicles undertaken at the request of the Police
Department shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the day
following the date of the tow as follows:
[a] A limit of $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage per
vehicle.
[b] A limit of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and
any day thereafter.
[c] A limit of $400 per vehicle stored regardless of the
duration of the storage, except that a waiver may be
granted for good cause by the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of
Community Affairs upon the request of the Township.
(c) Should a vehicle be abandoned due to the death or
incapacitation of the driver or any passenger, the operator of a
facility storing such vehicle shall charge the owner of record or
the security interest holder no more than $100 for the first 72
hours after such vehicle is placed on the premises.
(d) If the owner of record or security interest holder fails to submit
a proper claim for the vehicle on or before that 30th day, the
operator of the facility storing such motor vehicle may charge
the security interest holder reasonable costs for the removal
and storage of the motor vehicle. If the notice is properly
provided by the person storing the motor vehicle, the operator
of the storage facility may charge the owner of record or the
security interest holder reasonable costs for the removal and
storage of the motor vehicle from the date the operator
removed and stored the motor vehicle.
(e) The operator of the storage facility may assess the security
interest holder for the actual costs of providing the required
notice.
(3) The Township will use its best efforts to assist in the disposal of the
abandoned vehicle within the time frames prescribed in N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1.
D. Violations and penalties.
§ 356-15 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-15
353:1367
§ 356-16. Conduct of operators generally.
A wrecker license hereunder shall be issued subject to the following
conditions whereby no person owning or operating a wrecker or other
towing vehicles shall:
(1) Failure of the operators of facilities storing towed vehicles to
comply with the provisions of this § 356-15, Public auction of
abandoned motor vehicles; notices required, and of N.J.S.A. 39:10-1
et seq., or to take any actions to impede, delay, defer, prohibit or
interfere with the inspection of vehicles for public auction, or with
the public auction of abandoned vehicles by the Township of North
Brunswick, shall be deemed a violation of this § 356-15, and shall,
upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment or community
service for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment or community service, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge.
(2) The continuation of any violations of this § 356-15 on each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation(s) may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
(3) Operators of facilities on the Township rotating call list who are
adjudicated in violation of this § 356-15 shall be removed from the
rotating call list on a permanent basis.
A. No person owning or operating a wrecker or other towing vehicles,
while waiting for assignment, shall stand at any public street or
intersection or any public or private property, other than his or her own,
without first obtaining the consent of the police officer in charge (of
clearing the accident scene or of removing any disabled vehicles) or
from the owner of the property.
B. No person owning or operating a wrecker licensed under this chapter
shall permit or invite loitering within or near his or her wrecker.
C. No person shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of
another wrecker nor shall he/she solicit or divert prospective patrons of
a requested garage in the Township to another garage.
D. No person shall solicit, demand or receive from a person any
commission or fee except the proper fee for transporting the vehicle.
E. No person shall intercept police calls by radio or obtain information as
to the location of the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle by means
of interception of police radio calls for the purpose of procuring towing
business.
§ 356-15 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-16
353:1368
F. Offer or pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person or to any
police officer or Township employee for any information as to the
location of any accident or disabled vehicle or for soliciting the
employment of services described herein. The provisions of this section
shall apply to the operation of any wrecker on the streets of the
Township, whether such wrecker is licensed or unlicensed, and without
regard to whether or not the owner, operator or licensee of such
wrecker is engaged in the business of operating a wrecker within the
Township.
G. The licensee who is called to the scene of an accident or other type
incident shall be required to clean up the debris at the scene of the
incident or accident, to the satisfaction of the police officer in charge at
the scene.
H. Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving a wrecker to
and from in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by
otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly progress of traffic
along the public highways.
I. Fail, when requested by the owner or operator of a vehicle subject to
nonconsensual towing, to release a vehicle to the owner or operator
that has been, or is about to be, hooked or lifted but has not actually
been moved or removed from the property when the vehicle owner or
operator returns to the vehicle, or, to charge the owner or operator
requesting release of the said vehicle an unreasonable or excessive
decoupling fee. Such fee shall be presumptively unreasonable and
excessive if it exceeds by more than 25% of the usual and customary
decoupling fee charged by the towing company for consensual towing,
or if it exceeds by more than 50% of the usual and customary fee
charged for nonconsensually towed vehicles.
J. Charge a fee for a private property or other nonconsensual towing or
related storage service not listed on the schedule of services for which a
fee may be charged as established by the Director of the Division of
Consumer Affairs.
K. Charge an unreasonable or excessive fee, such fee shall be
presumptively unreasonable and excessive if it exceeds by more than
25% of the usual and customary decoupling fee charged by the towing
company for consensual towing, or if it exceeds by more than 50% of
the usual and customary fee charged for nonconsensually towed
vehicles.
L. Refuse to accept for payment in lieu of cash or an insurance company
check for towing or storage services a debit card, charge card or credit
card if the operator ordinarily accepts such card at its place of business,
unless the motorist is unable to provide valid identification or if the
operator has a bona fide reason to believe the card or other
identification is fictitious, altered, stolen, expired or revoked.
§ 356-16 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-16
353:1369
§ 356-17. Hours of service; communication equipment.
§ 356-18. Record of vehicles towed.
§ 356-19. Register of wreckers; identification cards; driving record.
M. Monitor, patrol, or otherwise surveil a private property for purposes of
identifying vehicles parked for unauthorized purposes and towing a
motor vehicle parked for an unauthorized purpose from such private
property without having been specifically requested to tow such vehicle
by the owner of the property.
N. A wrecker operator shall not remove any vehicle from the scene without
proper authorization from the police officer in charge.
O. A wrecker operator's drivers shall not turn around, back up, tow in the
opposite direction of normal traffic flow, cross a median or otherwise
operate to obstruct or to create a potentially hazardous traffic condition
unless directed to do so by the police officers present at the scene and
under their direction and supervision.
P. Prior to the time of any public auction, operators of facilities storing
towed vehicles shall allow the public to inspect the vehicles to be sold at
such public auction. Any operators of a facility storing towed vehicles
who take any actions to impede, delay, defer, prohibit or interfere with
the inspection of such vehicles for public auction shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 356-15D hereinabove.
A. Wrecker services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, seven-dayper-
week basis.
B. The licensee shall accept a minimum of two major credit cards 24 hours
per day and must be able to do so both at the principal location and by
drivers on the road at the time service or tow is performed.
A. Every wrecker that performs private property or other nonconsensual
towing shall retain and make available all invoices, job orders, logs,
claims for reimbursement from insurance companies and other
documentation relating to all consensual and nonconsensual towing
services performed and the rates charged for such services for a period
of three years.
B. Every wrecker shall keep a copy of the motor vehicle tow report, which
shall be prepared by or at the direction of the North Brunswick police
officer in charge of the scene. Said report shall assign an incident
number; indicate the date and time that the vehicle was towed, serviced
or transported; indicate a reason for the towing; state the make, model
and color of the vehicle; the vehicle's license plate and state of
registration; the name and address of the owner of the vehicle; and
state the name and badge number of the officer who directed the tow.
§ 356-16 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-19
353:1370
§ 356-20. Application and license fees.
§ 356-21. Rates for towing and storage service. [Amended
11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
A. The commanding officer of the Traffic Division of the North Brunswick
Police Department shall call for a register to be kept of the names of all
those owning or operating wreckers licensed under this chapter,
together with the license number and the description of such wreckers,
and the date and complete record of inspection made of each of them.
B. All operators must have a currently valid New Jersey driver's license
and maintain a safe driving record.
A. Each application for either a light-duty or a heavy-duty license shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50, plus an inspection fee of $50,
for each type of license requested.
B. The purpose of these fees is to cover the actual cost to the Township for
inspection and administration of this licensing program.
A. As for wrecker services provided, other than as covered by § 356-20A
preceding, service charges shall not exceed the following rates:
(1) The following is the fee schedule for light-duty towing services:
[Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02237]
(a) Light duty, all passenger vehicles.
[1] Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: $115.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $5.50.
[2] Monday through Friday, 6:01 p.m. to 5:59 a.m.: $125.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $5.50.
[3] Weekends and holidays: $125.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $5.50.
(b) Light duty, all vehicles registered between 6,001 pounds and
12,000 pounds.
237. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the fees authorized by this § 356-21A(1)
for light duty, all passenger vehicles, with the exception of § 356-21A(1)(d), storage fees to
be paid by the Township, shall be increased by 10% annually commencing on January 1,
2015, and each year thereafter.
§ 356-19 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-21
353:1371
[1] Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: $136.50.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $6.60.
[b] Each additional person after the first person shall be
charged at the rate of $88.80 per hour per person.
[2] Monday through Friday, 6:01 p.m. to 5:59 a.m.: $163.20.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $6.60.
[b] Each additional person after the first person shall be
charged at the rate of $88.80 per hour per person.
[3] Weekends and holidays: $163.20.
[a] Each additional mile outside North Brunswick
Township but within the State of New Jersey when the
tower agrees to tow outside the Township: $6.60.
[b] Each additional person after the first person shall be
charged at the rate of $88.80 per hour per person.
(c) Storage fees shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the day
following the date of the tow.
[1] Inside storage facility: $75 per day.
[2] Outside storage facility: $35 per day.
[3] An additional fee of $2 per running foot shall be authorized
for either the indoor or outside storage of trucks, tractor
trailers, buses and other vehicles longer than typical
passenger vehicles.
(d) Storage fees to be paid by the Township for towing and storage
of vehicles undertaken at the request of the Police Department
shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the date of
the tow as follows:
[1] A limit of $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage per
vehicle.
[2] A limit of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and any
day thereafter.
[3] A limit of $400 per vehicle stored regardless of the
duration of the storage, except that a waiver may be
granted for good cause by the Division of Local
§ 356-21 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-21
353:1372
Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs upon the request of the Township.
(e) Miscellaneous services, not to exceed:
[1] Start vehicle: $66.
[2] Flat tire: $66.
[3] Out of gas (does not include cost of gas): $66.
[4] Winching: $66 per 1/2 hour or any portion thereof.
[5] Cleanup materials. This item is to be a separate line item
and itemized on each bill that its use is required.
Reasonable rates are encouraged when billing for this
item. When Speedi-Dry is used as a cleanup material, a fee
of $15 per bag is authorized.
[6] A one-time yard charge for each visit or request may be
charged for the following, but not limited to: car cover;
photographs; administrative; placing any vehicle on a
public street adjacent to it for the vehicle's removal;
vehicle estimate requested by the owner or third-party
insurance carrier (includes time with appraiser); removal
of personal property from the subject vehicle (up to 15
minutes): $20.
(2) The following is the fee schedule for heavy-duty towing services:
(a) Heavy-duty towing.
[1] Conventional tow, 12,000 pounds to 25,000 pounds:
$192.50.
[2] Conventional tow, 25,001 pounds to 55,000 pounds: $330.
[3] Conventional tow, 55,001 pounds to 80,000 pounds: $495.
[4] Conventional tow, bus coach: $495.
[5] Nights, weekends and holidays: additional: $82.50.
[6] Per mile outside North Brunswick Township (all tolls
additional): $11.
[7] Extra-heavy-duty tilt bed low-boy tractor and trailer: $385
per hour.
[8] Winching: $385.
[9] Remove bumper: $33.
[10] Connect air line: $27.50.
[11] Remove axle: $27.50 per hour.
§ 356-21 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-21
353:1373
§ 356-22. Additional general regulations.
No driver, operator, owner or licensee of any wrecker shall:
[12] Remove drive shaft: $38.50.
[13] Remove air scoop: $49.50.
[14] Remove exhaust pipes: $33.
[15] Cage brake chambers: $27.50 per hour.
[16] Extra men, per hour, per man: $88.80.
[17] Cleanup materials. This item is to be a separate line item
and itemized on each bill that its use is required.
Reasonable rates are encouraged when billing for this
item.
[18] A one-time yard charge may be charged for the following,
but not limited to: car cover; photographs; administrative;
placing any vehicle on a public street adjacent to it for the
vehicle's removal; vehicle estimate requested by the
owner or third-party insurance carrier (includes time with
appraiser); removal of personal property from the subject
vehicle (up to 15 minutes): $45.
(b) Heavy-duty storage.
[1] Tractor: $55.
[2] Trailer: $55.
[3] Bus: $82.50.
[4] Tractor trailer: $82.50.
B. Every operator of a wrecker shall give the owner of the vehicle a
written receipt for the fee paid, when requested, in accordance with the
rates posted for the services which are required or directed to be
rendered.
C. No wrecker shall charge an unreasonable fee for their services. Fees
shall be presumed to be unreasonable if they exceed 25% of the usual
and customary fee charged for consensual towing and related storage
services, or 50% of the usual and customary fees for nonconsensual
towing and related storage services by towing and storage companies
operating within the Township.
A. Engage in cruising as defined herein.
B. Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving a wrecker to
and from in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by
§ 356-21 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-22
353:1374
otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly progress of traffic
along the public highways.
C. At the scene of an accident, park a wrecker on any public street or
intersection, or any public or private property, other than his or her
own, without first obtaining the consent of a police officer or the owner
of the property.
D. Solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of another wrecker or
divert prospective patrons of one garage to another.
E. Solicit, demand or receive any commission or fee from any person
except the proper fee for service to and transportation of a disabled
vehicle.
F. Offer or pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person or to any
police officer or Township employee for any information as to the
location of any accident or disabled vehicle or for soliciting the
employment of services described herein. The provisions of this section
shall apply to the operation of any wrecker on the streets of the
Township, whether such wrecker is licensed or unlicensed, and without
regard to whether or not the owner, operator or licensee of such
wrecker is engaged in the business of operating a wrecker within the
Township.
G. Fail, when requested by the owner or operator of a vehicle subject to
nonconsensual towing, to release a vehicle to the owner or operator
that has been, or is about to be, hooked or lifted but has not actually
been moved or removed from the property when the vehicle owner or
operator returns to the vehicle, or, to charge the owner or operator
requesting release of the said vehicle an unreasonable or excessive
decoupling fee. Such fee shall be presumptively unreasonable and
excessive if it exceeds by more than 25% of the usual and customary
decoupling fee charged by the towing company for consensual towing,
or if it exceeds by more than 50% of the usual and customary fee
charged for nonconsensually towed vehicles.
H. Charge a fee for a private property or other nonconsensual towing or
related storage service not listed on the schedule of services for which a
fee may be charged as established by the Director of the Division of
Consumer Affairs.
I. Charge an unreasonable or excessive fee, such fee shall be
presumptively unreasonable and excessive if it exceeds by more than
25% of the usual and customary decoupling fee charged by the towing
company for consensual towing, or if it exceeds by more than 50% of
the usual and customary fee charged for nonconsensually towed
vehicles.
J. Refuse to accept for payment in lieu of cash or an insurance company
check for towing or storage services a debit card, charge card or credit
card if the operator ordinarily accepts such card at its place of business,
§ 356-22 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-22
353:1375
§ 356-23. Rotating call list.
unless the motorist is unable to provide valid identification or if the
operator has a bona fide reason to believe the card or other
identification is fictitious, altered, stolen, expired or revoked.
K. Monitor, patrol, or otherwise surveil a private property for purposes of
identifying vehicles parked for unauthorized purposes and towing a
motor vehicle parked for an unauthorized purpose from such private
property without having been specifically requested to tow such vehicle
by the owner of the property.
L. Prior to the time of any public auction, operators of facilities storing
towed vehicles shall allow the public to inspect the vehicles to be sold at
such public auction. Any operators of a facility storing towed vehicles
who take any actions to impede, delay, defer, prohibit or interfere with
the inspection of such vehicles for public auction shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 356-15D hereinabove.
A. All requests for towing or wrecking service made by the Police
Department shall be by rotation. The Department shall maintain four
rotating call lists: 1) light-duty motor vehicle accident; 2) light-duty
miscellaneous; 3) heavy-duty motor vehicle accident; and 4) heavy-duty
miscellaneous. The Department shall, depending upon the vehicle(s) to
be towed, call the wrecker service from the appropriate list by rotation
within said list. When, however, the owner or driver of the disabled
motor vehicle indicates a choice of a specific wrecker owner, that
wrecker owner should be called, and no wrecker shall be assigned from
the rotating list.
B. The rotation system shall be conducted in the following manner:
(1) The Township Clerk shall compile four lists of all licensees as
provided in this chapter designated as follows:
(a) Light duty.
[1] Light-duty motor vehicle accident: vehicles having a gross
vehicle weight of 12,000 pounds or less towed as a result
of a motor vehicle accident.
[2] Light-duty miscellaneous: vehicles having a gross vehicle
weight of 12,000 pounds or less towed for impounds,
disabled road service, vehicle fires or other reasons.
(b) Heavy duty.
[1] Heavy-duty motor vehicle accident: vehicles having a
gross weight of 12,001 pounds or greater towed as a result
of a motor vehicle accident.
§ 356-22 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-23
353:1376
[2] Heavy-duty miscellaneous: vehicles having a gross weight
of 12,001 pounds or greater towed for impounds, disabled
road service, vehicle fire or other reasons.
(2) The original and annual public reporting of the current lists of
designated towing contractors containing the company name,
address, telephone number and maximum towing fees shall be
printed and circulated in the municipality or county as appropriate.
The annual reporting of the list shall be available for inspection by
any member of the general public upon request and during regular
business hours.
(3) Each owner, lessee or bailee of a wrecker licensed hereunder shall
be placed on an initial call list, for light-duty motor vehicle
accident, light-duty miscellaneous, heavy-duty motor vehicle,
heavy-duty miscellaneous, or all if heavy-duty, based upon the date
on which the license is issued and upon the classification of the
wrecker. Where an owner, lessee or bailee shall own or lease more
than one wrecker classified for light-duty which shall be assigned
to the same areas, said owner's, lessee's or bailee's name shall
appear but once on said call list.
(4) Whenever the Police Department or any other department
summons a wrecker, the owner, lessee or bailee at the beginning of
the list for the area concerned will be called. After being
summoned, such owner, lessee or bailee shall be placed at the end
of such list, whether or not said owner, lessee or bailee responds to
the call. Thereafter, the next licensee shall be called until the
rotation is completed.
C. Additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of wreckers as
may be promulgated hereunder by the Township Clerk shall take effect
immediately after service of a copy thereof to all holders of licenses for
wreckers in the Township, which may be made by addressing the same
to the licensees by mail at their last known addresses. If, pursuant to
the rules and regulations for rotation of wreckers adopted under this
chapter, the Police Department summons a wrecker to the scene of an
accident for the purpose of removing a vehicle and the owner of the
disabled vehicle declines to use the services of the wrecker summoned
and indicates that he or she prefers to have the vehicle handled by
another wrecker, the officer in charge shall authorize the summoned
wrecker to go to the garage designated by the owner of the disabled
vehicle. In any event, the summoned wrecker shall be entitled to collect
towing charges from either the owner of the disabled vehicle or the
owner of the garage to which the vehicle is towed at the discretion of its
owner.
D. A wrecker company that cannot respond when called shall not have any
other wrecker company, whether on the rotation list or not, respond in
its place. The next wrecker on the list shall be called to respond by the
Police Department.
§ 356-23 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-23
353:1377
§ 356-24. Grievance procedure.
Any person having a grievance against a licensee under this chapter may
seek redress in the following manner:
§ 356-25. Violations; notice of violations; violations and appeals.
E. Any wrecker company unable to respond to four or more police
requests per month may be subject to removal from the approved list.
F. After being requested by a dispatcher or desk officer of the Police
Department, approved wrecker operators shall respond to the scene
within 20 minutes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, except state holidays, and within 25 minutes at
all other times, unless such response time is prevented by extraordinary
conditions of weather or other extraordinary circumstances resulting in
obstruction of general access to the scene.
G. A wrecker operator shall immediately dispatch a wrecker when
requested by the desk officer to respond to an emergency situation.
A. Complaints.
(1) All complaints shall be filed, during normal operating hours, with
the Deputy Chief of Police. The complaint will set forth with
particularity all relevant facts and documentation upon which the
complaint is based and must contain an affidavit verifying the facts
contained therein to be true and accurate. The complainant may
request a hearing before the Deputy Chief of Police with regard to
the subject matter of this complaint.
(2) The Police Department shall forward all complaints to the Division
of Traffic and Safety, which shall review such complaints, and file a
recommendation with the Deputy Chief of Police within 15 days of
receipt of the complaint.
(3) The Chief will conduct a hearing and render a decision within 45
days from the date the complaint was filed.
B. Appeals.
(1) The complainant may appeal the decision made by the Deputy
Chief of Police, provided that said appeal is filed within 10 days
following the issuance of the decision.
(2) All appeals shall be filed with the Business Administrator. Said
Administrator shall review the case based upon the record before
the Deputy Chief of Police and issue a decision within 30 days.
A. If any of the provisions of this chapter are alleged to have been violated
or if an application is denied, the licensee or applicant shall be notified
of any noncompliance or denial by registered mail.
§ 356-23 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-25
353:1378
§ 356-26. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding the penalties provided for violations of § 356-15, the
following shall apply for violations of this chapter as follows:
B. The notice shall state the specific provision(s) of this chapter which it is
alleged has been violated or the reasons for denial of any application.
C. In the event of a violation notice, the notice shall further state that,
upon request, if made by the licensee within 15 days of the receipt of
said notice, the official issuing the notice of violation shall meet with the
licensee to discuss the basis for the determination that a violation exists
and any proposed means of eliminating any violations. That meeting
shall take place within 30 days of said request. Following any such
meeting, the official issuing the notice of violation may rescind the
notice if it is determined that there was no violation or in the event the
alleged violation is otherwise eliminated. The official may also grant
time for the correction of any violation upon request.
D. If, within 30 days after mailing the notice of violation, or within 30 days
after the aforesaid meeting, in the event a meeting is requested and
does not resolve the dispute in a mutually acceptable manner, the
licensee has failed to correct the violation or reason for noncompliance,
the licensee shall be penalized in accordance with this § 356-26.
E. A licensee or applicant may appeal from a decision to impose a penalty
or a decision not to grant a license within 15 days of the date of receipt
of a penalty notice or a notice that a license has not been granted. The
licensee or applicant shall file a letter of appeal from the decision and
request a hearing before the Township Council. Upon receipt of such
letter of appeal, the Township Council shall, by resolution, appoint a
hearing officer to hear and determine the appeal and set a date for a
hearing. The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing not less than 10
nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the complaint.
A. Rotating call list licensees. Rotating call list licensees shall be subject to
the following penalties:
(1) For a violation of any provision of this wrecker chapter, except
wrecker response time limits:
(a) First violation in any given calendar year will result in a
warning letter.
(b) Second violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than 15 days from the rotating call list.
(c) Third violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension from the rotating call list not greater than for a
period for the remainder of the calendar year or for 90 days,
whichever is greater.
§ 356-25 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 356-26
353:1379
§ 356-27. Enforcement.
The municipal officers and/or agencies designated to enforce the provisions
of this chapter in accordance with due process of law are the North
Brunswick Township Police Deputy Chief/designee and the North Brunswick
Township Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officers, where applicable.
§ 356-28. When effective; continued operation.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon publication of
appropriate notice of the adoption of this chapter and shall be applicable
to each existing licensee at the time of renewal of such license. Any person
who has a valid unexpired license which was issued in accordance with the
(d) Fourth violation in any given calendar year shall result in the
permanent removal from the rotating call list on a permanent
basis.
(2) For a violation of the wrecker response time limits:
(a) First violation in any given calendar year may result in a
warning letter.
(b) Second violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than seven days from the rotating call
list.
(c) Third violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than 28 days from the rotating call list.
(d) Fourth violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension from the rotating call list not greater than for a
period for the remainder of the year or for 56 days, whichever
is greater.
(e) Fifth violation in any given calendar year shall result in the
permanent removal from the rotating call list on a permanent
basis.
B. All other operators.
(1) For violations of any provision of the wrecker chapter, all operators
and/or owners of wreckers not on the rotating call list shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
imprisonment or community service for a term not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment or community service,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
(2) The continuation of any violations of this chapter on each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation(s) may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
§ 356-26 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 356-28
353:1380
previous ordinance may continue to operate under such license, but shall
be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter, except for such provisions
as only address the requirements and procedures for the issuance of a
wrecker's license pursuant to this chapter.
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 366
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 356-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 356-28
366:1381

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Board of Health Legislation
[Adopted 1-18-1994]
§ 366-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Township of North Brunswick of a general and permanent nature, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 366 through 427, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code
of the Township of North Brunswick," hereinafter known and referred to as
the "Code."
§ 366-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 366-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 366-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Clerk of the Township and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the Board
of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 366-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of North
Brunswick" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 366-6
366:1383
§ 366-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 366-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 366-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 366-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 366-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 366-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
§ 366-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 366-11
366:1384
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 366-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 366-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 366-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to May 1,
1972.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
H. A resolution adopted May 1, 1972, regarding meetings of the Board of
Health.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Penalties. In the following sections, the penalty provisions were revised
to provide that violators will be punished by a fine of not more than
§ 366-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 366-13
366:1385
$500 nor less than $2, the imposition of such penalties being authorized
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-70 and 26:3-70.1. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been numbered and
appear in the Code.)238
C. Membership of Board of Health. Section 2 of an ordinance of the
Township Committee (now Township Council) of the Township of North
Brunswick, adopted 2-4-1974 (§ 38-2 of the Township Code as reprinted
in 1993), is hereby amended to raise the membership of the Board of
Health from five to seven members, and to add the following sentence
to the end of said section: "In addition to the original appointment of the
Board, two members will be appointed for terms of three years."
238. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 366-13B, the following sections were amended: §§ 399-4,
411-7, 416-4, 421-10 and 427-9.
§ 366-13 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 366-13
366:1386
Chapter 375
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 135.
§ 375-1. Declaration of nuisance.
The growth, existence or presence of ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac and
any other noxious plant growths; weeds; dead or dying trees, brush, stumps,
roots, grass and other dead or dying plant growths on any plot of land, lot,
street, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place which is
deemed to be harmful to the public health or safety is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 375-2. Duty of owners.
No owner of any plot of land, lot, street, highway, right-of-way or any other
public or private place within the Township of North Brunswick shall cause,
allow or permit a nuisance as declared by this chapter to grow or exist
thereon.
§ 375-3. Private property; notice.
Whenever a nuisance as declared by this chapter is found on any plot of
land, lot or right-of-way, notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof
to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein
but not less than 10 days from the date of service thereof. If the owner
resides out of the state or cannot be notified speedily, such notice shall be
left at the place or premises with the tenant or occupant thereof, and a copy
of such notice shall be mailed to such owner by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
§ 375-4. Public property; notice.
Whenever a nuisance as declared by this chapter is found on any public
property or any street or highway on any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to remove
or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If such
person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified therein, the
Township Health Officer, or his/her designated representative, may remove
or abate such nuisance in the manner as hereinafter provided in the case of
a like condition existing on a private premises or place.
§ 366-13 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 375-5
375:1387
§ 375-5. Failure of person in charge to comply; violations and
penalties.
Any property owner who maintains such a nuisance as described in §§ 375-1
and 375-2 of this chapter and who refuses to comply with the notice set out
in § 375-4 of this chapter within 10 days of receipt of said notice by certified
mail or 30 days of receipt of this notice by ordinary mail shall be declared
in violation of this chapter and, upon conviction of violation of this chapter
in North Brunswick Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine between $10
and $200 for the first offense and between $25 and $500 for the second
offense.
§ 375-6. Failure of property owner to comply; removal by Health
Officer.
If the owner, upon being notified as provided in § 375-3 hereof, shall not
comply with such notice within the time specified therein and fails to
remove or abate such nuisance, the Township Health Officer, or his
designated representative, shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may
cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as
the Township Health Officer shall deem proper.
§ 375-7. Costs to become lien; institution of suit.
In any case where the aforesaid nuisances are required to be removed or
abated from any lands as provided for in § 375-6 hereof:
Chapter 381
CATS
A. The Township Health Officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Mayor
and Council who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands;
the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, to bear interest at the same rate
as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes.
B. The Board of Health may, in the alternative, certify the costs of
abatement of the nuisance to the Mayor and Council with a request that
the Mayor and Council institute suit in civil court against the property
owner to recover all costs of abatement, together with interest,
reasonable attorney's fees and court costs, as the court shall allow from
said property owner.
§ 375-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 375-7
375:1388
ARTICLE I
Stray Cats
[Adopted 9-20-1982239 ]
§ 381-1. Declaration of nuisance.
§ 381-2. Seizure; notification; custodial period and fees; disposal.
A. A cat shall be considered a public nuisance if it has no owner and no
known place of care or shelter or if it habitually trespasses upon or
damages either private or public property or harms lawful users or
occupants thereof or if it causes a definable public health hazard which
is supported by medical documentation.
B. Any person who owns, keeps, feeds or harbors any cat at any time
within the Township or who permits any cat to enter the limits of the
Township shall exercise sufficient and proper care and control over
such animal at all times so as to prevent the cat from becoming a public
nuisance.
A. The Health Inspector or the person or agency designated by the
governing body of the Township of North Brunswick to enforce the
provisions of this article shall, upon receipt of a written complaint that a
cat is a public nuisance, investigate said complaint and, if found to be
legitimate, shall authorize the seizure of the cat by the issuance of a
humane-type cat trap to trap said cat alive.
B. The person who is issued the trap must notify the enforcement officer
as soon as possible after a cat is apprehended. The enforcement officer
and/or the person or agency designated by the governing body of the
Township of North Brunswick will keep the cat in his/her care and
custody for a period of 15 days from the date of apprehension. If any cat
so apprehended bears any identification of ownership, the designated
officer shall, on the date of apprehension, notify the owner that the
animal has been apprehended, and that it may be claimed at a
designated location subject to the provisions of this article.
C. Any cat may be claimed by its owner during the fifteen-day custodial
period upon the payment to the Township of a pickup fee of $10, and a
maintenance fee of $3 per day or part thereof that the cat has been in
custody.
D. Any cat which has been seized pursuant to this article and which has
not been reclaimed during the fifteen-day custodial period may be
disposed of in a humane manner in accordance with standards
generally recognized by the American Veterinary Medical Association.
239. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that is supersede in its entirety the
Ordinance for the Control of Cats, adopted May 13, 1982.
§ 381-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-3
375:1389
§ 381-3. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly own, keep, feed or harbor
any cat which has been found to be a nuisance under this article. Any person
found to violate the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the
North Brunswick Municipal Court, be subject to a fine of between $5 and
$25 for a first offense, and shall be subject to a fine of between $10 and
$100 for each subsequent offense.
§ 381-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 381-3
375:1390
ARTICLE II
Cat Licenses
[Adopted 7-2-1990]
§ 381-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — For the purposes of this article, a dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
CRUEL OR INHUMANE TREATMENT — Committing any act of
mistreatment upon any cat, including but not limited to any act proscribed
by state statute, N.J.S.A. 4:22-26, and as it may hereafter be
amended.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-15]
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Office of the Township Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick.[Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-05;
4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment open to the public and engaging in the
business of selling dogs or cats or both, at retail. Any person who sells,
exchanges, or otherwise transfers only animals that were bred and reared
on the premises owned by the person shall be considered a breeder and not
a pet store.[Added 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
PET SHOP OPERATOR — A person who owns or operates a pet store, or
both.[Added 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
§ 381-5. Vaccination.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
§ 381-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-5
375:1391
§ 381-6. Licensing; fees. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-17;
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-33; 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-06]
Township of North Brunswick, unless such cat is vaccinated and
licensed. The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in
a cattery, or those held by a state or federal licensed facility, or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificates. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the
state or municipality.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Annual procurement; display of license required. Any person who shall
own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually in the month of
January apply for and procure from the the office of the Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick, or other official designated by the
governing body thereof to license cats, a license and official registration
tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned,
kept or harbored and shall place upon each cat a collar or other device
with the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto.
Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall include, but
are not limited to, breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves
are not transferable. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make
application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Township of North Brunswick for
no longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township of North Brunswick any cat licensed in another state or
municipality for the current year and bearing a registration tag or
sleeve, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
§ 381-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 381-6
375:1392
within the Township of North Brunswick for a period of more than
90 days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag
or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township of North Brunswick any unlicensed cat, and shall keep
same or permit same to be kept within the Township of North
Brunswick for a period of more than 10 days, shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the office of the
Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick or other local official
designated to license cats in the municipality. [Amended 4-19-2010
by Ord. No. 10-10]
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
[Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. Neither the office of the Clerk of
the Township of North Brunswick nor any other official designated by
the governing body of the municipality to license cats therein shall
grant any such license and official registration tag or sleeve for any cat
unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed
and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type
approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
United States Department of Human Services or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 381-5D of this article. The rabies inoculation
shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. If a required inoculation
has an expiration date which is less than one year from the date the
license is issued, the issuance of the license shall be conditioned upon
the applicant submitting proof to the office of the Clerk of the Township
of North Brunswick that the inoculation which will expire has been
administered. Said proof shall be submitted no later than 30 days after
the expiration date listed on the license. Failure to submit the required
proof of inoculations within 30 days of the expiration date shall result in
a fine of $5 for each thirty-day period, or fraction thereof, that the proof
has not been submitted. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
G. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of
$11 for each unneutered cat and $8 for each neutered cat. The fee for
§ 381-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-6
375:1393
any cat whose owner is an elderly person shall be reduced by the sum of
$2 per license. Persons who fail to obtain a license by February 1 of the
year in question shall be subject to a late charge of $5 for each month
or fraction thereof that the license is delinquent.
H. Fees, renewals and expiration date of license.
(1) A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of the license
and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original,
and said license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof
shall expire on the last day of January in the following year.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in the Township of North Brunswick.
Any valid New jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by this municipality as evidence of
compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
office of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick may issue a
duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for the particular cat at a
fee of $2 each. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
J. Disposition of fees collected.
(1) License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
municipality and shall be placed in a special account separate from
any of the other accounts of the municipality and shall be used for
the following purposes only:
(a) Collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure;
(b) Local prevention and control of rabies;
(c) Providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have
been exposed to rabies; and
(d) Administering the provisions of this article.
(2) Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
said third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to
the general funds of the municipality any amount then in such
account which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special
account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 381-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 381-7
375:1394
§ 381-7. Tampering with license tags.
No person, except an official in the performance of his duties, shall remove
a registration tag or sleeve from any cat, nor shall any person attach a
registration tag or sleeve to a cat for which it was not issued.
§ 381-8. Interfering with officials. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
03-15]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
employed to perform any duty under this article.
§ 381-9. Proof of licensing.
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of any health official,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
§ 381-10. Impounding of cats.
Any person authorized to enforce this article shall take into custody and
impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of as provided in §§ 381-11 and 381-12, any cat off
the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring the cat
on complaint of the police or of the resident of the premises to which the
cat has strayed, as well as any cat which the Animal Control Authority has
substantial reason to believe is abandoned, diseased or injured.
§ 381-11. Notice of seizure.
If any cat so seized wears a collar having inscribed thereon or attached
thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag, or if the
cat has identification as herein provided, or if the owner or other person
keeping or harboring the cat is otherwise known, the enforcement authority
or any person authorized in that behalf may return the cat to the owner, and
if not, he shall immediately notify by telephone or mail the person whose
address is given on the collar or the person whose name is registered as
the owner. The notice shall state that the cat has been seized and will be
liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
the service of the notice. A notice under this section may be served by
delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode or by mailing the same to the
address given on the collar or registration.
§ 381-12. Redemption or destruction of cats. [Amended 4-14-2003
by Ord. No. 03-15]
A. For every cat impounded, there shall be charged a detention expense of
$25, plus a kennel charge of $60 per week or part thereof to cover cost
of maintenance.
§ 381-7 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-12
375:1395
§ 381-13. Rabies control.
Any cat which has bitten or abraded the skin of a human being shall
be forthwith quarantine into the care of the enforcement authority for
observation and examination. Before such cat is released from quarantine,
the enforcement authority shall certify that, to the best of his knowledge,
such cat is free of rabies; provided, however, if any cat has received
antirabic treatment under the direction of the enforcement authority or a
licensed veterinarian within one year prior to the time that it has bitten
or abraded the skin of a human being, such cat may, in the discretion of
the enforcement authority, be quarantine into the care of its owner for
a period of not less than 10 days from the day of the bite or abrasion;
provided further that this section shall not be construed as preventing
the enforcement authority, where necessary, from quarantining the animals
referred to herein, so long as prior to such animal's release an examination
shall be made by a licensed veterinarian and a written report thereof be
transmitted to the enforcement authority.
B. Before the enforcement authority shall release said cat from detention
and if the cat so seized shall have been licensed and registered, the
owner or other person shall produce proof of such licensing and
registration; or if the cat shall not have been licensed and registered,
said owner or other person shall otherwise produce such evidence of
ownership or custody as may be deemed sufficient by the enforcement
authority.
C. Additionally, the enforcement authority shall not release any
impounded cat to such owner or other person unless and until such
owner or other person shall have paid to the Township of North
Brunswick, at the office of the licensing official, all the fees required to
be paid hereunder and, if the cat is unlicensed and not registered, an
additional charge of $2 payable to the Township of North Brunswick for
the issuance of a license.
D. The enforcement authority shall be required to detain every identifiable
licensed cat for a period of seven days after its seizure, and after notice
has been given pursuant to § 381-11 hereof, and shall detain every
unlicensed cat or every other cat so seized where it cannot be identified
or notice cannot be given as set forth in said § 381-11 for a period of
seven days after its seizure. If after such respective periods of
detention, no person has claimed the cat or will pay the charges
required hereunder, the enforcement authority may cause the cat to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible or to place the
cat with some responsible person desiring the cat as a household pet.
But the enforcement authority may sooner dispose of any cat, whether
or not the owner is known or whether it is licensed, if said cat is so ill or
injured as to justify such disposal. Prior to such actions, the owner shall
be notified, if known, and given the opportunity to provide any special
euthanizing instructions to the Animal Control Officer, which
instructions should be carried out at the expense of the owner.
§ 381-12 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 381-14
375:1396
§ 381-14. Enforcement. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-15]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer and each member of the
Police Department and the Health Department to assist and cooperate in
carrying out the provisions of this article.
§ 381-15. Prohibited actions. [Added 10-21-2013 by Ord. No.
13-21240]
No pet shop or pet shop operator shall sell, offer for sale, barter, auction,
breed or otherwise improperly sell or dispose of cats in the Township
of North Brunswick. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a shelter,
pound or other establishment from keeping, displaying, selling or otherwise
transferring any cat that has been seized, rescued or donated.
§ 381-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
03-15; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
A. No person shall commit any act of cruelty or shall treat any cat in an
inhumane manner. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
B. Unattended cat in a vehicle. No person shall leave any cat unattended
in a vehicle under inhumane conditions adverse to the health or welfare
of the cat. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $250.
C. Abandonment of a cat. No person shall abandon a cat. Any person who
shall violate this subsection shall be subject to a fine of $500. Any
person who shall abandon a cat near a roadway shall be subject to a fine
of $1,000.
D. Barter or sale of cat flesh, fur or hair. No person shall knowingly sell,
barter or offer for sale or barter, at wholesale or retail, the flesh, fur or
hair of a domestic cat or any product made in whole or in part from the
flesh, fur or hair of a domestic cat. This subsection shall not apply to the
sale or barter, or offering for sale or barter, of the fur or hair of a
domestic cat cut at a commercial grooming establishment or at a
veterinary office or clinic or for scientific research purposes. Any
person who shall violate this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000.
E. Anyone in violation of § 381-15, Prohibited actions, shall be subject to a
fine of $1,250.
F. Unless otherwise specified in this article, any person who violates or
refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $100 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
20 days.
240. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 381-15
through 381-19 as §§ 381-16 through 381-20, respectively.
§ 381-14 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-17
375:1397
§ 381-17. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on October 1, 1990. The payment of a
license fee shall not be required for the period October 1, 1990, through
December 31, 1990.
§ 381-17 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 381-17
375:1398
ARTICLE III
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-33]
§ 381-18. Maximum penalty.
For violation of any provision of this chapter, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,250.
§ 381-19. Separate violation.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 381-20. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this chapter is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 381-18 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 381-20
375:1399
Chapter 387
DOG LICENSING AND CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 154.
§ 387-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMIT A NUISANCE — A dog injuring or damaging any lawn,
shrubbery, flower garden or property of another, or a dog defecating on
any public street, sidewalk, public park or on the property of another.
CRUEL OR INHUMANE TREATMENT — Committing any act of
mistreatment upon any dog, including but not limited to any act
proscribed by state statute, N.J.S.A. 4:22-26, and as it may hereafter be
amended.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
LICENSING CONTROL AUTHORITY — The office of the Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick.[Added 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04;
amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, such term shall
mean and include every person having a right of property in such dog
and every person who has such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment open to the public and engaging in
the business of selling dogs or cats or both, at retail. Any person who
sells, exchanges, or otherwise transfers only animals that were bred
and reared on the premises owned by the person shall be considered
a breeder and not a pet store.[Amended 10-21-2013 by Ord. No.
13-22]
PET SHOP OPERATOR — A person who owns or operates a pet store,
or both.[Added 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22]
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to state
statute.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
§ 381-20 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 387-1
375:1400
§ 387-2. Animal Control Officer; assistants. [Amended 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-14; 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 387-3. Requirements for persons who keep or harbor dogs.
[Amended 2-17-1981; 6-15-1981; 7-20-1981; 9-19-1983; 9-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-18; 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14; 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-32; 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
STRAY DOG — Any dog with no owner or that has been permanently
separated from its owner.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to state statute.[Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
03-14]
B. The word "his" refers to either his or her.
A. The Board of Health and the Mayor and Council of the Township are
hereby authorized to employ a suitable person as Animal Control
Officer and to employ such assistants to the Animal Control Officer as
the Board of Health and Mayor and Council may from time to time deem
necessary. Such employee shall assist in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Animal Control Officer and such assistants as may be appointed
shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the Board of Health
and the Mayor and Council, and the Board of Health and the Mayor and
Council may adopt rules and regulations prescribing further duties of
the Animal Control Officer and his assistants and for the keeping and
maintaining of the Township dog pound not inconsistent with the laws
of the state and of this chapter.
C. The Board of Health or the Mayor and Council may contract with a
recognized animal welfare agency to perform the functions of the
Animal Control Officer.
A. License and registration. No person shall keep or harbor any dog within
the Township without registering and obtaining a license therefor to be
issued by the office of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick
upon application by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and
no person shall keep or harbor any dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 4-19-2010
by Ord. No. 10-09]
B. Application for license; registration numbers; proof of required
inoculations. The application for a dog license and registration shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which the
§ 387-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 387-3
375:1401
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or
short-haired variety; also, the name, street and post office address
and telephone number of the owner and the person who shall keep
or harbor such dog. The information on the application and the
registration number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period
of three years. In addition, the office of the Clerk of the Township of
North Brunswick shall forward to the State Department of Health each
month, on forms furnished by the Department, an accurate account
of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. Registration
numbers shall be issued in the order of the application. At the time
of application, the owner shall produce a record that the dog has
received all shots required by law. If a required inoculation has an
expiration date which is less than one year from the date the license
is issued, the issuance of the license shall be conditioned upon the
applicant submitting proof to the office of the Clerk of the Township
of North Brunswick that the inoculation which will expire has been
administered. Said proof shall be submitted no later than 30 days after
the expiration date listed on the license. Failure to submit the required
proof of inoculation within 30 days of the expiration date shall result in
a fine of $5 for each thirty-day period, or fraction thereof, that the proof
has not been submitted. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
C. Annual procurement of license and registration tag. Any person who
shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall annually, in the
month of January, apply for and procure from the office of the Clerk of
the Township of North Brunswick a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag
securely fastened thereto. If said owner has obtained a valid dog license
from another municipality within Middlesex County, said license shall
be valid within the Township of North Brunswick for the balance of the
calendar year, provided that the owner provides the previous
municipality and the office of the Clerk of the Township of North
Brunswick with his new post office address and telephone number.
[Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
D. Fees; expiration date; late charges.
(1) The person applying for the license and registration tag of a dog
shall pay an annual fee of $9 which $0.20 is to be designated for the
State of New Jersey Pilot Clinic Fund, and shall also pay a fee of $1
for the registration tag of each dog. For each annual renewal, the
fee for the license and for the registration tag shall be the same as
for the original license and tag. The licenses, registration tags and
renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of January of the
following year. In addition to the above fees, any person applying
for a license and registration tag shall pay a surcharge of $3 for any
dog of reproductive age which has not had its reproductive
capacity permanently altered through sterilization, the surcharge
§ 387-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 387-3
375:1402
being designated or the State of New Jersey Animal Population
Control Fund.
(2) The fees for a dog license for any elderly person shall be the sum of
$7 per year, of which $0.20 is to be designated for the State of New
Jersey Pilot Clinic Fund, and such person shall also pay a fee of $1
for the registration tag of each dog. In addition, any elderly person
applying for a license and registration tag shall pay a surcharge of
$3 for any dog of reproductive age which has not had its
reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization,
the surcharge being designated for the State of New Jersey Animal
Population Control Fund.
(3) In the event that the dog owner fails to obtain a license by February
1 of the year in question, the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services shall impose a late charge of $5 upon the
dog's owner fix each month or traction thereof after February 1
that the license is delinquent.
(4) Any person applying for the license and registration tag of a
potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual fee of $500.
E. Replacement of lost registration tag. Whenever the metallic tag of
registration provided for by this chapter has been lost, such tag may be
replaced by the office of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick
with a new number tag, together with a new certificate of registration,
upon payment of a fee of $2 each, provided that the old certificate of
registration is presented at the same time. [Amended 4-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-09]
F. Seeing eye dogs. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly
known as "Seeing Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other
dogs, except that the owners or keepers of such dogs shall not be
required to pay any the therefor.
G. Newly acquired dogs and dogs attaining licensing age. The owner of
any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains
licensing age shall make application for a license and registration tag
for each dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
H. Dogs brought into Township. Any person who shall bring or cause to be
brought into the Township any dog licensed in another state for the
current year and bearing a registration tag, and who shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Township for a period of
more than 90 days, shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed under
§ 387-5.
§ 387-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 387-4
375:1403
§ 387-4. Unauthorized removal and attachment of tag prohibited.
[Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 387-5. Requirements for kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
[Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-32; 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04;
4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22]
A. License. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the office of the Clerk of the
Township of North Brunswick for a license entitling him to keep or
operate such establishment.
B. Application. The application for a kennel, shelter or pound license shall
describe the premises where the establishment is located or is
proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be maintained.
The application shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
Animal Control Officer of the Township showing compliance with the
local and state rules and regulations governing the location of any
sanitation at such establishment.
C. Content of license; expiration. All licenses for a kennel, shelter or pound
shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and
all such licenses shall expire on the lost day of January of the following
year.
D. Individual dog licenses; transferability. Any person holding a license for
a kennel, shelter or pound shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner
of different premises.
E. Fees. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for
10 or fewer dogs shall be $20 and for more than 10 dogs shall be $25.
No fee shall be charged for a shelter or a pound.
F. Control of dogs allowed off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, shelter or
pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
G. No pet shop or pet shop operator shall sell, offer for sale, barter,
auction, breed or otherwise improperly sell or dispose of dogs in the
Township of North Brunswick. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a
shelter, pound or other establishment from keeping, displaying, selling
or otherwise transferring any dog that has been seized, rescued or
donated.
§ 387-4 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 387-6
375:1404
§ 387-6. Canvassing and impoundment of dogs. [Amended
4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-32; 3-2-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
A. Annual canvass of dogs by Sanitary Inspector. The Sanitary Inspector of
the Board of Health shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all
dogs owned, kept or harbored within the Township and shall report on
or before May 1 of each year to the office of the Clerk of the Township of
North Brunswick and to the State Department of Health the result
thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and addresses of
persons owning, keeping or harboring such dogs, the number of
licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of the persons, together
with the registration numbers of each of the dogs, and the number of
unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of the persons,
together with a complete description of each of the unlicensed dogs.
Such canvass may be made with the assistance of the Township police
reserves. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
B. Certain dogs to be impounded. The Animal Control Officer of the
Township shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into
custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as
provided in this chapter, the following:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Animal Control Officer or his agent
has reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the dog.
C. Notice to owners of impounded dogs.
(1) If any dog seized pursuant to the provisions of the preceding
section wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or
attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring
the dog is known. the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve
on the person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner
or the person keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in
writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last-known place of abode or at the address given
on the collar or by forwarding it by certified and regular mail in a
prepaid letter addressed to that person in his usual or last known
place of abode or the address on the collar.
§ 387-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 387-6
375:1405
D. Pound and maintenance fees; redemption: destruction.
(1) For every dog impounded, there shall be charged a detention
expense of $25, plus a kennel charge of $60 per week or part
thereof to cover the cost of maintenance.
(2) The enforcement authority shall not release any impounded dog to
any owner or other person unless and until such owner or other
person shall have paid to the Township of North Brunswick, at the
office of the licensing control authority, all fees required to be paid
hereunder, and. if the dog is unlicensed and unregistered, an
additional charge of $8.20 for a neutered dog shall be payable to
the Township of North Brunswick, of which $0.20 is to be
designated for the State of New Jersey Pilot Clinic Fund and $1 is to
be designated for the registration tag of each dog. For a
nonneutered dog (i.e., any dog of reproductive age which has not
had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through
sterilization), a fee of $11.20 shall be payable to the Township of
North Brunswick, of which $3 is to be designated for the State of
New Jersey Animal Population Control Fund.
(3) When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as set forth in Subsection C, or
has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not
been and cannot be given as set forth in Subsection C, and if the
owner or person keeping or harboring the dog has not claimed the
dog and paid expenses incurred by reason of its detention and if the
dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person
keeping or harboring the dog has not produced a license and
registration tag for the dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause
the dog to be destroyed in such a manner as to cause as little pain
as possible. The Animal Control Officer may sooner dispose of any
dog, whether or not the owner is known or whether it is licensed, if
such dog is so ill or injured as to justify such disposal. Prior to such
actions, the owner shall be notified, if known, and given the
opportunity to provide any special euthanizing instructions to the
Animal Control Officer, which instructions should be carried out at
the expense of the owner.
E. Weekly report of animals seized. The Animal Control Officer shall
submit a weekly report to the office of the Clerk of the Township of
North Brunswick, which report shall contain a description of each
animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the reason for
such seizure and the disposition made of such animal. [Amended
4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
F. Quarterly report of animals captured, destroyed and redeemed. The
office of the Clerk of the Township of North Brunswick shall render a
quarterly report to the Board of Health and the Mayor and Council,
which report shall contain the following information: [Amended
4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
§ 387-6 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 387-6
375:1406
§ 387-7. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Sanitary Inspector of the Board of Health, the
Health Officer of the Board of Health and of each member of the Police
Department of the Township to assist in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 387-8. Prohibited actions.
(1) The number of dogs captured.
(2) The number of dogs destroyed.
(3) The number of dogs redeemed from the pound.
G. Invading premises to seize dogs. Any officer or agent authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter is hereby
authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog
which he may lawfully seize and impound when such officer is in
immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the owner
of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the same.
A. Interference with officer. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere
with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this
chapter.
B. Permitting dogs to commit nuisances. No person owning or having the
care or custody of a dog shall knowingly or negligently permit any dog
to commit any nuisance upon any public street nor other thoroughfare
nor upon any crosswalk of any public street or thoroughfare nor in or
upon any public building or any approach to such building nor in or
upon any public park or public playground nor upon the property of
another, nor shall any such person omit to do any reasonable and
proper act nor omit to take any reasonable and proper precaution to
prevent any such dog from committing a nuisance in or upon any of the
places or premises herein specified. It shall be the duty of each dog
owner to remove any feces left by his dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street
or other public area.
C. Dogs damaging shrubbery, flowers, etc. No person owning, keeping or
harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do any injury or damage to
any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of another.
D. Howling or barking dogs. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess
or harbor upon his premises any dog which shall, by howling or
barking, make any disturbing noises in any neighborhood in the
Township.
E. Dogs running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit such dog to be outside unless such dog is
accompanied by a person capable of controlling the dog and unless
such dog is securely confined by an adequate leash. The only exceptions
§ 387-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 387-8
375:1407
to the aforementioned provision is if a dog is kept on private property
which is completely fenced in or which is provided with a hidden
wireless fence that is posted, or if a dog is being transported in a
dog crate or carrier. Any owner whose dog shall be found running at
large in the Township off the premises of the owner of such dog shall,
upon conviction, be subject to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $50 for the first offense or to imprisonment for a term of not
less than five days nor more than 10 days, or both, at the discretion
of the Municipal Court. For a subsequent violation, such owner shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $15 nor more than $100 or to
imprisonment for a term of not more than 20 days, or both, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
03-14; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-32]
F. No person shall commit any act of cruelty or shall treat any dog in an
inhumane manner. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-14]
G. Unattended dog in a vehicle. No person shall leave any dog unattended
in a vehicle under inhumane conditions adverse to the health or welfare
of the dog. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $250. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
H. Abandonment of a dog. No person shall abandon a dog. Any person who
shall violate this subsection shall be subject to a fine of $500. Any
person who shall abandon a dog near a roadway shall be subject to a
fine of $1,000. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
I. Barter or sale, of dog flesh, fur or hair. No person shall knowingly sell,
barter or offer for sale or barter, at wholesale or retail, the flesh, fur or
hair of a domestic dog or any product made in whole or in part from the
flesh, fur or hair of a domestic dog. This subsection shall not apply to
the sale or barter, or offering for sale or barter, of the fur or hair of a
domestic dog cut at a commercial grooming establishment or at a
veterinary office or clinic or for scientific research purposes. Any
person who shall violate this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
J. Proper care required. No person shall fail to provide their animals with
sufficient and wholesome food and fresh water, proper shelter,
protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering and with humane care and treatment. For the purpose of this
subsection, "proper shelter" shall be defined as a doghouse with sound
sides, top and bottom with a slanted roof to provide runoff from the rain
and snow. There shall be a covering over the entranceway to prevent
rain, wind and snow from entering the structure, and the structure shall
be large enough for the animal to stand up in a natural position and turn
around without touching the top or sides of the structure. [Added
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-32]
§ 387-8 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 387-8
375:1408
§ 387-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
03-14; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-32]
Chapter 388
PET WASTE
§ 388-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste throughout the Township of North Brunswick to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe the penalties
for failure to comply therefor.
§ 388-2. Definitions.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise shall have custody of any pet, whether or not
the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement
K. No pet shop or pet shop operator shall sell, offer for sale, barter,
auction, breed or otherwise improperly sell or dispose of dogs in the
Township of North Brunswick. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a
shelter, pound or other establishment from keeping, displaying, selling
or otherwise transferring any dog that has been seized, rescued or
donated. [Added 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22]
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this chapter, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding
$1,250.
B. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in
which a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this chapter is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or violation.
§ 387-8 PET WASTE § 388-2
388:1409
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle or other
suitable container and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the Township of North Brunswick or some other refuse collector;
or, disposal into a system which is designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
§ 388-3. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
disposel of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 388-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 388-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the Board
of Health.
§ 388-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 399
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 399-1. Acceptance of standards; copy on file.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting the lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy
of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion
of the text thereof herein.
§ 388-2 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 399-2
399:1410
§ 399-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 399-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for use and examination by the public.
§ 399-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $2 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 411
REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 184. Recycling — See Ch. 258.
§ 411-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PERSON or PERSONS — Includes natural person or persons, partnerships,
firms and corporations.
§ 411-2. Certain deposits prohibited without permit.
No animal or vegetable substance or garbage or refuse or dirt gathered in
cleaning sewers, or waste from mills or factories or any materials which
are offensive to health or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render the
atmosphere impure or unwholesome, or which shall be liable to become a
nuisance or a breeding place for mosquitoes, insects or vermin of any kind
or which shall create a fire hazard, shall be deposited upon or used to fill up
or raise the surface or level of any lot, grounds, street, road or alley in this
township unless pursuant to a special permit from the Board of Health.
§ 399-2 REFUSE § 411-3
411:1411
§ 411-3. Persons prohibited from making certain deposits without
permit.
No owner, agent, lessor, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot, grounds,
street, road or alley in this township shall permit the depositing thereon of
any animal or vegetable substance or garbage or refuse or dirt gathered
in cleaning sewers, or waste from mills or factories or any materials which
are offensive to health or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render the
atmosphere impure or unwholesome, or which shall be liable to become a
nuisance or a breeding place for mosquitoes, insects or vermin of any kind,
or which shall create a fire hazard, unless pursuant to a special permit of
the Board of Health.
§ 411-4. Issuance of permit; revocation.
No permit shall be granted to any person or persons unless it shall appear
to the satisfaction of the majority of the members of said Board, after an
inspection of the premises to be used by the applicant and a consideration
of the application and the facts therein presented, that the depositing of
garbage or refuse or any of the above-named substances, or the permitting
of the deposit of garbage or refuse or any of the above-named substances,
will not constitute a nuisance or in any way endanger the health of the
residents of this township. If it shall appear to the majority of the members
of said Board at any time during the depositing of garbage or refuse or
any of the above-named substances, or the permitting of the deposit of
garbage or refuse or any of the above-named substances, under a permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter, that the same then constitutes
a nuisance or in any way endangers the health of the residents of this
township, or if the said licensee in any way violates the provisions of this
chapter, the said Board may revoke the said permit.
§ 411-5. Prima facie evidence of permission.
The presence of garbage or refuse or any of the above-named substances
upon the lands of any person, which garbage, refuse or any of the abovenamed
substances did not result from the use and occupation of said
resident's premises, in the absence of a special permit by such person, shall
be a prima facie evidence of permission to deposit said substances.
§ 411-6. Deposits in municipal dump.
No person shall deposit refuse or waste material of any kind upon the
municipal dump without obtaining a permit from the Board of Health. Said
permit may limit the type of refuse or waste material and may regulate the
method of dumping upon the municipal dumping grounds.
§ 411-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $5 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
§ 411-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 411-7
411:1412
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 411-8. Duration of special permit.
The said permit referred to in this chapter shall be valid for one year
from the date of its issuance, and a renewal thereof must be applied for
and secured before the expiration date of such permit. Temporary permits,
however, may be issued by the Board for a lesser period of time.
Chapter 416
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 411-7 REFUSE § 411-8
411:1413

ARTICLE I
Standards
[Adopted 8-16-1965]
§ 416-1. Acceptance of standards; copies on file.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A
copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 416-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)."
§ 416-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board
of Health upon the introduction of this Article and will remain on file there
until final action is taken on this Article, for use and examination by the
public.
§ 416-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $2 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 416-1 REFUSE § 416-4
411:1415

ARTICLE II
Training Regulations
[Adopted 8-2-1993]
§ 416-5. Title.
This Article shall be known as "Regulation 156A-1 - Retail Food-Handling
Training Regulation."
§ 416-6. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any movable restaurant,
truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle, watercraft or other movable unit, including
hand-carried, portable containers in or on which food or beverage is
transported, stored or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary
locations.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any food which consists in whole
or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish,
edible crustacea, raw seed sprouts, heat-treated vegetables and vegetable
products or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, in a form
capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or
toxigenic microorganisms or the slower growth of C. botulinum. The term
does not include foods which have a pH level of four point six (4.6) or below
or a water activity (aw) value of eighty-five hundredths (0.85) or less.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee
shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich
shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand;
industrial feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization,
institution or group preparing, storing or serving food; catering kitchen;
commissary; box lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat market;
delicatessen; grocery store; public food market; or any similar place in
which food or drink is prepared for retail sale or service on the premises
or elsewhere; and any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge; except that agricultural markets, covered dish suppers or
similar type of infrequent church or nonprofit-type institution meal services
shall meet the special provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-8, provided that any food
and beverage vending machine shall meet the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24-11, provided further that bed-and-breakfast and community
residences, as defined, meet the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-13.
TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any retail food
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period
of time in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or
similar transitory gathering, including church suppers, picnics or similar
organizational meetings and mobile retail food establishments, as well as
agricultural markets.
§ 416-5 REFUSE § 416-7
411:1417
§ 416-7. Certification required.
§ 416-8. Fee schedule for retail food establishment reinspections
and retail food establishment initial plan review.241 [Added
4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
§ 416-9. Posting of evaluation/inspection placards.242 [Added
2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
A. No retail food establishment, fixed, temporary or mobile, shall serve
potentially hazardous food products within the Township of North
Brunswick unless and until one or more supervisory personnel are
certified in food safety and sanitation at least once every two years
through a course of instruction approved by the State Department of
Health or the Middlesex County Office of Health Services.
Organizations or groups which hold periodic gatherings and meals
should have a responsible officer of the group certified in food safety.
[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or supervisory
personnel in immediate charge of the establishment to provide proof of
such program completion to the satisfaction of any authorized sanitary
inspector requesting the same.
A. Retail food establishment reinspections fee: $50.
B. Retail food establishment initial plan review fee: $75.
C. Fees are payable to the Township of North Brunswick to the
Department of Parks, Recreation and Community Services within 10
business days of the reinspection or plan review.
D. Failure to pay the fee within 10 working days will result in a court
summons with fines as follows:
First penalty $100
Second penalty $200
Third and subsequent penalties $400
A. It shall be required of the retail food establishments of the Township of
North Brunswick to display their retail food inspection placard in the
front window or door of the establishment immediately after its issue.
The placard shall be unobstructed and viewable from the exterior. The
placard may also be posted by the inspecting official immediately after
its issue.
241. Editor's Note: Original § 416-8, Summons and complaint, was renumbered as § 416-9 by
Ord. No. 19-07, adopted 4-15-2019; and subsequently renumbered as § 416-10 by Ord. No.
20-03, adopted 2-18-2020.
242. Editor's Note: Original § 416-9, Violations and penalties, was renumbered as § 416-10 by
Ord. No. 19-07, adopted 4-15-2019; and subsequently renumbered as § 416-11 by Ord. No.
20-03, adopted 2-18-2020.
§ 416-7 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 416-9
411:1418
§ 416-10. Summons and complaint.
In addition to such other actions authorized by the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code, the authorized sanitary inspector is hereby authorized to
file a summons and complaint against any establishment which does not
meet the requirements hereof. Said complaint shall be in the name of the
Township of North Brunswick and shall be returnable before and be under
the authority and jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the Township of
North Brunswick.
§ 416-11. Violations and penalties.
B. In the event there is no entry window or suitable location, the
evaluation/inspection placard shall be pasted in a conspicuous place
near the public entrance of the establishment where the Health
Department deems acceptable and in such a manner that the public
may view the placard upon entering the establishment.
A. The owner, operator or person in immediate charge of a temporary or
mobile retail food establishment who is unable, upon request of an
authorized sanitary inspector, to reasonably and satisfactorily establish
attendance and successful completion of an approved food-handler's
training program, as defined herein, shall, upon a finding of guilt, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250. Upon a second conviction
hereunder, the defendant shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Upon a third or subsequent conviction, the defendant shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $750 and imprisonment for a term not to exceed
five days.
B. Any penalty recovered in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer
of the Township of North Brunswick.
§ 416-9 REFUSE § 416-11
411:1419
Chapter 421
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
§ 421-1. Acceptance of standards; copies on file.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems; the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems; and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof, is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6). A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 421-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963)."
§ 421-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this
Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file
in said office for use and examination by the public.
§ 421-4. Permit required to locate, construct, alter.
§ 421-5. Certificate of compliance.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a permit for the location, construction or
alteration of said sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the
Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with
the code.
A. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor
shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or
occupied which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until
the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that said
disposal system has been located and constructed in compliance with
the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid
code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for alterations to
an existing individual sewage disposal system.
§ 416-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 421-5
421:1420
§ 421-6. License for business of cleaning, emptying septic tanks,
cesspools.
§ 421-7. Denial of permit or certificate.
In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 421-8. Stop work orders.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as
aforesaid.
§ 421-9. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that the said disposal
system has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms
of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such
business issued by the Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for
a period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by
the Board of Health. Said license may be revoked for failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or any rule or
ordinance of the Board of Health.
B. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for
such removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system, $5.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system, $2.
§ 421-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 421-9
421:1421
§ 421-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $2 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 427
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 427-1. Definitions.
PRIVATE POOL — A pool which is constructed or installed to provide
swimming, bathing or wading facilities for the recreation of the owner or
occupant of a house and his family and guests and which is so located as
to be an accessory use to a residence. This definition includes all buildings,
structures and equipment constructed or used in connection with a private
swimming pool.
PUBLIC POOL — A pool which is constructed or installed to operate as
a commercial swimming pool as part of a swim club, hotel, motel, health
club, or other commercial facility, or as part of a multifamily housing
complex, homeowners' association, condominium association or townhouse
association. This definition includes all buildings, structures and equipment
constructed or used in connection with a public swimming pool.
§ 427-2. Permit required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
applications are made and approvals have been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of § 205-138, Certificates and permits.
C. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system, $5.
D. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $2 shall be charged.
E. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter,
$20 for each vehicle or conveyance.
F. For the issuance of a permit to clean or empty any receptacle used for
the reception or storage of human excrement or other putrescible
matter, $5.
§ 421-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 427-3
421:1422
§ 427-3. Private pools.
§ 427-4. (Reserved)
§ 427-5. Public pools.
A. All swimming pools shall be maintained in good working order and in a
safe and sanitary condition at all times. The area surrounding the pool
and its enclosure shall be kept neat and in good order and attractive so
as to be in conformity with surrounding properties. No rubbish, debris
or litter of any kind shall be permitted at any time.
B. Pools shall not be left in disrepair or unmaintained to provide for
stagnant conditions defined as water that is murky or unclear, providing
for plant growth or mosquito breeding, or causing a foul odor.
C. All swimming pools shall be provided with proper covering when not in
use in order to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. A proper covering
shall refer to a permanent cover that shall properly fit the pool and not
a tarp (tarpaulin) or other loosely fitted covering that is inadequately
fitted and deteriorates with weather conditions. Covers shall also not
allow for the pooling of water or rain water on the top. Covering frames
may be utilized if they:
(1) Prevent the pooling of water; and
(2) Are constructed safely and adequately to prevent injury or harm.
D. Aboveground permanent pools.
(1) Aboveground permanent pools may also be drained if not in use.
Draining may only occur when no water quality chemicals are
present in the water. Aboveground permanent pools that are
drained must be removed or dismantled, or covered in a manner as
to not provide for pooling water or mosquito breeding conditions.
Those pools that are drained must also be maintained as to protect
from and prevent bodily injury or harm and must be enclosed or
protected as per the provisions of this chapter.
(2) As such, the definition of "not in use" shall not refer to or include
preparations for use where chemicals or treatment methods are
being applied to water to provide for recreational bathing as such
methods are not conducive to mosquito breeding.
E. Owners may elect to permanently fill underground pools with sediment
or soils approved by the Township of North Brunswick in a manner so as
not to cause environmental pollution or harm.
A. Standard code adopted by reference. Chapter IX, Public Recreational
Bathing, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et
seq.) and Chapter 4A, Public Swimming Pools and Places, of Title 26 of
the New Jersey Statutes (N.J.S.A. 26:4A-4 et seq.) are hereby
§ 427-3 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 427-5
421:1423
§ 427-6. Inspections.
All swimming pools, bathing areas and enclosures shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the Health Official or his designated
representative.
§ 427-7. Fee schedule for public recreational bathing facilities
reinspections and initial plan review. [Added 2-18-2020 by Ord. No.
20-03243]
Fees shall be as follows:
incorporated into this Chapter 427 in their entirety by reference. A
copy of the code is annexed to and made part of this chapter without
the inclusion of the text herein. The code adopted by this chapter is
commonly known as the "New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter IX
Public Recreational Bathing 2004" and is sometimes referred as the
"Swimming Pool Code."
B. Copy on file. A copy of the Swimming Pool Code has been placed on file
in the office of the Township Clerk and shall remain on file there for use
and examination by the public.
C. Permits required.
(1) An annual permit shall be required for the operation of a public
pool and obtained from the Township Clerk. Annual permits shall
be effective May 1 of each year and expire April 30 of each year.
(2) The fee for the issuance and renewal of an annual permit to operate
a public swimming pool shall be $50.
(3) Permits shall also be secured from the Construction Official as
required by the Uniform Construction Code for an annual pool
inspection.
D. Revocation of permit. Permits may be revoked by the Health Official or
the Construction Official for failure to comply with this chapter or with
the standard code as cited in § 427-5A.
A. Public recreational bathing facility reinspections fee: $50.
B. Public recreational bathing initial plan review fee: $75.
C. Fees are payable to the Township of North Brunswick to the
Department of Parks, Recreation, and Community Services within 10
business days of the reinspection or plan review.
D. Failure to pay the fee within 10 working days will result in a court
summons with fines as follows:
243. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 427-7 and 427-8 as §§ 427-8 and
427-9, respectively.
§ 427-5 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § 427-7
421:1424
§ 427-8. Enforcement.
§ 427-9. Violations and penalties.
First penalty $100
Second penalty $200
Third and subsequent penalties $400
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
hereby conferred upon the Township Health Official, and the Director of
Community Development, or his designated representative, who shall
have such powers as are conferred upon him by this chapter, and as
reasonably may be implied.
B. It shall be the duty of the Health Official, and the Director of
Community Development, or his designated representative, to inspect
and remedy any conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter,
and he shall have the right to enter any building or premises during the
daytime in the course of his duties.
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by this chapter is found, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
within such time as shall be specified therein but not less than 10 days
from the date of service thereof. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to
such owner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
B. If the owner, upon being notified as provided in § 427-5 hereof, shall not
comply with such notice within the time specified therein and fails to
remove or abate such nuisance, the Township Health Official or the
Director of Community Development, or their designated
representative(s), shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to
be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as the
Township Health Official or Director of Community Development shall
deem proper.
C. In any case where the aforesaid nuisances are required to be removed
or abated from any lands as provided for in § 427-5B hereof:
(1) The Township Health Official or the Director of Community
Development shall certify the cost thereof to the Mayor and Council
who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause
the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands; the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, to bear interest at the same
rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes.
(2) The Director of Community Development or the Township Health
Official may, in the alternative, certify the costs of abatement of the
§ 427-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 427-9
421:1425
Appendix
Chapter A432
POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter A433
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street excavations — See Ch. 297. Registration of utilities — See Ch. 323.
§ A433-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
nuisance to the Mayor and Council with a request that the Mayor
and Council institute suit in civil court against the property owner
to recover all costs of abatement, together with interest,
reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs, as the court shall allow
from said property owner.
D. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is
issued under the terms hereof, be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed
$250. The continuation of such violation on each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons
allowing or permitting the continuance of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
(2) For a second offense within two years of any prior conviction under
this chapter, by a fine not less than $250 and not to exceed $500.
(3) For a third offense or any subsequent offenses within 10 years of
any prior conviction under this chapter, by a fine of not less than
$500 and not to exceed $2,000 or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and
imprisonment. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article
and each day that each such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 427-9 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § A433-1
A432:1426
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of North Brunswick in
the County of Middlesex, and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — CSC TKR d/b/a Cablevision of Raritan Valley ("Cablevision"),
the grantee of rights under this chapter.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,244 or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to, those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premise where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A433-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
244. Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 51 et seq.
§ A433-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A433-3
A432:1427
§ A433-3. Grant of authority.
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the Township of a cable television system or other communications facility,
and for the provision of any communication service over such facilities.
Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon
prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A433-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A433-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-16, and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, both the Township
and Cablevision shall be bound by the terms of this municipal consent until
such time as Cablevision converts the municipal consent (and any certificate
of approval) into a system-wide franchise.
§ A433-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A433-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
franchise territory, as described in the application for municipal consent, at
Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A433-8. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
service area to those residences within the franchise territory which are
located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes per mile or
greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where residents agree
to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the line extension
formula as provided by the company in its application for municipal consent.
§ A433-9. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
§ A433-3 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § A433-9
A432:1428
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Township. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to permit the Township to require payment of a
franchise fee by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other
cable television service providers offering service in the municipality.
§ A433-10. Free service.
§ A433-11. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its cable plant and facilities in the Township:
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public
libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within the Township.
B. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the
following: one standard installation per school or library; one cable
modem per installation; and basic cable modem service for the term of
this chapter for each installation. This offer shall be subject to the
terms, conditions and use policies of the company as those policies may
exist from time to time.
C. Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
one municipally owned facility, without charge, the following: one
standard installation; one cable modem per installation; and basic cable
modem service for the term of this chapter for each installation. This
offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of the
Company as those policies may exist from time to time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove or
relocate its equipment at its own expense.
§ A433-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A433-11
A432:1429
§ A433-12. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A433-13. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A433-14. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A433-15. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, and
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A433-11 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § A433-16
A432:1430
§ A433-16. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this Agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A433-17. Rates.
§ A433-18. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
A. The rates of the Company for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly broadcast basic level of cable television service
rate to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes to cable
television services provided by the company, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age;
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21;
(3) The senior citizen discount herein relates only to the broadcast
basic level of cable television service and shall not apply to any
additional service, feature, or equipment offered by the company,
including any premium channel services and pay-per-view services;
and
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or perchannel
a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
C. The company shall have no further obligation to provide the senior
discount herein in the event that the company converts the municipal
consent granted herein to a system-wide franchise in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1; or upon Board approval of a certification that
another cable television service provider offering services to residents
of the Township files, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30(d), that it is
capable of serving 60% or more of the households within the Township.
In the event the company does cease providing a senior discount
pursuant to this provision, it shall comply with all notice requirements
of applicable law.
§ A433-16 POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A433-18
A432:1431
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A433-19. Equitable terms.
§ A433-20. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this chapter, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the cable services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated
entities or assignees should, within six months after such expiration,
termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an
open video system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A433-21. Public, educational, and governmental access.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its Franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the Franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Township shall be under no obligation
to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Township's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, Township agrees to support the company's petition
to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of competitive
disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
§ A433-18 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § A433-21
A432:1432
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services to the residents of
the Township as described in the application for municipal consent. All
Cablevision support for PEG access shall be for the exclusive benefit of
Cablevision's subscribers.
B. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall continue to provide and maintain one fiber access
return feed at each of the following two locations: Township Hall (710
Hermann Road); and North Brunswick Township High School (1436 US
Highway 130). The Township shall use said return feeds exclusively for
noncommercial public, education and government access programming
in the cable system.
D. If, during the term of this Agreement, the PEG access channel provided
to the Township by Cablevision carries original, nontext, nonduplicative
programming for at least 50% of the time between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. for 12 consecutive weeks, the Township shall have the right to
request an additional PEG access channel. Upon receipt of such
request, Cablevision shall make such additional PEG access channel
available within 120 days. In the event the additional PEG access
channel provided to the Township fails to carry original, nontext,
nonduplicative programming for at least 25% of the time between 10:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. within one year of being provided to the Township,
or at any time thereafter for 12 consecutive weeks, such additional PEG
access channel shall revert to Cablevision for its sole and exclusive use
after Cablevision provides the Township 90 days advance notice of such
reversion.
E. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
section.
F. In consideration of the rights granted in this chapter, Cablevision shall
provide the Township with a one-time PEG grant of up to $110,000
payable as follows: an initial grant payment of $45,600 within 60 days
of the issuance of the Certificate of Approval by the Board of Public
Utilities (the "Initial Grant"); and two grants of $4,600 each provided in
annual installments upon written request by the Township (the "Annual
Grant"). The Annual Grant shall be payable to the Township within 90
days from receipt of the Township's annual written request. Cablevision
§ A433-21 POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A433-21
A432:1433
§ A433-22. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted, in writing, to the Township by the company except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this chapter, or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A433-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws, as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ A433-24. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A433-25. Notice.
Notices required under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be mailed,
first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party may
change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change in
writing at least 30 days prior to the time such change becomes effective.
The time to respond to notices under this chapter shall run from receipt of
such written notice.
shall not be obligated to make any additional payments beyond year 15
of the franchise term.
G. The Township agrees that the initial grant and the annual grant
provided pursuant to Subsection E shall be used for the exclusive
support of PEG access programming, such as the purchase and/or
rental of PEG access equipment and facilities. On request, the Township
shall provide Cablevision with a certification of compliance with this
section.
H. The company shall have no further obligation to provide any PEG grant
payments due and payable after the date upon which the Company
converts the municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide
franchise in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1.
§ A433-21 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § A433-25
A432:1434
Notices to the company shall be mailed to:
Cablevision Systems Corporation
111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Vice President for Government/Public Affairs, New Jersey
With a copy to:
Cablevision of Raritan
1111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Legal Department
Notices to the Township shall be mailed to:
Township of North Brunswick
710 Hermann Road
North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902
Attention: Township Administrator
§ A433-26. Effective date and board of public utility approval.
This chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval
as issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material
terms of this chapter. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the company to
seek modification of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
Chapter A434
WATERFOWL, FEEDING OF
§ A434-1. Feeding of waterfowl, including Canada geese.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FEED or FEEDING — The act of or the furnishing of food or other
sustenance which is essential for growth or maintenance.
PERSON(S) — An individual, family, firm, partnership, corporation,
association of persons or institution commonly recognized by law as a
unit.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Brunswick.
§ A433-25 WATERFOWL, FEEDING OF § A434-1
A434:1435
Distribution Table
Chapter DT
DISTRIBUTION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-1 2-7-2005 Public contracts Ch. 70. Art. I
05-2 2-22-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-3 3-7-2005 Taxicabs amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-23
05-4 3-21-2005 Solid waste amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-05
05-5 3-21-2005 Public entertainment
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-09
WATERFOWL — Any member of the species of birds, commonly known
as swans, geese, river and sea ducks, sea gulls and any other waterfowl,
falling under the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey Department of
Fish, Game and Wildlife or otherwise defined.
B. Feeding waterfowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, cause to
be fed or provide food or other sustenance essential for growth or
maintenance to any waterfowl within the Township.
C. Signs. Appropriate signs shall be erected within all Township parks, as
well as other areas within the Township, at the discretion of the
Business Administrator, advising and alerting the public not to feed
waterfowl.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates
or neglects to comply with any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction
thereof, by a fine not to exceed $1,000. As an alternate penalty, a
convicted person may be ordered to perform community service not to
exceed 10 hours. Each day such violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable to such.
§ A434-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1436
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-6 5-2-2005 Property maintenance:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. I
05-7 4-4-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 285
05-8 Tabled
05-9 4-18-2005 Police Department: fees
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. III
05-10 5-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
05-11 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
05-12 9-6-2005 Cap bank NCM
05-13 9-19-2005 Salaries NCM
05-14 9-19-2005 Acquisition of easements NCM
05-15 10-11-2005 Bond NCM
05-16 10-11-2005 Bond NCM
05-17 10-11-2005 Bond NCM
05-18 10-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
05-19 10-11-2005 Separate stormwater
sewer system
Ch. 276, Art. III
05-20 10-11-2005 Pet waste Ch. 388
05-21 10-11-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 216
05-22 10-11-2005 Wildlife feeding Ch. 353
05-23 10-24-2005 Snow and ice removal Ch. 287
05-24 Withdrawn
05-25 10-24-2005 Dumpsters Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-03
05-26 Bond NCM
05-27 10-24-2005 Purchase of property NCM
05-28 11-7-2005 Relinquishment of
easement
NCM
05-29 11-7-2005 Taxicabs amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-23
05-30 11-7-2005 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1437
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-31 11-7-2005 Hawking and peddling
amendment
Ch. 188
05-32 11-7-2005 Dog licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 387
05-33 11-7-2005 Cats: violations and
penalties
Ch. 381, Art. III
05-34 11-14-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 205
05-35 11-21-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 205
05-36 12-5-2005 Salaries NCM
06-01 3-6-2006 Uniform growth-based
affordable housing
production
Repealed by Ord.
08-29
06-02 3-20-2006 Salaries NCM
06-03 3-20-2006 Emergency medical
services: false alarm calls
from health care
organizations, providers
and practitioners
Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-13
06-04 3-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
06-05 4-3-2006 Land use amendment
(stormwater control for
nonresidential major
development)
Ch. 205
06-06 4-17-2006 Penalties amendment Ch. 1, Art. I; 32,
Art. II; 106; 109;
116; 119; 123;
135, Art I; 143,
Arts. I and II; 157;
158; 165; 168;
184; 188; 197;
212; 219; 234;
238, Arts. I and
III; 243, Art. I;
250; 262; 276,
Art. I; 281; 287;
292; 342, Arts. I
and II; Repealed
by Ord. No. 16-08
06-07 5-1-2006 Bond NCM
06-08 4-17-2006 Assumption of mortgage NCM
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1438
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-09 5-15-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 205
06-10 5-18-2006 Termination of wastewater
agreement
NCM
06-11 6-5-2006 Soil importation Ch. 291
06-12 6-5-2006 Street name change NCM
06-13 6-5-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-14 6-5-2006 Housing preservation and
rehabilitation: grants/
deferred loans
Ch. 198, Art. I
06-15 8-7-2006 Bond NCM
06-16 8-7-2006 Bond NCM
06-17 8-7-2006 Acquisition of easements NCM
06-18 9-5-2006 Bond NCM
06-19 9-5-2006 Bond NCM
06-20 9-5-2006 Addition of handicapped
parking zone
Ch 227, Art. I
06-21 9-5-2006 Authorization of land
exchange
NCM
06-22 9-5-2006 Authorization of land
exchange
NCM
06-23 9-5-2006 Establishment of CAP
bank
NCM
06-24 9-5-2006 Salaries NCM
06-25 10-3-2006 Land use amendment
(stormwater control for
nonresidential major
development)
Ch. 205
06-26 10-16-2006 Dedication of emergency
services building
NCM
06-27 11-6-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 205
06-28 11-16-2006 Property maintenance:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. II
06-29 11-6-2006 Renaming of Department
of Public Works facility
NCM
06-30 11-20-2006 Housing standards and
occupancy limits
Ch. 197
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1439
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-31 11-20-2006 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 266
06-32 11-20-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 205
06-33 12-4-2006 Shopping carts
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-20
06-34 12-4-2006 Land use amendment
(personal wireless
telecommunication
facilities and equipment)
Ch. 205
06-35 12-18-2006 Salaries NCM
06-36 12-4-2006 Peace and good order:
graffiti
Ch. 238, Art. IV
06-37 12-4-2006 Public records: fees for
copies amendment
Ch. 254, Art. II
06-38 12-4-2006 Hawking and peddling Ch. 188
06-39 12-4-2006 Canvassing and soliciting:
permits; regulations
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
06-40 12-18-2006 Salaries NCM
07-01 2-5-2007 Bond NCM
07-02 2-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
07-03 2-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
07-04 2-20-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 205
07-05 2-20-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 106
07-06 3-5-2007 Bingo and raffles
amendment
Ch. 131
07-07 3-5-2007 Smoking: outside
municipal buildings
Ch. 285, Art. II
07-08 3-5-2007 Naming of North
Brunswick Community
Park
NCM
07-09 3-19-2007 Public records: fees for
copies amendment
Ch. 254, Art. II
07-10 5-21-2007 Affordable housing
amendment
Ch. 195, Part 1
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1440
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-11 5-21-2007 Housing standards and
occupancy limits
amendment
Ch. 197
07-12 5-21-2007 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 266
07-13 6-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
07-14 6-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
07-15 6-4-2007 Sewers: use amendment Ch. 276, Art. I
07-16 8-6-2007 Authorization of a license
agreement between
AMTRAK and the
Township
NCM
07-17 8-6-2007 Salaries NCM
07-18 8-6-2007 Acceptance of lands NCM
07-19 8-6-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-20 8-6-2007 Bond NCM
07-21 9-4-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
07-22 9-4-2007 Bond NCM
07-23 9-17-2007 Temporary construction
easement
NCM
07-24 10-1-2007 Bond NCM
07-25 11-19-2007 Length of Service Awards
Program amendment
Ch. 50
07-26 11-19-2007 Recycling amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-04
07-27 11-19-2007 Marriages and civil unions Ch. 220
07-28 12-4-2007 Bond NCM
07-29 12-17-2007 Salaries NCM
08-01 2-4-2008 Fire lanes and fire zones
amendment; fire
prevention amendment
Chs. 173; 176
08-02 2-4-2008 Purchase of property NCM
08-03 2-4-2008 Purchase of property NCM
08-04 2-4-2008 Purchase of property NCM
08-05 3-3-2008 Drainage easements NCM
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1441
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-06 3-3-2008 Public records: fees for
copies amendment
Ch. 254, Art. II
08-07 3-3-2008 Passport applications and
fees amendment
Ch. 235
08-08 4-7-2008 Recycling amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-04
08-09 4-7-2008 Salaries NCM
08-10 4-21-2008 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 287
08-11 5-5-2008 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 212
08-12 5-5-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-13 5-19-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 205
08-14 6-2-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. II
08-15 7-7-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 205
08-16 7-7-2008 Exchange of lands NCM
08-17 9-2-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Plan
Ch. 74, Art. I
08-18 9-2-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
08-19 9-2-2008 Reproduction of maps and
other records amendment
Ch. 254, Art. I
08-20 9-2-2008 Shopping carts Ch. 281
08-21 9-2-2008 Bond NCM
08-22 9-2-2008 Bond NCM
08-23 9-2-2008 Bond NCM
08-24 9-15-2008 Easement NCM
08-25 9-15-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 205
08-26 9-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
08-27 9-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
08-28 Land use amendment Not adopted
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1442
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-29 12-1-2008 Affordable housing;
affirmative marketing:
residential and
nonresidential
development requirements
Ch. 195, Part 3
08-30 12-15-2008 Affordable housing;
affirmative marketing:
administration of
affordable housing
program
Ch. 195, Part 4
09-01 2-17-2009 Property maintenance:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. II
09-02 3-2-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 205
09-03 3-2-2009 Peace and good order:
disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 238, Art. I
09-04 3-2-2009 Dog licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 387
09-05 3-2-2009 Cat licenses amendment Ch. 381, Art. II
09-06 3-16-2009 Water amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-08
09-07 4-20-2009 Reacquisition of property NCM
09-08 4-20-2009 Lease authorization NCM
09-09 6-1-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 205
09-10 6-1-2009 Salaries NCM
09-11 8-3-2009 Peace and good order:
drug-free school zones;
drug-free public property
zones
Ch. 238, Arts. V
and VI
09-12 8-3-2009 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 106
09-13 8-3-2009 Court amendment Ch. 14
09-14 Tabled
09-15 9-8-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 205
09-16 9-8-2009 Bond NCM
09-17 9-8-2009 Bond NCM
09-18 9-21-2009 Hotels and multifamily
housing
Ch. 196
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1443
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-19 10-19-2009 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 145
09-20 10-19-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 205
09-21 10-19-2009 Bond NCM
09-22 12-7-2009 Bond NCM
09-23 12-7-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
09-24 12-21-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
09-25 12-21-2009 Parkland dedication
amendment
Ch. 231
09-26 12-21-2009 Parking for the
handicapped amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
09-27 12-21-2009 Parking for the
handicapped amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
10-01 3-1-2010 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 212
10-02 3-1-2010 Limousines amendment Ch. 213
10-03 3-15-2010 Dumpsters Ch. 158
10-04 3-15-2010 Recycling Ch. 258
10-05 3-15-2010 Solid waste Ch. 184
10-06 4-5-2010 Bond NCM
10-07 4-5-2010 Public records: tax sale
certificates
Ch. 254, Art. III
10-08 4-5-2010 Salaries NCM
10-09 4-19-2010 Dog licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 387
10-10 4-19-2010 Cat licenses amendment Ch. 381, Art. II
10-11 5-17-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 205
10-12 5-17-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 205
10-13 6-1-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
10-14 6-1-2010 Public entertainment
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-09
10-15 7-6-2010 Flood hazard areas Ch. 180
10-16 7-6-2010 Ground lease agreement
with MetroPCS
NCM
10-17 8-2-2010 Dumpsters amendment Ch. 158
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1444
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-18 8-2-2010 Sewers: separate
stormwater sewer system
amendment
Ch. 276, Art. III
10-19 8-2-2010 Hotels and multifamily
housing amendment
Ch. 196
10-20 8-2-2010 Water amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-08
10-21 9-7-2010 Wreckers Ch. 356
10-22 9-7-2010 Street vacation NCM
10-23 9-7-2010 Bond NCM
10-24 9-20-2010 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 287
10-25 9-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-37
10-26 9-20-2010 Volunteer Tuition Credit
Program
Ch. 45
10-27 10-4-2010 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
10-28 11-1-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 205
10-29 9-20-2010 Littering amendment Ch. 216
10-30 10-18-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 205
10-31 11-1-2010 Property maintenance:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. II
10-32 11-1-2010 Wreckers amendment Ch. 356
10-33 11-1-2010 Salaries NCM
10-34 11-15-2010 Conveyance of permanent
easements
NCM
10-35 12-6-2010 Public records: fees for
copies amendment
Ch. 254, Art. II
10-36 12-6-2010 Salaries NCM
10-37 12-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 334
11-01 2-7-2011 Street name change NCM
11-02 2-22-2011 Land use amendment Ch. 205
11-03 2-22-2011 Housing standards and
occupancy limits
amendment; rental
housing amendment
Chs. 197; 266
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1445
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-04 Bond NCM
11-05 3-7-2011 Pawnbrokers and precious
metals and gems buyers
Ch. 237
11-06 4-4-2011 Land use amendment Ch. 205
11-07 4-4-2011 Salaries NCM
11-08 5-2-2011 Gift of lands NCM
11-09 5-2-2011 Personnel: benefits for fulltime
employees
Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-14
11-10 5-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
11-11 6-6-2011 Gift of lands NCM
11-12 7-5-2011 Housing standards and
occupancy limits
amendment
Ch. 197
11-13 7-5-2011 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 266
11-14 8-1-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-15 9-6-2011 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 287
11-16 Bond NCM
11-17 Bond NCM
11-18 Bond NCM
11-19 9-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
11-20 11-21-2011 Bond NCM
11-21 12-5-2011 Salaries NCM
12-01 2-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
12-02 2-21-2012 Salaries NCM
12-03 2-21-2012 Bond NCM
12-04 4-2-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12-05 4-2-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12-06 4-2-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12-07 Acquisition of property NCM
12-08 5-21-2012 Access and easement
agreement
NCM
12-09 5-21-2012 Recycling amendment Ch. 258
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1446
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-10 6-4-2012 Exchange of property NCM
12-11 8-6-2012 Hotels and multifamily
housing amendment
Ch. 196
12-12 8-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
12-13 Bond NCM
12-14 Bond NCM
12-15 Bond NCM
12-16 9-4-2012 Authorization of
permanent easement
NCM
12-17 10-1-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 205
12-18 10-1-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 205
12-19 12-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
12-20 12-17-2012 Salaries NCM
13-01 2-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
13-02 2-4-2013 Accept gift of land NCM
13-03 3-4-2013 Oak Leaf Village
Redevelopment Plan
NCM
13-04 3-18-2013 Amtrak license agreement NCM
13-05 3-18-2013 Urban renewal project
financial agreement
NCM
13-06 4-15-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 205
13-07 6-3-2013 Salaries NCM
13-08 7-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
13-09 8-5-2013 Parking for the
handicapped amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
13-10 8-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
13-11 8-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
13-12 8-5-2013 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 266
13-13 8-5-2013 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
13-14 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1447
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-15 Bond NCM
13-16 Bond NCM
13-17 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
13-18 9-3-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
13-19 9-3-2013 Department of Parks,
Recreation and
Community Services
committees
Ch. 22
13-20 9-16-2013 Easement acceptance NCM
13-21 10-21-2013 Cat licenses amendment Ch. 381, Art. II
13-22 10-21-2013 Dog licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 387
13-23 10-21-2013 Taxicabs Ch. 311
13-24 11-18-2013 Street vacation NCM
13-25 11-18-2013 Street vacation NCM
13-26 12-2-2013 Solid waste amendment Ch. 184
13-27 12-2-2013 Salaries NCM
14-01 3-3-2014 Salaries NCM
14-02 4-7-2014 Wreckers amendment Ch. 356
14-03 4-21-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 205
14-04 4-21-2014 Acquisition of easement NCM
14-05 4-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
14-06 7-7-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
14-07 7-7-2014 Salaries NCM
14-08 8-4-2014 Court amendment Ch. 14
14-09 8-4-2014 Salaries NCM
14-10 Bond NCM
14-11 10-20-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
14-12 12-1-2014 Salaries NCM
14-13 12-15-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 311
14-14 12-15-2014 Easement acceptance NCM
14-15 12-15-2014 Easement termination NCM
15-01 3-2-2015 Cable television franchise Ch. A433
15-02 3-2-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1448
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-03 3-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
15-04 3-16-2015 Smoking: parks and
recreation areas
Ch. 285, Art. III
15-05 4-20-2015 Street vacation NCM
15-06 4-20-2015 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
15-07 4-20-2015 Bond NCM
15-08 5-4-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-09 Bond NCM
15-10 Tabled
15-11 7-6-2015 Financial agreement with
North Brunswick Crescent
Urban Renewal LLC
NCM
15-12 8-3-2015 Easement acceptance NCM
15-13 9-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-14 Bond NCM
15-15 Bond NCM
16-16 Bond NCM
15-17 9-21-2015 Peace and good order:
noise
Ch. 238, Art. II
15-18 11-2-2015 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
15-19 12-21-2015 Salaries NCM
16-01 2-16-2016 Street vacation NCM
16-02 2-16-2016 Parking for the
handicapped amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
16-03 3-21-2016 Solid waste amendment Ch. 184
16-04 4-18-2016 Acquisition of easement NCM
16-05 5-2-2016 Salaries NCM
16-06 5-16-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 205
16-07 5-16-2016 Sewers: use amendment Ch. 276, Art. I
16-08 5-16-2016 Water Utility Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-17
16-09 5-16-2016 Salaries NCM
16-10 6-27-2016 Parking for the
handicapped amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1449
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-11 6-27-2016 Salaries NCM
16-12 7-25-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 205
16-13 7-25-2016 Affordable housing;
affirmative marketing;
affordable housing
amendment;
administration of
affordable housing
program amendment
Ch. 195, Part 1;
Ch. 195, Part 4
16-14 8-1-2016 Acquisition of easement NCM
16-15 9-6-2016 Bond NCM
16-16 9-6-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
16-17 9-6-2016 Salaries NCM
16-18 9-16-2016 Sewers: facilities charges
amendment
Ch. 276, Art. II
16-19 11-7-2016 Bond NCM
16-20 11-21-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 311
16-21 12-5-2016 Length of Service Awards
Program amendment
Ch. 50
16-22 12-5-2016 Salaries NCM
16-23 12-19-2016 Human Relations
Committee
Ch. 43
17-01 2-6-2017 Salaries NCM
17-02 4-17-2017 Police Department: fees
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. III
17-03 5-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
17-04 5-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
17-05 6-26-2017 Bond NCM
17-06 6-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 334
17-07 8-7-2017 Swimming pools Ch. 427
17-08 8-7-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
17-09 9-5-2017 Bond NCM
17-10 9-5-2017 Bond NCM
17-11 9-5-2017 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 176
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1450
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-12 9-5-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17-13 10-2-2017 Salaries NCM
17-14 12-4-2017 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 325
17-15 12-18-2017 Personnel: direct deposit Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-14
17-16 Tabled
17-17 12-18-2017 Water utility amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 19-17
18-01 2-5-2018 Property Maintenance:
Commercial and
Multifamily Dwellings
Amendment
Ch. 243, Art. I
18-02 2-5-2018 Property Maintenance:
Commercial and
Multifamily Dwellings
Amendment
Ch. 243, Art. I
18-03 2-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 334
18-04 5-7-2018 Street Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 297
18-05 5-7-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 205
18-06 8-6-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 205
18-07 8-6-2018 Salaries NCM
18-08 11-5-2018 Snow and Ice Removal
Amendment
Ch. 287
18-09 9-4-2018 Agreement NCM
18-10 9-4-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 205
18-11 9-4-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 205
18-12 8-27-2018 Bond NCM
18-13 8-27-2018 Bond NCM
18-14 8-27-2018 Bond NCM
18-15 9-4-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
18-16 9-17-2018 Salaries NCM
18-17 11-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 334
19-01 2-4-2019 Street Vacation NCM
19-02 2-4-2019 Taxicabs Amendment Ch. 311
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1451
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-03 2-19-2019 Taxicabs Amendment Ch. 311
19-04 2-19-2019 Transportation Services
Amendment
Ch. 318
19-05 3-18-2019 Rent Control: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 268, Art. I
19-06 3-4-2019 Sewer Connection Fee
Waiver
NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-07 4-15-2019 Retail Food
Establishments:
Training
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 416, Art.
II
62
19-08 4-29-2019 Bond NCM 62
19-09 5-6-2019 Parades,
Special
Events and
Similar
Assemblies
Ch. 166 62
19-10 4-29-2019 Bond NCM 62
19-11 5-20-2020 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 205 62
19-12 5-20-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 205 62
19-13 6-3-2019 Emergency
Medical
Services
Ch. 164 62
19-14 8-5-2019 Personnel Ch. 61 62
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1452
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-15 6-24-2019 Defense and
Indemnification
Repealer;
Health
Benefits
Repealer;
Motor Vehicle
Maintenance
Department
Repealer;
Officers and
Employees
Repealer;
Salaries and
Compensation
Repealer; Tax
Collector
Pension
Repealer
Ch. 19,
reference
only; Ch. 37,
reference
only; Ch. 53,
reference
only; Ch. 58,
reference
only; Ch. 79,
reference
only; Ch. 87,
reference
only
62
19-16 8-5-2019 Police
Department:
Employment
by Outside
Entities
Ch. 69, Art.
VI
62
19-17 8-5-2019 Water Utility Ch. 352 62
19-18 8-5-2019 Peace and
Good Order:
Disorderly
Conduct
Amendment
Ch. 238, Art.
I
62
19-19 8-5-2019 Sewers: Use
Amendment
Ch. 276, Art.
I
62
19-20 9-3-2019 Exceed
Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 62
19-21 9-3-2019 Bond NCM 62
19-22 9-3-2019 Bond NCM 62
19-23 9-3-2019 Bond NCM 62
19-24 9-3-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 205 62
19-25 9-3-2019 Salaries NCM 62
§ DL-1 DISTRIBUTION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1453
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-26 9-16-2019 Construction
Codes,
Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 147 62
19-27 12-2-2019 Salaries NCM 62
19-28 12-16-2019 Parking:
Parking for
the
Handicapped
Amendment
Ch. 227, Art.
I
62
20-01 2-3-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 334 62
20-02 2-18-2020 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 205 62
20-03 2-18-2020 Retail Food
Establishments:
Training
Regulations
Amendment;
Swimming
Pools
Amendment
Ch. 416, Art.
II; Ch. 427
62
20-04 2-18-2020 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 205 62
20-05 3-16-2020 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 62
20-06 4-6-2020 Bond NCM 62
20-07 4-6-2020 Bond NCM 62
20-08 4-6-2020 Bond NCM 62
20-09 4-6-2020 Salaries NCM 62
20-10 4-6-2020 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 184 62
20-11 4-20-2020 Acquisition of
Land
NCM 62
§ DL-1 NORTH BRUNSWICK CODE § DL-1
DT:1454

LAND USE
205 Attachment 6

Zoning Ordinance of the Township of North Brunswick
Middlesex County, New Jersey
[Amended 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-32; 2-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]

Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements

Zone Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Lot Depth Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Lot Coverage Stories Feet Max. Impervious Coverage Minimum Floor Area

R-1 20,000 120 120 40 15 35 20% 5 5 15% 2½ 30 40% 900
R-2 15,000 100 100 40 12 28 20% 5 5 20% 2½ 30 50% 800
R-3 10,000 90/100 90 35 8 20 20% 5 5 25% 2½ 30 60% 700
R-4 7,500 75/90 90 30 6 18 20% 5 5 25% 2½ 30 60% 700
R-4A 7,500 75/90 90 30 6 18 20% 5 5 25% 2½ 30 60% 700
R-5 - 300 400 (A) 75 150 75 75 75 25% 2½ 30 60% (B)
R-6(C) - 150 150 45 15 35 20% 5 5 15% 2½ 30 40% 900
R-7 - 300 200 30 35 70 35 10 10 30% 7 70 60% 300
R-M Not applicable
R-T-D Not applicable
C-1 - 100/125 100 (D) 10 20 20 5 5 40% 2½ 30 80% --
NOTES:
(A) As specified in § 205-56A(1).
(B) As specified in § 205-56B(6).
(C) The standards in this schedule apply to the development of single-family dwellings which are not part of a PRD or ERD development; see §§ 205-59 and 205-60 for standards applicable to PRD and ERD developments.
(D) As specified in § 205
