Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98:12]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Norwood of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Norwood, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 323, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Norwood," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Norwood by impressing thereon the Seal of the borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Norwood" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Norwood, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
of Norwood to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 NORWOOD CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 3-1-1998.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part
of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and
other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Mayor and Council that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
§ 1-13 NORWOOD CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)1
§ 1-15. (Reserved)
§ 1-16. (Reserved)
§ 1-17. (Reserved)
§ 1-18. (Reserved)
1. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, General Penalty, adopted as Sec. 3-1 of the Revised General
Ordinances, was superseded 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05:14. See now Ch. 174, Penalties and
Fines.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7

ARTICLE III
Use and Construction
[Adopted as Ch. 1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 1-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood in the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — The governing body of the borough,
constituted and elected pursuant to law.
CHAPTER — One of the major divisions of the Code identified by a Arabic
numeral, and divided by subject matter.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the borough government
established or designated by ordinance of this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the borough government
assigned to such organizational unit by the Borough Council.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
SECTION — A major subdivision of a chapter.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
SUBSECTION — A subdivision of a section.
WRITING AND WRITTEN — Includes printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-20. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require, the
following rules of construction shall apply:
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. The singular
number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
C. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
D. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
E. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
F. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
§ 1-20 NORWOOD CODE § 1-20
1:10
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
§ 5-1. Departments, boards and commissions.
There shall be the following departments, boards and commissions of the
borough:
§ 5-2. Standing committees. [Amended 6-25-1997 by Ord. No.
97:06]
The Council shall have the sole and exclusive authority to establish standing
committees of the Council and to appoint the chairpersons and members
thereof, which committees shall include but not be limited to finance and
insurance, public safety, property, zoning and planning, public works,
buildings and sewers, public utilities, health and welfare and personnel/
labor relations.
§ 5-3. Powers and duties of department heads.
The Mayor and Council may appoint an administrative department head for
any department in accordance with this Code. The administrative head of
the department, subject to the Code and the approval and direction of the
Mayor and Council, shall:
A. Departments.
(1) Department of Finance and Audits.
(2) Department of Public Works.
(3) Police Department.
(4) Department of Transportation and Public Utility.
(5) Department of Property and Planning.
(6) Department of Health and Welfare.
B. Boards and agencies.
(1) Municipal Court.
(2) Board of Adjustment.
(3) Planning Board.
(4) Board of Assistance.
(5) Board of Health.
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
§ 1-20 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION § 5-3
5:11
Chapter 10
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 10-1. Board of Assistance.
There shall be a Board of Assistance of the Borough composed of three
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. One member of the Board shall serve for a term of one year, and
such member may be a member of the governing body. Two members of
the Board shall serve for terms of two years on a staggered basis. All
members shall serve without compensation. The Board of Assistance shall
have such powers and perform such duties as are prescribed by general law
and ordinance and shall appoint a Director of Welfare pursuant to state law.
§ 10-2. Board of Health.
B. Direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
departmental appropriations.
D. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Mayor and Council.
E. Provide such information and reports on the work of his department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor and Council.
F. Exercise such other or different powers of administrative supervision
and direction as the Mayor and Council may delegate to him.
A. Established. There shall be a Board of Health in the Borough which
shall consist of seven members and two alternate members. The
member's of the Board of Health shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council. Members shall be
appointed for terms of three years, and appointments to fill vacancies
shall be made in the same manner as original appointments for the
unexpired term only. Alternate members shall be appointed for two
years subject to N.J.S.A. 26:3-3. [Amended 12-7-1999 by Ord. No.
99:08]
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Health shall have the power and
authority to adopt ordinances relating to the protection of the health of
Borough residents, shall employ necessary personnel and fix their
salaries and shall have under its jurisdiction the Bureau of Vital
Statistics of the Borough, the Health Officer and such other employees
as are necessary to carry out its duties. The Board of Health shall have
all of the jurisdiction conferred upon boards of health by Title 26 of the
Revised Statutes.
§ 5-3 NORWOOD CODE § 10-3
10:12
§ 10-3. Environmental Commission.
A. Creation of Commission. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is
hereby established in and for the Borough, an Environmental
Commission to be known as the "Environmental Commission of the
Borough of Norwood."
B. Membership, appointments and qualifications; alternate members.
(1) The Environmental Commission shall be comprised of seven
members, one of whom shall also be a member of the Norwood
Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the Borough.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the creation of
this Commission and upon the occasion of each vacancy or
termination of each term of office, as hereinafter defined. In the
event that the Mayor shall fail or refuse to appoint within 30 days
from the date of creation of this Commission, or occasion of
vacancy or termination of term of office, then and in that event the
members shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council.
(2) Alternate members. There shall be two alternate members to the
Environmental Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and who shall be designated by the Mayor as Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2 and who shall serve in rotation and only during the
absence or disqualification of any regular member or members. No
alternate shall act or sit as a member of the Environmental
Commission where his action or participation in a matter shall
increase the Commission membership reviewing said matter to
more than seven members.
C. Terms of office; vacancies. In order to first create an Environmental
Commission, two members shall be appointed for a one-year term
expiring December 31, 1982, two members shall be appointed for twoyear
terms expiring December 31, 1983, and three members shall be
appointed for three-year terms expiring on December 31, 1984.
Thereafter, as the aforesaid terms expire, each Commissioner shall be
appointed for a term of three years, commencing upon the first day of
January of the year in which the appointment is made. In the event that
a member's term on the Planning Board shall terminate prior to the
expiration of his term on the Environmental Commission, then a
replacement from said body shall be designated to fill the unexpired
term on the Commission in order to ensure such representation. All
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only, in the same
manner as the original appointment.
D. Alternate members; terms of office. In order to create the office of
alternate member to the Environmental Commission, Alternate No. 1
shall be appointed for a two-year term expiring December 31, 1984.
Thereafter, as the aforesaid terms expire, each alternate shall be
appointed for a term of two years, commencing upon the first day of
January of the year in which the appointment is made. Vacancies in the
§ 10-3 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 10-3
10:13
term of alternate shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection C above.
E. Compensation of members. The members of the Environmental
Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
F. Powers of Commission. The Environmental Commission shall have the
following powers:
(1) To study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation.
(2) To study and make recommendations concerning the water
resources management.
(3) To study and make recommendations concerning air pollution
control.
(4) To study and make recommendations concerning solid waste
management.
(5) To study and make recommendations concerning noise control.
(6) To study and make recommendations concerning soil and
landscape protection.
(7) To study and make recommendations concerning environmental
appearances.
(8) To study and make recommendations concerning marine resources
as well as protection of flora and fauna.
(9) To conduct research into the use or potential use of open land areas
of the Borough.
(10) To coordinate the activities of other unofficial bodies or
organizations concerned with the use of open space.
(11) To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and
pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes and powers as herein set forth.
(12) To promote in general an environmental, ecological conservation
and natural resources program for the Borough.
(13) In addition to the aforesaid upon designation by the Mayor and
Council to act as liaison between other Environmental
Commissions or governing bodies of other municipalities along
with federal agencies on a county, state or federal level.
G. Index of open areas. The Environmental Commission shall create and
maintain an index of all open areas in the Borough for the publicly or
privately owned areas in order to obtain information on the proper
present and future use of such areas and may from time to time
§ 10-3 NORWOOD CODE § 10-3
10:14
recommend to the Planning Board of the Borough such programs
concerning such open space for inclusion in the Master Plan of the
Borough and for prospective development and use of such areas.
H. Management of properties. If authorized and approved by the Mayor
and Council, the Environmental Commission may manage for
environmental and conservation purposes such lands which are owned
in whole or in part by the Borough. In the event that the Commission
should be so designated to manage certain properties, such
management shall not necessarily be exclusive but may be jointly with
the Mayor and Council, or with other bodies or agencies, if in the
opinion of the Mayor and Council such joint management is necessary
and proper. In conjunction with the said management the Commission
may recommend rules and regulations for the use of said properties and
the conduct of all persons using same, which rules and regulations shall
be subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council or any joint
agencies charged with the final responsibility for management of said
lands.
I. Acquisition of lands. If authorized and approved by the Mayor and
Council, the Environmental Commission may acquire property, both
real and personal, in the name of the municipality by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any
lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas in the Borough.
J. Reports and records; meetings. The Environmental Commission shall
convene no less than four times a year and may convene more often at
the determination of the members of said Commission. Minutes shall be
kept of all meetings and records maintained by the Commission of all of
its activities. The Commission shall report periodically as required by
the Mayor and Council, but in any event shall make, on or before the
first day of December of each year, an annual report to the Mayor and
Council, which report shall be comprehensive and detailed indicating
operations, receipts, disbursements and expenditures for the preceding
year and plans or projects, if known, for the following year.
K. Organization. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve
as Chairman and Presiding Officer of the Environmental Commission.
The Chairman shall, within 30 days of the appointment of Commission
members, call a meeting for the purpose of organizing this body, at
which meeting the Commission shall choose by majority vote a person
designated to act in the absence of the Chairman. The Commission is
also authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation,
§ 10-3 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 10-3
10:15
§ 10-4. Community Development Grant Advisory Committee.
which bylaws shall not become effective without the approval of the
Mayor and Council.
L. Appropriations. The Environmental Commission shall have no powers
to raise funds of its own other than the receipt of gifts of real or
personal property as hereinabove provided with the exception that the
Mayor and Council may authorize private fund-raising activities if
deemed necessary. The Mayor and Council may annually determine and
appropriate sufficient sums for the care, custody, policing, or
maintenance of lands controlled in whole or in part by such Commission
which funds shall be raised by taxation as part of the municipal budget.
In addition the Mayor and Council may appropriate annually a sum for
the expenses incurred by the Environmental Commission.
M. Removal of Commissioner. The Borough Council may remove any
member of the Commission for cause, on written charges served upon
the member and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A. Creation of Committee. There is hereby created in the Borough a
Community Development Grant Advisory Committee to be known as the
"Community Development Grant Advisory Committee of the Borough of
Norwood."
B. Membership; appointment. The Community Development Grant
Advisory Committee shall consist of six members, one of whom shall
also be the member of the governing body who shall serve as Council
liaison to the Northeast Bergen County Community Development
Program, and all of whom shall be residents of the Borough of Norwood.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, upon advice and consent
of the Council.
C. Terms of office; vacancies. In order to first create a Community
Development Grant Advisory Committee, two members shall be
appointed for a one-year term, expiring December 31, 1983, two
members shall be appointed for two-year terms, expiring December 31,
1984, and one member shall be appointed for a three-year term,
expiring December 31, 1985. Thereafter, as the aforesaid terms expire,
each member shall be appointed for a term of two years, commencing
upon the first day of January of the year in which the appointment is
made. The term of office of the Committee member who shall also serve
as Council liaison to the Northeast Bergen County Community
Development Program shall be concomitant with his or her term as
such Council liaison. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term
only, in the same manner as the original appointment.
D. Compensation of members. The Community Development Grant
Advisory Committee shall receive no compensation for their services.
§ 10-3 NORWOOD CODE § 10-4
10:16
Chapter 16
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 16-1. Court established; powers.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the borough pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 264 of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey,2 as amended and
supplemented, to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of
Norwood, Bergen County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal bearing
the impress of the name of the Court. The Municipal Court shall be held at
such place as the Borough Council shall from time to time designate and
shall exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred
upon municipal courts by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
E. Chairman of Committee. The member of the Committee who shall serve
as Council liaison to the Northeast Bergen County Community
Development Program shall serve as Chairman of the Committee.
F. Powers and duties. The Committee shall have no power to bind the
Borough of Norwood or to act in any way on behalf of the Borough,
without the express consent and approval of the governing body. The
function of the Committee shall be an advisory one and shall be:
(1) To investigate and determine community development, federal,
state and other governmental or private grants or funds available
for use by the Borough of Norwood.
(2) To establish and determine the needs or programs by virtue of
which the Borough may obtain such grants or funds.
(3) To ascertain the compliance of such needs or programs with the
requirements established for such grants or funding.
(4) To prepare, for eventual filing and approval by the governing body,
any and all forms or applications necessary to obtain such funding
or grants.
(5) To exercise any and all such additional research or studies for the
purpose of determining the availability of other programs for
community development of Norwood.
G. Meeting; report to Council. The Committee shall meet from time to
time, as established by the determination of the members. The
Committee shall report periodically, as required by the Mayor and
Council, but in any event shall make, on or before the regular Council
meeting for the month of December of each year, an annual report to
the Mayor and Council
2. Editor's Note: Repealed P.L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 10-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 16-2
16:17
§ 16-2. Municipal Judge; powers and duties.
There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by the
Borough Council, who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of
appointment and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. The
Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications and shall have,
possess and exercise all of the functions, duties, powers and jurisdiction
conferred upon a Municipal Judge by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 16-3. Municipal Court Clerk.
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council and who shall perform such functions and duties as are
prescribed for him by law, the rules applicable to municipal courts and by
the Municipal Judge. His duties shall include but not be limited to:
§ 16-4. Municipal Court discovery fees. [Added 3-1-2005 by Ord. No.
05:02]
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to respective complainants, receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
D. Attending Court; taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds; making inquiries as to their
sufficiency and inequity; receiving and accounting for fines in Court.
F. Interviewing persons on informal Police Court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue summonses
requiring Court appearances in this regard; maintaining and classifying
records and files.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Norwood Municipal
Court shall be submitted through the Borough Prosecutor.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of
Norwood for the discovery provided:
(1) Seventy-five cents per page for each of the first 10 pages
photocopied.
(2) Fifty cents per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
(3) Twenty-five cents per page for each of the pages photocopied
thereafter.
(4) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
§ 16-2 NORWOOD CODE § 16-4
16:18
Chapter 17
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS AND
EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Ethics Board — See Ch. 20.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 42.
Personnel — See Ch. 46.
§ 17-1. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth
in this section. Any term that is not defined in this chapter shall be defined
in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A.
59:1-1 et seq., and the cases decided thereunder.
BOROUGH ATTORNEY — The Attorney from the Borough of Norwood.
BOROUGH OFFICIAL — All appointed or elected employees, agents,
officers and volunteers of the Borough of Norwood.
CIVIL SUIT — Any civil or administrative action that is pending in the New
Jersey Supreme, Superior or Tax Courts; the courts of the United States;
any other court of competent jurisdiction; and any state, federal or local
administrative body or agency, and that is arising out of and directly related
to a public official's lawful exercise of his or her authority or duty in the
furtherance of the public official's authority or duty.
CLAIM — Any written or oral expression of the intent of any person to
prosecute a criminal offense or an ethical offense, institute a criminal
proceeding or an ethics proceeding or file a civil suit against any Borough
official, either in the Borough official's official capacity or individual
(5) Twenty-five cents for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
(6) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
(7) Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
(8) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough's copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Norwood, e.g., another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 16-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF § 17-1
17:19
capacity, for acts, omissions or events arising out of or connected, directly
or indirectly, with the performance of the Borough official's duties.
CRIMINAL OFFENSE — Any offense that is defined as a crime in the United
States or New Jersey Criminal Code, as well as all quasi-criminal offenses
whether defined by federal or state laws or regulations or any county or
municipal ordinance.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDING — Any criminal, quasi-criminal or other law
enforcement proceeding that is pending in any state or federal court
regarding a criminal offense arising out of and directly related to the public
official's lawful exercise of his or her authority or duty in the furtherance of
the public official's authority or duty.
ETHICAL OFFENSE — Any violation of the Local Government Ethics Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., and/or any Borough Ethics Ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto.3
ETHICS PROCEEDING — Any proceeding that is pursued against a Borough
official alleging an ethical offense arising out of and directly related to
the public official's lawful exercise of his or her authority or duty in the
furtherance of the public official's authority or duty.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood.
§ 17-2. Defense of civil suits.
As to civil suits in which a Borough official is named as a party, the Borough
shall defend and/or provide a defense for the Borough official as to all
claims, either through the Borough Attorney or his or her designee, through
legal counsel provided by the Borough's insurance carrier, or by permitting
the Borough official to retain legal counsel chosen by the Borough official.
If the Borough official is authorized by the governing body to retain legal
counsel, the Borough will pay only the reasonable cost of the
representation, including investigation, costs and reasonable legal fees, as
further defined in this chapter.
§ 17-3. Indemnification in connection with civil suits.
As to civil suits in which a Borough official is a party, the Borough shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough official for all damage awards,
verdicts and any other forms of civil penalty or judgment not covered
by insurance, unless it is determined that the Borough should not be
responsible on account of the factors set forth in this chapter or any other
applicable state law.
§ 17-4. Defense of criminal prosecutions.
The Borough will not provide a defense for Borough officials who are
charged with criminal offenses. The governing body may, however,
authorize the Borough to reimburse the Borough official for the reasonable
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Ethics Board, Municipal.
§ 17-1 NORWOOD CODE § 17-4
17:20
cost of the defense of a criminal proceeding, including investigation, costs
and reasonable legal fees, as further defined in this chapter, provided that
the criminal proceeding is dismissed or is finally determined in favor of the
Borough official.
§ 17-5. Defense of ethics proceedings.
The Borough will not provide a defense for Borough officials who are
charged with ethical offenses. The governing body may, however, authorize
the Borough to reimburse the Borough official for the reasonable cost of the
defense of ethics proceeding, including investigation, costs and reasonable
legal fees, as further defined in this chapter, provided that the ethics
proceeding is dismissed or is finally determined in favor of the Borough
official. In addition, the Borough may indemnify a Borough official if the
Mayor and Council, by a majority vote, finds that a Borough official who
is found to have committed an ethical offense acted in a manner that was
reasonably debatable at the time that the violation occurred and that the
Borough official's actions or omissions did not constitute willful misconduct
or an intentional wrong.
§ 17-6. Reasonable costs of defense.
The governing body, with the advice of the Borough Attorney, shall
determine what costs, expenses and legal fees are reasonable under the
facts and circumstances of each claim, civil suit or criminal proceedings.
The Borough only will pay or indemnify the Borough official for legal fees
that are based on reasonable hourly rates, and will not pay retainers to
attorneys or investigators. The governing body will determine, on a case-bycase
basis, the reasonable hourly rate to be paid to the legal counsel who is
retained by a Borough official as authorized by this chapter.
§ 17-7. Notice of claims to be provided to Borough.
Any Borough official who receives notice of a claim or is named as a
party in any civil suit, ethics proceeding, or criminal proceeding either in
his or her official capacity or in an individual capacity for events arising
out of or connected directly or indirectly with the performance of his or
her duty as a Borough official, shall promptly advise the governing body
and the Borough Attorney of the claim or that the civil suit or criminal
proceeding has been commenced and shall supply to the governing body
and the Borough Attorney a copy of any and all notices and pleadings
pertaining to the matter. The Borough official shall thereafter cooperate
with the appropriate Borough agents, attorneys, servants and employees in
effectuating the provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-8. Borough not to be liable.
The Borough will not provide a Borough official with a defense or
indemnification in the following instances:
§ 17-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF § 17-8
17:21
§ 17-9. Reimbursement back to Borough required.
If, pursuant to the terms of this chapter or any other applicable law, the
Borough has paid any legal fees, defense costs or damages on account
of a Borough official and it is later determined that the payment of same
was improper or was disallowed under the terms of this chapter or any
law, or the Borough official is compensated for these payments by any
third party, then the Borough official shall, within 30 days of the receipt
of the Borough's demand, reimburse to the Borough the full amount of the
improper or disallowed payments made by the Borough.
§ 17-10. Reimbursement for punitive damages prohibited.
The Borough shall not reimburse any Borough official for any punitive or
exemplary damages or any damages resulting from the commission of a
criminal offense or an ethical offense by any Borough official. The Borough
may, however, indemnify a Borough official for exemplary or punitive
damages if, in the judgment of the governing body, the acts committed by
the Borough official upon which these damages are based did not constitute
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
§ 17-11. Control over litigation.
When the Borough provides a defense of a Borough official pursuant to this
chapter, the Borough may assume exclusive control of the representation of
the Borough official to the extent permitted by law. If the Borough permits
A. If the act or omission of the Borough official constitutes a criminal
offense, ethical offense, actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct
or an intentional or wrongful act or omission;
B. If the act or omission of the Borough official is outside the scope of the
Borough official's employment, duties or official capacity;
C. If the act or omission of the Borough official does not arise out of and is
not directly related to the Borough official's lawful exercise of his or her
authority or duty in the furtherance of the Borough official's authority
or duty;
D. If the action or proceeding has been brought by the Borough itself
against the Borough official;
E. If the Borough official has failed to substantially cooperate with the
Borough and its agents, servants, attorneys and employees in
connection with the matter;
F. If it is not deemed appropriate by the governing body pursuant to the
provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et. seq.,
or any other statute or applicable law; or
G. If insurance coverage is available to pay any or all of the legal costs or
judgments, to the extent of such coverage.
§ 17-8 NORWOOD CODE § 17-11
17:22
the Borough official to retain legal counsel, the governing body may limit
the extent of the participation of or the payment to the legal counsel if, in
the opinion of the governing body, this limitation is reasonable under the
circumstances and will not prejudice the Borough official.
§ 17-12. Bifurcated treatment.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Borough from
bifurcating its treatment as to any claim, civil action, or criminal
proceeding, both as to whether and how it will provide a defense and/or
indemnification. Accordingly, the Borough may provide a defense and/or
indemnification for some allegations against a Borough official, but not as
to others, and may provide the defense in different forms as to different
allegations.
§ 17-13. Police officers and others excluded.
This chapter is not intended to conflict with any of the provisions of the New
Jersey statutes that now require or that subsequently require the Borough
to provide for the defense and indemnification of any public officials
specified therein, including but not limited to police officers, firefighters
and the Municipal Clerk. If any of the provisions of this chapter are in
conflict with any provisions of these statutes, including but not limited to
those that apply to police officers (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-155), firefighters (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-28), and the Municipal Clerk (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-134.1), the provisions
of applicable New Jersey statutes, as interpreted by the courts of this state,
shall prevail over the terms and conditions of this chapter, but only to the
extent of any inconsistency between the terms of the applicable statute and
this chapter.
Chapter 18
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 46.
§ 18-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADA — The Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
AGENCY — The Borough of Norwood.
DESIGNATED DECISION MAKER — The Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Norwood or its designee.
§ 17-11 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF § 18-2
17:23
§ 18-2. Purpose.
§ 18-3. Required ADA notice.
A. This chapter is adopted by the borough in satisfaction of the
requirements of the ADA and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, 28 C.F.R. § 35.107.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a designated coordinator
whose duties shall include assuring that the borough complies with and
carries out its responsibilities under the ADA. Those duties shall also
include the investigation of any complaint filed with the borough.
A. In addition to any other advice, assistance or accommodation provided,
a copy of the following notice shall he given to anyone who inquires
regarding the borough's compliance with the ADA or the availability of
accommodation that would allow a qualified individual with a disability
to receive services or participate in a program or activity provided by
the agency:
NOTICE OF ADA PROCEDURE
The Borough of Norwood has adopted an internal grievance
procedure providing for prompt and equitable resolution of
grievances alleging any action prohibited by the U.S. Department of
Justice regulations implementing Title 11 of the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Title 11 states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified
disabled individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be
subjected to discrimination" in programs or activities sponsored by a
public entity.
The internal grievance procedure can be found in the Borough Code,
Chapter 18. Grievances should be addressed to the borough's
designated ADA Coordinator, who has been designated to coordinate
ADA compliance efforts, at the following address:
A.D.A. Coordinator Borough of Norwood 455 Broadway
Norwood, New Jersey 07648
B. Grievance may be filed in writing or orally, but should contain the name
and address of the person filing it and briefly describe the alleged
violation. A form for this purpose is available from the designated ADA
Coordinator. In cases of employment-related grievances, the
procedures established by the Borough's personnel policies will be
followed where applicable.4
C. A grievance should be filed promptly within 30 days after the grievant
becomes aware of the alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of
discrimination that occurred before this grievance procedure was in
place will be considered on a case-by-case basis.)
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Personnel.
§ 18-2 NORWOOD CODE § 18-3
17:24
§ 18-4. Designated ADA Coordinator.
§ 18-5. Grievance procedure.
A grievance alleging that the borough has failed to comply with the ADA or
has acted in a way that is prohibited by the ADA shall be submitted either
in writing or orally to the Designated ADA Coordinator within 30 days of
the grievant becoming aware of the alleged violation. A grievance alleging
employment discrimination will be processed pursuant to the borough's
personnel policies, to the extent applicable.
D. An investigation, as may be appropriate, will follow the filing of a
grievance. The investigation will be conducted by the designated ADA
Coordinator. This chapter contemplates informal but thorough
investigations, affording all interested persons and their
representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a
grievance.
E. In most cases a written determination as to the validity of the grievance
and a description of the resolution, if any, will be issued by the
designated decision maker and a copy forwarded to the grievant no
later than 45 days after its filing.
F. The ADA Coordinator will maintain the files and records of the Borough
relating to the grievances filed.
G. The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the
grievance filed hereunder will not be impaired by the person's pursuit
of other remedies, such as the filing of an ADA grievance with the
responsible federal department or agency or the New Jersey Division on
Civil Rights. Use of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the
pursuit of other remedies.
H. This chapter will be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons, to meet appropriate due process standards, and to
assure that the agency complies with the ADA and implementing
federal rules.
A. The office of Designated Coordinator of ADA compliance and complaint
investigation for the borough is hereby created. The ADA Coordinator
shall be appointed by the majority vote of the Borough Council.
B. All inquiries regarding the borough's compliance with the ADA and the
availability of any accommodation that would allow a qualified
individual with a disability to receive services or participate in a
program or activity provided by the borough should be directed to the
designated coordinator identified in Subsection A above.
C. All grievances alleging that the borough has failed to comply with or
has acted in a way that is prohibited by the ADA should be directed to
the Designated ADA Coordinator identified in this section in accordance
with the procedures set forth in §§ 18-5 through 18-8 of this chapter.
§ 18-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF § 18-6
17:25
§ 18-6. Grievance contents.
§ 18-7. Grievance form.
The following form may be utilized for the submission of a grievance
pursuant to this chapter:
Americans with Disabilities Act Grievance Form
Date:
Name of grievant:
Address of grievant:
Telephone number of grievant:
Name, address and telephone number of alternate contact person:
Where are you alleged to have been denied access?
Department:
Bureau or office:
Location:
Incident or barrier:
Please describe the particular way in which you believe you have been
denied the benefits of any service, program, or activity or have otherwise
been subject to discrimination. Please specify dates, times and places of
incidents, and names and/or positions of borough employees involved, if
any, as well as names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any witnesses
to any such incident. Attach additional pages if necessary.
Proposed access or accommodation:
A. A grievance submitted pursuant to this chapter may be submitted in or
on the form set forth at § 18-7.
B. A grievance submitted pursuant to this chapter shall include the
following information:
(1) The name of the grievant and/or any alternate contact person
designated by the grievant to receive communication or provide
information for the grievant;
(2) The address and telephone number of the grievant or alternate
contact person; and
(3) A description of the manner in which the grievant alleges that ADA
has not been complied with or has been violated, including times
and locations of events and names of witnesses if appropriate.
§ 18-6 NORWOOD CODE § 18-7
17:26
If you wish, describe the way in which you feel access may be had to the
benef its described above, or that accommodation could be provided to
allow access.
A copy of the above form may be obtained by contacting the designated
ADA coordinator.
§ 18-8. Investigation.
Chapter 19
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 19-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to state that it is the public policy of the
Borough of Norwood that the Mayor and Council will not use the power
of eminent domain granted to the Borough by statute or otherwise to
acquire private property against the wishes of the property owner for
private development merely to increase tax ratables or tax revenue derived
from the property, and that this power only will be used to acquire private
property: 1) when the property is to be opened to the public or for the
public's use; or 2) when the acquisition is necessary to eliminate an existing
use of the property that inflicts an affirmative harm on society. The Mayor
and Council adopts this section because, on June 23, 2005, the United
States Supreme Court decided the case of Kelo v City of New London, 125
S. Ct. 2655 (2005). The Court's 5 to 4 majority affirmed the use of the
governmental power to condemn property, known as the power of eminent
domain, to acquire privately-owned property against the owner's will and
then transfer the property to a developer for private redevelopment only
A. Upon receipt of a grievance submitted pursuant to this chapter, the
Designated ADA Coordinator will notify the grievant of the receipt of
the grievance and the initiation of an investigation into the matter. The
Designated ADA Coordinator will also indicate a date by which it is
expected that the investigation will be completed, which date shall not
be later than 45 days from the date of receipt of the grievance, if
practicable, or unless a later date is agreed to by the grievant.
B. Upon completion of the investigation, the designated ADA Coordinator
shall prepare a report for review by the designated decision maker for
the borough. The designated decision maker shall render a written
decision within 45 days of receipt of the grievance, if practicable, or
unless a later date is agreed to by the grievant, which decision shall be
transmitted to the grievant and/or the alternate contact person if so
designated by the grievant.
§ 18-7 EMINENT DOMAIN § 19-1
19:27
because the proposed redevelopment will provide increased tax revenue.
The principal dissenting opinion, authored by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor,
would permit governments to condemn and then transfer condemned
property to private parties in only two circumstances: when (as with
railroads) the property is to be opened to the public's use, or when the
condemnation is necessary to eliminate an existing use of the property that
"inflict[s] affirmative harm on society." Accordingly, the Mayor and Council
seeks to do all that it can under the law to limit the Borough's power to
condemn and acquire property, as suggested by the dissenting Justices in
the Kelo case.
§ 19-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
EMINENT DOMAIN — The power of the Borough, whether authorized by
statute, rule or regulation, or otherwise, to take or acquire private property
and put it to public use through the legal process called condemnation.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — The duly elected Mayor and Council of the
Borough.
§ 19-3. Limitation on the power of eminent domain.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough shall not adopt an ordinance or
resolution using the Borough's power of eminent domain to acquire private
property against the wishes of the property owner for private development
to increase tax ratables or tax revenue derived from the property, and this
power only will be used by the Borough to acquire private property: 1) when
the property is to be opened to the public or for the public's use; or 2) when
the acquisition is necessary to eliminate an existing use of the property that
inflicts an affirmative harm on society.
Chapter 20
ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officials and
employees — See Ch. 17.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 42.
Personnel — See Ch. 46.
§ 20-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the
meanings indicated:
§ 19-1 NORWOOD CODE § 20-1
20:28
BOARD or ETHICS BOARD — The Norwood Ethics Board established by this
chapter.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
§ 20-2. Establishment and organization of Board.
§ 20-3. Staffing and funding.
§ 20-4. Code of Ethics.
A. There is hereby established a Norwood Board of Ethics consisting of six
members who are residents of the Borough, at least two of whom shall
be public members. The members of the Board shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
Members of the Board shall be chosen by virtue of their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local
government affairs. No more than three members of the Board shall be
of the same political party.
B. The members of the Board shall annually elect a Chairperson from
among the membership of the Board.
C. The members shall serve for terms of five years; except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for terms of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years and the remaining members
shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each member shall
serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed by the Borough for necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties under this chapter.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough shall provide the Board with
offices for the conduct of its business and the preservation of its records
and shall supply equipment and supplies as may be necessary.
B. All necessary expenses incurred by the Board and its members shall be
paid, upon certification of the Chairman of the Board, by the Treasurer
within the limits of funds appropriated by the Mayor and Council by
annual or emergency appropriations for those purposes.
C. The Board may appoint employees, including independent counsel, and
clerical staff as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter
within the limits of funds appropriated by the Mayor and Council for
those purposes.
A. Within 90 days after the establishment of the Board, the Board shall
promulgate by resolution a Code of Ethics for all officers and employees
§ 20-1 ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL § 20-4
20:29
§ 20-5. Powers of the Board of Ethics.
The Board shall have the following powers:
serving the Borough. Officers and employees serving a Borough
independent authority shall be deemed to be serving the Borough for
purposes of this chapter.
B. The Code of Ethics so promulgated by the Board shall be either
identical to the provisions set forth in Section 5 of c. 29, P.L. 1991 (the
Local Government Ethics Law)or more restrictive, but shall not be less
restrictive. Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the Code
of Ethics, and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held
thereon, shall be published in at least one newspaper circulating within
the Borough and shall be distributed to the Borough Clerk and the
heads of the agencies serving the Borough for circulation among the
officers and employees serving the municipality. The Board shall hold a
public hearing on the Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its
promulgation at which any officer or employee serving the Borough and
any other person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify. As a
result of the hearing, the Board may amend or supplement the Code of
Ethics as it deems necessary. If the Code of Ethics is not identical to the
provisions set forth in Section 5 of c. 29, P.L. 1991 (the Local
Government Ethics Law), the Board shall thereafter submit the Code of
Ethics to the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local Government
Services in the Department of Community Affairs for approval. A Code
of Ethics requiring approval by the Local Finance Board shall take
effect for all officers and employees serving the Borough 60 days after
approval by the Local Finance Board. A Code of Ethics identical to the
provisions set forth in Section 5 of c. 29, P.L. 1991 (the Local
Government Ethics Law) shall take effect 10 days after the public
hearing held thereon. The Board shall forward a copy of the Code of
Ethics to the Borough Clerk and shall make copies of the Code of Ethics
available to officers and employees serving the Borough.
A. To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with
regard to possible violations of the Code of Ethics or financial
disclosure statements by officers or employees serving the Borough.
B. To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance
of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the
holding of a hearing.
C. To forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or other
governmental body any information concerning violations of the Code
of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers or employees
serving the Borough, which may become the subject of criminal
prosecution or which may warrant the institution of other legal
proceedings by the Attorney General.
§ 20-4 NORWOOD CODE § 20-5
20:30
§ 20-6. Advisory opinions.
An officer or employee serving the Borough may request and obtain from
the Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed activity or
conduct would, in its opinion, constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics or
any financial disclosure requirements. Advisory opinions of the Board shall
not be made public except when the Board, by the vote of 2/3 of all of its
members, directs that the opinion be made public. Public advisory opinions
shall not disclose the name of the officer or employee unless the Board in
directing that the opinion be made public so determines.
§ 20-7. Investigations and reports.
D. To render advisory opinions to officers or employees serving the
Borough as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of the Code of Ethics or financial
disclosure requirements.
E. To enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics and financial disclosure
requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the Borough
and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by
this chapter.
F. To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are necessary
to implement the purposes of this chapter.
A. The Board, upon receipt of a signed written complaint by any person
alleging that the conduct of any officer or employee serving the
Borough is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure
requirements, shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint within 30
days of receipt and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and
circumstances set forth in the complaint. The Board shall make a
determination as to whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction or
frivolous or without any reasonable factual basis. If the Board shall
conclude that the complaint is outside its jurisdiction, frivolous or
without factual basis, it shall reduce that conclusion to writing and shall
transmit a copy thereof to the complainant and to the officer or
employee against whom the complaint was filed. Otherwise, the Board
shall notify the officer or employee against whom the complaint was
filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and circumstances set
forth therein. The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to
present the Board with any statement or information concerning the
complaint which he wishes. Thereafter, if the Board determines that a
reasonable doubt exists as to whether the officer or employee is in
conflict with the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure
requirements, it shall conduct a hearing in conformity with the rules
and procedures, insofar as they be applicable, provided for hearings by
a state agency in contested cases under the Administrative Procure Act,
P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.) concerning the possible
violation and any other facts and circumstances that may have come to
§ 20-5 ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL § 20-7
20:31
Chapter 21
FINANCE AND AUDITS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 21-1. Director.
There shall be a Department of Finance and Audits of the borough which
shall have jurisdiction over all business pertaining to finance. The Treasurer
of the borough, when so appointed by the Mayor and Council, shall be the
Director of the Department of Finance and Audits.
§ 21-2. Division of the Treasury.
Within the Department of Finance and Audits there shall be a Division of the
Treasury, the head of which shall be the Borough Treasurer. The Collector
shall be the Treasurer of the borough, and he shall serve for a term of
one year. Under the supervision and direction of the Treasurer, the Division
shall:
its attention with respect to the conduct of the officer or employee. The
Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the officer
or employee is in conflict with the Code or any financial disclosure
requirements. This decision shall be made by no less than 2/3 of all
members of the Board.
B. If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict with
the Code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose any
penalties that it believes appropriate within the limitations of Section
10 of c. 29, P.L. 1991 (the Local Government Ethics Law). A final
decision of the Board of Ethics may be appealed to the Local Finance
Board within 30 days of the decision.
A. Keep and maintain books and records of all financial transactions of the
borough in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Division of Local Government in the Department of the Treasury of the
State of New Jersey.
B. Have custody of all public moneys of the borough and make monthly
reports to the Mayor and Council of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unexpended appropriations. All moneys received
from any source by or on behalf of the borough or any department,
board, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by
borough ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall, by the
next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them to the credit of
the borough in an authorized public depository of the borough to the
credit of the proper account.
C. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the borough government and
each of its departments and preaudit all bills, claims and demands
against the borough, including payrolls, and require each department
head to certify that the materials, supplies or equipment have been
§ 20-7 NORWOOD CODE § 21-2
21:32
§ 21-3. Payment of claims.
§ 21-4. Division of Tax Collection.
Within the Department of Finance and Audits there shall be a Division of
Tax Collection, the head of which shall be the Borough Tax Collector. The
method of appointment, qualifications, term, tenure and duties of the office
of Tax Collector shall be as follows:
received and accepted as specified and that the services have been duly
rendered.
D. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the proper exercise of budgetary control.
E. Install, operate and maintain a central payroll system and all social
security, pension and insurance records for personnel of all
departments.
A. Disbursements. Disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall
be made by the Treasurer upon preaudit and warrant of the Director of
the Department of Finance and Audits, approved by the Mayor and
Council, except that payments from the payroll account shall be made
pursuant to Subsection B of this section. Every warrant shall be in the
form of a warrant-check payable to the order of the person entitled to
receive it and shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the
account or appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each warrant-check
shall bear the signatures of the Mayor or Acting Mayor, the Treasurer
or Acting Treasurer and the Borough Clerk or Acting Borough Clerk.
B. Payroll account. There shall be an account to be designated the
"Borough of Norwood Payroll Account," and from time to time the
Borough Treasurer, upon receipt of a warrant or an amount due such
payroll account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll
account, charging the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
Disbursement from the payroll account may be made by payroll checks
signed by the Treasurer alone or, in his absence, the Borough Clerk or
Acting Borough Clerk, upon preaudit and warrant of the Director of the
Department of Finance and Audits and approval by the Mayor and
Council of the entire payroll. In the case of error or adjustment in the
payroll, the Treasurer shall make proper correction and appropriate
record of such correction.
C. Travel expenses. Itemized claims supported by receipts, where
available, should be presented in order to obtain reimbursement for
expenses incurred by local officials where authorized to travel by the
borough. Travel expenses will be reimbursed only in accordance with
the travel regulations of the borough.
§ 21-2 FINANCE AND AUDITS, DEPARTMENT OF § 21-4
21:33
A. Appointment. The Borough Tax Collector shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. In the event
the Mayor falls to nominate such Borough Tax Collector within 30 days
after the office becomes vacant, or in the event the Council fails to
confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of
such 30 days, the Borough Council shall appoint a Borough Tax
Collector by a majority vote of at least three affirmative votes, the
Mayor having no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
B. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as Borough
Tax Collector unless he shall hold a Tax Collector certificate issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.3 or 40A:9-145.4.
C. Term of office; vacancies. The Borough Tax Collector shall hold his
office for a term of four years from the first day of January next
following his appointment. Vacancies other than due to expiration of
term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Tenure in office; removal; complaint; hearing. The Borough Tax
Collector shall not acquire tenure of office unless he holds a Tax
Collector certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-145.3 or 40A:9-145.4. Any person who shall be reappointed Tax
Collector subsequent to having received a Tax Collector certificate
pursuant to said law and who shall have served as Tax Collector for not
less than four consecutive years immediately prior to such
reappointment shall hold his office during good behavior and efficiency,
notwithstanding that such reappointment was for a fixed term of years,
and he shall not be removed therefrom for political reasons by only for
good cause shown and after a proper hearing conducted in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.8.
E. Compensation. The Borough Tax Collector shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the borough in a
salary ordinance.
F. Duties. The Borough Tax Collector shall be the collector of taxes of the
borough and shall perform all the duties prescribed by the statutes of
the State of New Jersey pertaining to said office. In addition thereto, he
shall hold the position and perform the duties of municipal collector of
arrears of taxes as established by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-143. He shall also
perform such duties as shall be outlined in relevant borough ordinances
and bylaws.
G. Other offices. No person shall serve as Borough Tax Collector who is a
member of the governing body of the borough. The offices of Borough
Tax Collector and Borough Treasurer and Borough Clerk shall be held
by the same person as set forth in the ordinance creating the position of
Borough Administrator.
§ 21-4 NORWOOD CODE § 21-5
21:34
§ 21-5. Division of Tax Assessments.
Within the Department of Finance and Audits there shall be a Division of
Tax Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor. The Tax
Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council to serve for a term of four years. Prior to his appointment the
Tax Assessor shall be qualified by training and experience, or a combination
thereof, in the valuation and assessment of real and personal property. The
Tax Assessor shall:
§ 21-6. Commissioners of Assessments.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-21, there shall be a
General Board to make all assessments for benefits accruing from local
improvements and to perform such other duties as are provided for by
statute. The Board shall consist of three members appointed by the Mayor
and Council in the same manner as other borough officers are appointed.
No person shall be appointed to the Board unless he is a resident and
citizen of the Borough and a freeholder, and upon any member of the
Board ceasing to be either a resident or citizen and freeholder, his office
shall become vacant. Appointment shall be for a term of one year, and
all vacancies caused by death, removal or disqualification shall be filled
for the unexpired term only. Members of the Board, within 10 days after
appointment, shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation that they will
faithfully and impartially perform the duties of their office, which oath
shall be filed with the Borough Clerk. The Commissioners of Assessments
shall make assessments for benefits for local improvements and for that
purpose shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties of a Board of
Assessment for local improvements as provided by law.
Chapter 25
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
B. Maintain adequate assessment records for each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
C. Maintain a current Tax Map of the borough and cause to be recorded
thereon, all changes in ownership or character of real property
assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of other departments
as provided by the Code.
§ 21-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 21-6
25:35

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Company; Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
[Adopted as Secs. 2-18 and 2-18A of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 25-1. Recognition of fire company.
The borough recognizes the Norwood Fire Company No. 1 as a duly
incorporated volunteer fire company authorized to use the fire hydrants and
water facilities of the borough for the purpose of fighting fires within the
Borough.
§ 25-2. Junior Firemen's Auxiliary. [Added by Ord. No. 90-0-2]
A. Establishment. There is hereby established an auxiliary to the Norwood
Fire Company No. 1, Inc., to be known as the "Norwood Fire Company
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary," and this Auxiliary shall operate under and
be guided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 et seq.
B. Age limitations. Membership in the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall be
open to individuals between the ages of 16 and 21 years who shall
obtain permission to join the Auxiliary from their parents or guardians,
which permission must be in writing and acknowledged or proved in the
manner required by law for deeds to real estate to be recorded.
C. Rules and regulations. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Norwood shall formulate rules and regulations to govern the activities
of the Auxiliary.
§ 25-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 25-2
25:37

ARTICLE II
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 7-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99:03]
§ 25-3. Establishment of program.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members
of the Norwood Volunteer Fire Department/Norwood Volunteer Ambulance
Corps for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the
Borough of Norwood.
§ 25-4. Contributions; administration of plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Norwood pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388;
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code, and this
article.
§ 25-5. Criteria.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as follows:
§ 25-6. Credit for prior service.
The LOSAP shall provide for contributions as credit for no more than 10
years of prior service for each eligible volunteer in accordance with the
following schedule:5
§ 25-7. Costs.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
A. Any volunteer who accumulates 100 points in a year will be considered
an active volunteer for that year and therefore be eligible for the full
benefit amount.
B. The annual contributions shall be $600 per eligible member.
A. Fire Department: Schedule A.
B. Ambulance Corps: Schedule B.
A. For regular annual services: $28,800 per year.
5. Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 25-3 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 25-7
25:39
§ 25-8. Credit for active service.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer Norwood Fire Department/Norwood
Volunteer Ambulance Corps in accordance with the following schedule:6
§ 25-9. When effective; ballot question.
B. For contributions for prior years service: $25,300 per year for an
estimated 10 years.
A. Fire Department: Schedule A.
B. Ambulance Corps: Schedule B.
A. This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a
public question at the next general election November 2, 1999.7
B. Ballot question: Shall the Borough of Norwood be authorized to
establish a Length of Service Awards Program for the Norwood
Volunteer Fire Department/Norwood Volunteer Ambulance Corps that
serve the Borough of Norwood, pursuant to the following terms and
conditions:
(1) The program shall provide for annual contributions to a deferred
income account for each active volunteer member that meets the
eligibility criteria and in accordance with the schedule adopted by
the Borough of Norwood.
(2) The program shall provide for contributions as credit for no more
than 10 years of prior services for each eligible volunteer.
(3) The proposed annual contribution for an active volunteer is $600.
(4) The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
(a) For regular annual services: $28,800 per year.
(b) For contributions for prior years service: $25,300 per year for
an estimated 10 years.
6. Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are on file in the Borough offices.
7. Editor's Note: This article was approved by the voters 11-2-1999.
§ 25-7 NORWOOD CODE § 25-9
25:40
Chapter 29
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
§ 29-1. Intent.
The Borough of Norwood desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the purpose of alleviating
the shortage of safe and sanitary housing.
§ 29-2. Consent to inclusion in area of operation.
The Borough of Norwood does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 29-3. Approval for new construction.
The Borough of Norwood understands that the Housing Authority of Bergen
County will not make application for new construction in the Borough of
Norwood without the approval of the governing body of the Borough of
Norwood.
§ 29-4. Filing of certified copy.
The Clerk be and is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of
this chapter with the Commissioner of the State Department of Community
Affairs and with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
Chapter 33
INTERLOCAL SERVICE AGREEMENTS
§ 25-9 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 29-4
29:41

ARTICLE I
Community Development Block Grant Program
[Adopted by Ord. No. 84-0-22, last amended by Ord. No. 96-0-07
(Sec. 2-26 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 33-1. Findings.
Certain federal funds are potentially available to the County of Bergen
under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974,
as amended and commonly known as the "Community Development Block
Grant." It is necessary to supersede an existing interlocal services
cooperative agreement for the county and its people to benefit from this
program. An agreement has been proposed under which the Borough of
Norwood and the County of Bergen in cooperation with other municipalities
will modify an Interlocal Services Program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1
et seq. It is in the best interest of the municipality to enter into such an
agreement.
§ 33-2. Agreement executed.
It is ordained by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood that
the agreement entitled "Three Year Cooperative Agreement; an Agreement
Superseding the Cooperative Agreement Dated May 1975 and Amendments
Thereto for the Purpose of Inserting a Description of Activities for the
Twentieth Year (July 1, 1997 - June 30, 1998) Urban County Community
Development Block Grant Program," to clarify the planning and
implementation procedures and to enable the municipality to make a threeyear
irrevocable commitment to participate in the Community Development
Program for the program years 1997, 1998 and 1999 (July 1, 1997 - June 30,
2000), be executed by the Mayor and Municipal Clerk in accordance with
the provisions of law.
§ 33-1 INTERLOCAL SERVICE AGREEMENTS § 33-2
33:43
Chapter 38
MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL
§ 38-1. Borough Council.
§ 38-2. Meetings.
A. Organization of Borough Council. The Council shall consist of the
Mayor and six Councilmen elected at large in the borough, all of whom
shall be elected and take office in the manner provided by law. The
terms of office of the Mayor and Councilmen shall commence on
January 1 next following their election.
B. Vacancies.
(1) Pursuant to the borough law, a vacancy occurring in the office of
Mayor, whether by resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by the
Council until the next annual election and until the election and
qualification of a successor. At such next annual election, the
person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired
term only.
(2) All vacancies in other elective offices shall be filled by nomination
by the Mayor and appointment by him, with the advice and consent
of the Council expressed by a vote of the majority of the members
of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least three
affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to
have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
(3) All appointments to fill vacancies on the Council shall be until
January 1 following the next general election. If such vacancies
shall occur at so short a period of time before the next annual
election that the office cannot be filled at such election, the vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner as though the same had occurred
immediately after the election and the vacancy shall be filled at the
next subsequent annual election for such portion of the term, if any,
as may still remain unexpired. At such next annual election, the
person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired
term only.
A. The Borough Council shall meet for organization on the first day of
January following each general election unless that day be Sunday, in
which case it shall meet on the next succeeding day. Thereafter, the
Borough Council shall meet regularly within the borough at such times
and places as provided by resolution. The Mayor shall, when necessary,
call special meetings of the Council. In case of his neglect or refusal,
any four members of the Council may call such meetings at such time
and place in the borough as they may designate and, in all cases of
special meetings, notice shall be given to all members of the Council or
left at their places of residence. Three Councilmen and the Mayor and,
§ 33-2 NORWOOD CODE § 38-2
38:44
§ 38-3. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Borough Council but
shall not vote except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie. The Mayor
shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint all
officers in the borough. No appointments shall be made except by the vote
of a majority of the members of the Council present at the meeting, provided
that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose,
the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same manner for
the unexpired term only. The Mayor shall make nomination to fill a vacancy
within 30 days after the appointive office becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails
to nominate within 30 days or the Council fails to confirm any nomination
made by the Mayor, then after the expiration of the 30 days, the Council
shall appoint the officer.
§ 38-4. President of Council.
At the annual meeting the Borough Council, by a majority vote, shall elect
from its number a President of the Council who shall preside at all of its
meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President of the Council
shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall
have the right to debate and vote on all questions before the Council. If the
Council at its annual meetings fails to elect a President, the Mayor shall
appoint the President from the Council and in that case, no confirmation
by the Council shall be necessary. If the Mayor is absent from the borough
for a period of three days or for any reason is unable to act, the President
in the absence of the Mayor, four Councilmen, shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may meet and
adjourn from time to time.
B. Consent agenda. There shall be an item at each regular meeting of the
Borough Council entitled "consent agenda," which shall consist of a
resolution or resolutions of a routine and noncontroversial nature not
requiring discussion. Each resolution to be placed on the consent
agenda shall be discussed at the work session next preceding the
regular meeting. If necessary, a vote shall be taken at the work session
prior to placing any resolution which has not been presented for
discussion at the work session next preceding the regular meeting and
may be added to the consent agenda by unanimous vote of the
governing body at the regular meeting. No resolution placed on the
consent agenda will be discussed separately at a regular meeting
unless brought up by a member of the public at the appropriate public
portion of the regular meeting. At the regular meeting, the Clerk shall
read the consent agenda by title only. Any resolution may be removed
from the consent agenda if any member of the public or the Mayor
requests. The Council will adopt the resolutions placed on the consent
agenda by majority vote on a resolution to adopt all items on the
consent agenda.
§ 38-2 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 38-4
38:45
of the Council shall perform all the duties of the Mayor during his absence
or inability. The Mayor, in case of his intended absence from the borough
for more than three days at any one time, shall notify the President, in
writing, of his intended absence, whereupon the President shall be and
become Acting Mayor from the receipt of notice and continue to act until
the Mayor's return.
Chapter 42
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
46.
§ 42-1. Borough Clerk.
A. Appointment. The Borough Clerk shall be appointed for a three-year
term by the governing body (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133). No person shall be
appointed Borough Clerk unless he/she holds a registered municipal
clerk certificate. [Amended 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 02:13]
B. Clerk of Council and Committees.
(1) The Borough Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and as
Secretary of any special legislative committees of the Council. He
shall attend all meetings of the Council and of such committees
when required by the Chairman and shall keep the minutes of the
proceedings of the Council and of such committees. The minutes of
each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the officer presiding
at the meeting and by the Clerk.
(2) In addition to the duties of the Borough Clerk set forth herein, the
Borough Clerk shall serve as director of all administrative clerical
staff, clerical employees employed by the departments, boards and
commissions set forth in Chapter 5, Administrative Organization,
and such other clerical employees whose positions maybe
established by law.
C. Ordinances and resolutions.
(1) The Clerk shall record all ordinances and all resolutions of a
permanent character in books to be provided for that purpose.
After each ordinance he shall also record and certify the proof of
publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and
resolution so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk,
who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon the date stated, and
when so signed the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public
record of the ordinance or resolution. Any omission by the Clerk or
§ 38-4 NORWOOD CODE § 42-1
38:46
the Mayor to record, sign or certify as herein required shall not
impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been duly
adopted.
(2) At the close of each year, the Clerk, with the advice and assistance
of the Borough Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the
ordinances and resolutions or true copies thereof, which then
remain in force and effect. He shall also properly index the record
books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions.
D. Custodian of records. The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep
all records, books and documents of the borough. He/she shall provide
a request for public records form in accordance with the terms set forth
in P.L.2001, c.404,8 access to records amendment, and upon the
payment of fees prescribed herein for the use of the borough, furnish a
certified copy of any such paper in his/her custody under the corporate
seal of the borough. Fees for copies of records or documents shall be as
follows: [Amended 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 02:13]
(1) For a duplicate tax bill: $1.
(2) For copies of all other records or documents which are required by
law to be made, maintained or kept on file by the borough or any
department, commission, board or agency thereof or by any official
acting for or on behalf thereof, copies shall be supplied upon the
payment of the following fees, which shall be based upon the total
number of pages or parts thereof to be purchased without regard to
the number of records being copied:
(a) First page to tenth page: $0.75 per page.
(b) Eleventh page to twentieth: $0.50 per page.
(c) All pages over 20: $0.25 per page.9
E. Corporate Seal. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the
Borough to be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the Council, or when necessary to exemplify
any document on record in his office, or to certify any act or paper
which, from the records in his office, shall appear to have been a public
act of the Borough or a public document. He shall not affix the Seal or
cause or permit it to be affixed to any other instrument or writing or
other paper unless required by law or ordinance.
F. Insurance, surety bonds and contracts. The Clerk, subject to the
supervision of the Mayor and Council, shall:
(1) Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D93), regarding citizens' use of their own photographic
process, was repealed 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 02:14.
§ 42-1 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 42-1
38:47
own bond which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of
all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the
benefit of the Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand
or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor,
services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the Borough
may be a party.
(2) Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Borough as obligee or any other form of security
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Borough.
(3) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Borough.
(4) Report to the Borough Council at such time as the Council may
require on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each
surety bond and contract of insurance, the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
G. Other laws and ordinances. In addition to such other functions, powers
and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, and subject to the
supervision and direction of the Mayor and Borough Council, the Clerk
shall:
(1) Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the
General Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any
other law or ordinance.
(2) Administer the provisions of Borough ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
(3) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to
him by the Mayor and Borough Council.
H. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication. No rule or
general regulation made by any department, board, agency or authority
of the Borough, except those which relate to the organization or
internal management of the municipal government or any part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Borough Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all rules and regulations which shall
be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
I. Deputy Borough Clerk.
(1) Appointment. There shall be a Deputy Borough Clerk of the
Borough appointed by the Mayor and Council for a term of one
year.
(2) Duties.
§ 42-1 NORWOOD CODE § 42-1
38:48
§ 42-2. Municipal Administrator.
(a) The Deputy Borough Clerk shall assist the Borough Clerk in the
performance of his duties in such manner and to such extent as
shall be required by the Borough Clerk with the prior consent
of the Council. During such periods as the Borough Clerk is,
with the consent of the Council, absent from his duties, the
Deputy Borough Clerk shall exercise the powers and perform
all the duties of the Borough Clerk as is provided by law. In
addition to the foregoing, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall
exercise such additional powers and perform such additional
duties of the Borough Clerk as is provided by law.
(b) In addition to the foregoing, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall
attend all regular public meetings of the Board of Adjustment
and the Planning Board for the purpose of recording the
proceedings of those Boards and transcribing same into
minutes for the approval of the respective Boards. He shall
perform such other duties as may from time to time be
requested by either of the Boards in accordance with their
rules and regulations in such case made and provided.
A. Creation of position. The office of Municipal Administrator is hereby
created in and for the Borough of Norwood, and the employment of a
person to fill such office is hereby authorized.
B. Appointment; qualifications; holding office. The Municipal
Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council. In the event the Mayor fails to
nominate such Municipal Administrator within 30 days after the office
is created, or after the office should become vacant, or in the event the
Council fails to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after
the expiration of such 30 days, the Borough Council shall appoint a
Municipal Administrator by a majority vote of at least three affirmative
votes, the Mayor having no vote thereon, except in the case of a tie. The
Municipal Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive
and administrative qualifications and training in government. The term
of office of the Municipal Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the
governing body. Removal shall only be had by a 2/3 vote of the
governing body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the governing body. The governing body
may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect; provided,
however, that the governing body shall cause to be paid to the
Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary
for the next three calendar months following adoption of the resolution.
However, in the event said resolution of removal is adopted prior to
April 1 of any calendar year, the governing body shall cause to be paid
to the Administrator forthwith the unpaid balance of his salary and his
salary for an additional six months following adoption of the resolution.
It is the intention of this provision that changes in Administrator will
§ 42-1 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 42-2
38:49
not be had as a result of a political termination subsequent to a change
of the Borough administration.
C. Compensation. The Borough Administrator shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Borough
Council in a salary ordinance.
D. Deputy Administrator. There may be designated in the same manner as
a designation of Borough Administrator a qualified Deputy
Administrator of the Borough, which Deputy Administrator shall
perform the duties of Borough Administrator during the temporary
absence of the Administrator or during the temporary disability of the
Administrator.
E. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Borough Administrator shall be Chief Administrative Officer of
the Borough subject to the policies and directives of the governing
body.
(2) Further, the Borough Administrator shall:
(a) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
divisions and offices of the Borough government, together with
the members of the governing body assigned as liaison or
commissioner of said departments.
(b) Prescribe and enforce administrative rules to be followed by
each department.
(c) Carry on a continuing review of department performance,
evaluate the present level of services and make
recommendations for change when indicated.
(d) Introduce improved methods and practices to facilitate more
efficient delivery of municipal services.
(e) Be responsible for the maintenance and enforcement of
personnel policies and practices.
(f) Be responsible for collective bargaining on behalf of the
Borough.
(g) Provide liaison with all Borough professionals, including but
not limited to the Borough Engineer, the Borough Auditor and
the Borough Attorney.
(h) Provide liaison with the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
as well as other boards of the Borough and the professionals
who serve those boards.
(i) Study, recommend to the Mayor and Council and provide
liaison for any county, state or federal services or grants for
which the Borough may be eligible.
§ 42-2 NORWOOD CODE § 42-2
38:50
§ 42-3. Borough Attorney.
F. Other Borough positions. The Administrator shall also serve as the
Borough Clerk and Borough Tax Collector. Nothing herein contained
shall abrogate or deny the right of the Borough Administrator to any
tenure rights which may accrue as the result of his serving the position
of Borough Clerk and Borough Tax Collector while serving those
positions as well as those of the Borough Administrator. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Borough Administrator from also holding
any other appointed municipal office of the Borough and affiliated
duties thereof.
A. Appointment. The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council for a term of one year. He
shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of
the Borough. In lieu of appointing an individual attorney, the Mayor
may, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint a firm of
attorneys, all members of which shall be attorneys at law of New Jersey.
The Borough Attorney shall not receive a fixed salary but shall be paid
such retainer as may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council,
plus such fees and charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
B. Powers and duties. The Borough Attorney shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are provided for the office of Borough Attorney
by general law or ordinance of the Borough. He shall represent the
Borough in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which the
Borough or any of its offices or agencies may be a party or have an
interest. He shall give legal counsel and advice when required by the
Mayor and Council or any member thereof and shall, in general, serve
as the legal advisor to the Mayor and Council on all matters of Borough
business. In furtherance of the general powers granted in this section,
but not by way of limitation, the Borough Attorney shall:
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Borough.
(2) With the approval of the Mayor and Council, conduct appeals from
orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the
Borough as he may in his discretion determine to be necessary or
desirable or as directed by the Mayor and Council.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Borough Council, have the power to
enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any
litigation in which the Borough is involved.
(4) Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to
him by the Mayor and Council or any member thereof with respect
to their official powers and duties and perform such duties as may
be necessary to provide legal counsel to the Mayor and Council in
the administration of municipal affairs.
§ 42-2 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 42-3
38:51
§ 42-4. Borough Prosecutor.
§ 42-5. Borough Public Defender.
(5) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize
for special or regular employment in or for the Borough.
A. Appointment. In addition to the Borough Attorney, there shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council a Borough Prosecutor, who shall attend the regular sessions of
the Municipal Court of the Borough and shall prosecute all cases on
behalf of the Police Department of the Borough and on behalf of all
Borough officials who have brought complaints to be heard in the
Municipal Court.
B. Compensation. The Borough Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of
New Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough. He shall be paid
such compensation as the governing body of the Borough may from
time to time establish by appropriate ordinance.
A. Appointment. In addition to the Borough Attorney and Borough
Prosecutor, there shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council, a Borough Public Defender who shall serve in
the Municipal Court of the Borough. The duties of the Borough Public
Defender shall be to serve as legal counsel to those defendants unable
to afford same and who are charged or about to be charged with such
violation of law as shall entitle a defendant to have counsel assigned to
him or her as may from time to time be established by any court of
competent appellate jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the subject
matter or assignment of counsel. The determination as to whether or
not there is a right to counsel by a defendant shall be liberally
construed in favor of that right and shall be based upon such rules as
may be promulgated by the appellate courts aforesaid or as a result of
their decisions. The Public Defender shall follow such guidelines and
prepare such forms for completion by an applicant for services of the
Public Defender subject to the prior approval of the Judge of the
Municipal Court with a view toward establishing a uniform method of
determining entitlement to the services of the office of the Public
Defender who shall serve such defendants without charge.
B. Compensation. The Borough Public Defender shall be an attorney at law
of New Jersey and shall be paid such compensation as the governing
body of the Borough may from time to time establish by appropriate
ordinance.
C. Application fee for Public Defender. [Added 11-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97:19; amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15:01]
(1) Persons applying for representation by the Borough's Public
Defender will pay an application fee of $200 at the time of
§ 42-3 NORWOOD CODE § 42-5
38:52
§ 42-6. Construction Official.
§ 42-7. Exemption from residency requirement.
The Borough Attorney, Borough Prosecutor, Borough Engineer, Borough
Construction Official and Borough Poundkeeper are hereby exempted from
the requirement of being residents of this Borough.
§ 42-8. Chief Financial Officer. [Added by Ord. No. 89-0-2; amended
6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:05]
presentation of an application for the Public Defender. The
Municipal Court Judge may, however, in accordance with the
Supreme Court's guidelines, waive any required application fee,
in whole or in part, only if the Judge determines in his or her
discretion that the applicant has made a clear and convincing
showing that the application fee represents an unreasonable
burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal Court
may permit an applicant, for good cause shown, to pay the
application fee over a specified period of time not to exceed four
months.
(2) Funds collected pursuant to Subsection C(1) will be deposited in a
dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer. The
funds so deposited will be used exclusively to meet the costs
incurred by the Borough in providing the services of the Public
Defender, including, when required, the costs of expert witnesses
and lay investigation and testimony.
A. Appointment, term and qualifications. The Construction Official shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, to
serve for a term of one year. Prior to his appointment he shall be
qualified by training and experience in the duties of a Construction
Official. The Construction Official shall also serve as Zoning Officer and
shall issue certificates of occupancy.
B. Duties. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Enforce the Building Code and have all the powers, functions and
duties prescribed by general law and ordinance for construction
officials.
(2) Keep a record of his proceedings, a permit book and a complaint
book, all of which shall be subject to inspection. He shall report
regularly to the Mayor and Council, at its discretion, the number of
permits issued, the estimated cost of such work and the fees
received and paid by him for the Treasurer.
C. Exemption from residency requirement. The Construction Official is
exempt from the requirement of being a resident of the Borough.
§ 42-5 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 42-8
38:53
§ 42-9. Assistant Chief Financial Officer/Deputy Tax Collector/
Deputy Treasurer. [Added 6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:0510]
§ 42-10. School crossing guard. [Added 9-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97:15]
A. There is hereby created, ratified, and confirmed in the Borough of
Norwood the position of Chief Financial Officer, ("Officer") pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
B. Appointment, compensation and term. The Officer shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall be
compensated in accordance with the salary ordinance. The Officer shall
serve a term of four years which shall run from January 1 in the year of
appointment, unless the Officer shall have been granted tenure of office
upon reappointment in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8.
C. Powers and duties. The Officer shall supervise and perform all
professional functions associated with the Borough's municipal finance
requirements as required by law, by the Division of Local Government
Services, and as may be reasonably directed by the Mayor and Council.
D. Qualifications. The Officer shall fully comply with the requirements for
education and certification set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13 to
40A:9-140.15, as amended.
A. There is hereby created in the Borough of Norwood the position of
Assistant Chief Financial Officer/Deputy Tax Collector/Deputy
Treasurer ("Assistant").
B. Appointment, compensation and term. The Assistant shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall be
compensated in accordance with the salary ordinance. The Assistant
shall serve as an at-will employee for a term of up to one calendar year
which shall begin on the date of appointment and shall terminate on
December 31 of the year in which the appointment is made, or until a
successor is appointed and qualified for the position.
C. Power and duties. The Assistant shall assist the Chief Financial Officer,
Tax Collector, and Treasurer in the conduct of their statutory and other
duties, as directed by the Mayor and Council.
A. The term of appointment for all crossing guards in the Borough of
Norwood shall be on a fiscal rather than calendar basis and shall run
from September 1 through June 30 of each year in order to coincide
with the school year.
B. Those crossing guards appointed for 1997 shall complete their term
through December 31, 1997.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 42-9 as § 42-10.
§ 42-8 NORWOOD CODE § 42-10
38:54
§ 42-11. Defined Contribution Retirement Program offices and
positions of employment. [Added 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08:08]
C. An interim appointment of crossing guards shall be made in late
December 1997/early January 1998 for the period commencing January
1, 1998, and ending June 30, 1998.
D. The first full year appointment made under this chapter shall be made
in late August 1998/early September 1998 for the entire term of
September 1, 1998, through June 30, 1999.
A. Individuals serving or employed in the following offices or positions are
deemed to be eligible for and shall participate in the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
(1) Borough Administrator;
(2) Municipal Court Administrator;
(3) Municipal Prosecutor;
(4) Municipal Court Judge; and
(5) Public Defender.
B. Individuals serving or employed in the following offices or positions are
exempt from Defined Contribution Retirement Program membership,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
(1) Certified Health Officer;
(2) Tax Collector;
(3) Chief Financial Officer;
(4) Construction Code Official;
(5) Qualified Purchasing Agent;
(6) Tax Assessor;
(7) Registered Municipal Clerk;
(8) Licensed uniform subcode inspector; and
(9) Principal Public Works Manager.
C. If an individual is appointed to one of the offices or positions listed in
Subsection A and the individual is not serving in a position as described
in Subsection B, the Borough's Pension Certifying Officer may
determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
(1) Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement
System on July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
§ 42-10 MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL § 42-11
38:55
§ 42-12. Purchasing Agent. [Added 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12:04]
(2) Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
(3) Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification, as set forth in Subsection B, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
(4) Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
D. This section shall be implemented, construed, and is subject to Chapter
92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Creation of position. The position of Purchasing Agent is created for the
Borough pursuant to the Qualified Purchasing Agent Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-9 to 40A:11-9.1, and the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, N.J.A.C. 5:34-5.1 to 5:34-5.5. The employment of persons filling
that position is authorized, ratified, and confirmed.
B. Appointment and term. The Purchasing Agent will be appointed
annually by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, for a
term of one year. The Borough's Chief Financial Officer may also be
appointed to serve as the Borough's Purchasing Agent.
C. Compensation. The Purchasing Agent will be paid a salary that will be
fixed by the Mayor and Council in the Salary Ordinance that is adopted
from time to time.
D. Qualifications. The Purchasing Agent is required to possess and
maintain a valid qualified purchasing agent certificate issued by the
New Jersey Division of Local Government Services, Department of
Community Affairs, and satisfy all of the requirements of the applicable
statutes and regulations then in effect for the position.
E. Vacancies and temporary appointments. If the position becomes vacant,
a temporary appointment may be made pursuant to § 42-12B and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9g.
F. Duties. The Purchasing Agent will have, on behalf of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough, the authority, responsibility and accountability
for the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) to prepare public advertising for and to
receive bids and requests for proposals for the provision or
performance of goods, services, and construction contracts; to award
contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in accordance with the
regulations, forms, and procedures promulgated by state regulatory
agencies; and to conduct any activities as may be necessary or
appropriate to the purchasing function of the Borough.
§ 42-11 NORWOOD CODE § 42-13
38:56
§ 42-13. Direct deposit of employee compensation. [Added
11-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15:15]
Chapter 46
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of municipal
officials — See Ch. 17.
Disability discrimination grievance
procedure — See Ch. 18.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 42.
§ 46-1. Personnel manual.11
The personnel policies and procedures that apply to employees and officers
of the Borough shall be those policies and procedures that are set forth in
the personnel manual that is to be adopted and modified from time to time
as needed by the resolutions of the Mayor and Council.
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
A. All full-time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Norwood are mandated to have
direct deposit of their net pay in a banking institution specified as of
January 1, 2016, in accordance with Chapter 28, P.L. 2013, as codified
under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f, Subdivisions b and c.
B. Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough
of Norwood are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
C. Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the
direct deposit mandate from the Borough of Norwood Administrator.
Such requests will be presented to the Mayor and Council within 14
days. The Mayor and Council may grant such an exemption by
resolution and only for good cause.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that: "This ordinance shall take effect upon
final reading and final approval and publication, according to law, but only after the
adoption of a resolution adopting a personnel manual as set forth above."
§ 42-13 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-1
46:57
§ 50-1. Establishment; members; line of authority. [Amended
2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 05:01; 11-29-2006 by Ord. No. 06:20; 3-6-2007
by Ord. No. 07:04; 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
§ 50-2. Police Committee; Police Commissioner. [Amended 2-1-2005
by Ord. No. 05:01]
At the annual reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council, a Police
Committee of the Council shall be appointed, consisting of three members
of the Council. A chairperson of that committee shall also be appointed at
that time, who shall be the Police Commissioner. The Police Commissioner
shall serve as the liaison between the Police Department, the Police Chief,
the Police Committee, and the Mayor and Council.
§ 50-3. Appointments and promotions generally. [Amended
6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:16; 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 05:01; 10-3-2006
by Ord. No. 06:17]
A. The Police Department of the Borough of Norwood is hereby
reestablished, ratified, and confirmed. The Department will consist of
the following members: one Chief of Police, one Captain, five Sergeants,
and as many patrol officers that the Mayor and Council may from time
to time deem necessary and proper. One Sergeant and one patrol officer
may be members of the Detective Bureau.
B. The line of authority and relative rank of the Police Department will be
in the following order, beginning with the highest rank: Chief, Captain,
Sergeant, and patrol officer, except that the Detective Sergeant will
report to the Chief.
A. Members of the Police Department shall be appointed initially and
promoted by the Mayor's nomination and appointment, with the advice
and consent of the Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.
B. Promotions.
(1) Promotions. All promotions shall be made from within the
membership of the Department as constituted at the time of such
promotion. All members of the Police Department hired after
January 1, 2005, in order to be promoted to Sergeant or above,
must have a Bachelors' degree.
(2) Eligibility. The promotion list shall expire two years after the
posting date of the final scores of the completed examination.
(a) Sergeants. Candidates must have completed three years in the
rank of patrolman, in this Department, prior to the date of the
written examination.
(b) Captains. [Amended 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
§ 50-1 NORWOOD CODE § 50-3
46:58
[1] Candidates must have completed one year in the rank of
Sergeant. (Time performing as Acting Sergeant is not to be
counted.)
[2] If all candidates for Captain fail in the testing procedure,
another complete examination is to be administered with
the requirements for eligibility to be as follows:
[a] Candidate must be a full-time sworn officer of this
Department.
[b] Candidate must have completed at least seven years
as police officer with at least three years as a member
of this Department.
(3) Examinations.
(a) As an aid in determining the qualifications of the members of
the Department, said members who meet the requirements
and wish to be candidates for the position of Sergeant or
Captain will be required to take written and oral examinations.
They will also be required to appear before a Promotional
Board in order to exhibit their knowledge of police work and
departmental duties, and finally, as set forth herein, candidates
will be required to pass psychological testing. [Amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
(b) At least 60 days prior to the date a written examination is
scheduled, a notice shall be posted at the Police Department
that will set forth the following:
[1] The position available through promotion.
[2] The date the examination will be conducted.
[3] The location of the examination.
[4] The time the examination will begin.
[5] A list of study materials.
(c) The written examination shall be administered by a recognized
agency selected by the Mayor, Council and the Police Chief.
The oral exam will be conducted by the Police Chief, the Mayor
and the Police Commissioner.
(d) Ties. In the event of a tie in the final score of any two or more
candidates, preference shall be given to the candidate who is a
resident of the municipality.
(e) Sergeant. Candidates shall be evaluated on the following four
factors in the order shown:
[1] Written examination: 20 points.
§ 50-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-3
46:59
[2] Oral examination: 35 points.
[3] Promotional rating: 40 points.
[4] Seniority: five points.
(f) Captain. Candidates shall be evaluated on the following three
factors in the order shown: [Amended 11-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 13:12]
[1] Written examination: 20 points.
[2] Oral examination: 35 points.
[3] Promotional rating: 45 points.
(4) Sergeant's test procedure.
(a) Each candidate shall be graded with the grade computed on
the basis of 100 being a perfect score.
(b) Each candidate may achieve a final point credit equal to 20
points on the written portion and 35 points on the oral portion
of the examination. This credit is achieved by multiplying the
grade attained by 35 or 20 and then dividing by 100.
Example: Grade 70 x 35 = 2,450/100 = 24.5
Grade 70 x 20 = 1,400/100 = 14.0
(c) After the written portion of the examination, the seven
candidates with the highest point totals will proceed on to the
oral portion of the examination. All ties for the seventh position
will be eligible to continue.
(d) After the oral testing portion, the points for the written and
oral portions of the examination will be added for each
candidate and only the top five candidates will continue in the
testing procedure.
(e) Promotion rating (merit) shall be administered by the Mayor
and Council and the Chief of Police, who shall be referred to as
the "Promotional Board." This Board will interview and grade
each and every candidate. Factors to be considered by the
Board in scoring the candidate's ability shall be:
[1] Performance and leadership skills.
[2] Educational background.
[3] Training.
[4] Supervisory experience.
[5] Attitude:
§ 50-3 NORWOOD CODE § 50-3
46:60
[a] Use of sick time.
[b] Efforts in supporting the Department's goals and
objectives.
[c] Handling the Department's equipment.
[d] Rapport with fellow employees and the public.
[6] Demeanor.
(f) Each member of the Board shall grade all candidates on the
basis of 100 being a perfect score. The scores of each Board
member for a particular candidate shall be added together, the
total then divided by the number of members on the Board.
This total shall be the candidate's grade.
(g) Each candidate may achieve a final point credit equal to 40
points. This credit is achieved by multiplying the grade
attained by 40, then dividing by 100.
Example: Grade 78 x 40 = 3,120/100 = 31.2
(h) A maximum of five points may be attained for seniority.
[1] One-quarter point per anniversary year, or portion thereof,
from date appointed as a probationary patrolman,
computed at the date of written examination. Maximum
points attainable are five.
[2] Officers who leave the Department on a temporary basis
for United States military duty and immediately return
upon completion of their tour of duty are credited with that
time the same as if they never left the Department.
(5) Captain's test procedure. [Amended 11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
13:12]
(a) Each candidate shall be graded with the grade computed on
the basis of 100 being a perfect score.
(b) Each candidate may achieve a final point credit equal to 20
points on the written portion and 35 points on the oral portion
of the examination. This credit is achieved by multiplying the
grade attained by 35 or 20 and then dividing by 100.
Example: Grade 70 x 35 = 2,450/100 = 24.5
Grade 70 x 20 = 1,400/100 = 14.0
(c) After the written portion of the examination, the five
candidates with the highest point totals will proceed on to the
oral portion of the examination. All ties for the fifth position
will be eligible to continue.
§ 50-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-3
46:61
(d) After the oral testing, the points for the written and oral
portions of the examinations will be added for each candidate,
and only the top three candidates will continue in the testing
procedure.
(e) Promotional rating (merit) shall be administered by the Mayor
and Council and the Chief of Police, who shall be referred to as
the "Promotional Board." This Board will interview and grade
each and every candidate. Factors to be considered by the
Board in scoring the candidate's ability shall be:
[1] Performance and leadership skills.
[2] Educational background.
[3] Training.
[4] Supervisory experience.
[5] Attitude:
[a] Use of sick time.
[b] Efforts in supporting the Department's goals and
objectives.
[c] Handling the Department's equipment.
[d] Rapport with fellow employees and the public.
[6] Demeanor.
(f) Each member of the Board shall grade all candidates on the
basis of 100 being a perfect score. The scores of each Board
member for a particular candidate shall be added together, the
total then divided by the number of members on the Board.
This total shall be the candidate's grade.
(g) Each candidate may achieve a final point credit equal to 45
points. This credit is achieved by multiplying the grade
attained by 45 then dividing by 100.
Example: Grade 78 x 45 = 3,510/100 = 35.1
(6) Required minimum total point score. Candidates for Sergeant or
Captain must achieve a minimum total point score of 65 in order to
be promoted or placed on the eligibility list. [Amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
(7) Letter of intent; requirements.
(a) Each candidate for the position of Sergeant or Captain is
required to write a letter of intent which will state his or her
§ 50-3 NORWOOD CODE § 50-3
46:62
§ 50-4. Qualifications.
Members of the Police Department shall be:
intention to take part in the examination procedure.
[Amended 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
(b) Members who do not meet the requirements to be eligible for
complete participation may, upon approval of the Chief of
Police, take the written portion of the examination for exercise
or practice only. The cost, if any, for participating in the
examination process shall be the candidate's responsibility.
The results of such examination will have no bearing on that
examination or any future examination.
(8) Removal from promotional list. The name of any eligible officer
shall be removed from the eligible promotional list for any of the
following or other valid reasons:
(a) Permanent appointment to the position for which the list was
promulgated.
(b) Inability, unavailability or refusal to accept the appointment.
(9) Notice of exam. Sixty days prior to the date for the examination for
promotion, a notice will be posted on the bulletin board in police
headquarters informing the members of the Department that
testing will be held. The notice shall give the date, time and
location for the test and a list of study guides.
A. Citizens of the United States and otherwise qualified for appointment as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:47-1 et seq.12
B. Of good mental and physical health, sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey
and otherwise be eligible for membership in that system.
C. Able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. Of good moral character and free from conviction of any crime involving
moral turpitude.
E. Not less than 21 years of age nor more than 35 years of age, except as
provided by law in the case of veterans.
F. Able to pass any written, oral and physical examination conducted
under the auspices of the New Jersey State Police.
G. Willing to take an oath before entering upon the duties of their office
and within 10 days after their appointment to support the Constitution
12.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
§ 50-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-4
46:63
§ 50-5. Powers and duties.
of the United States, the Constitution of the State of New Jersey and to
faithfully, impartially and justly perform all duties as a member of the
Police Department of the borough according to the best of their ability
and understanding.
H. Each applicant shall comply with all of the rules of the State of New
Jersey pertaining thereto. No person shall be given or accept a
permanent appointment as a police officer in the borough unless such
person has first been given a probationary or temporary appointment to
such office for a period of not longer than one year, and has successfully
completed a police training course at a school approved and authorized
by the Police Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public
Safety of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
56 of the Laws of 1961.13
A. The rights, privileges, powers and duties of the members of the Police
Department, including special officers, marshals or temporary officers,
shall be those prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey, the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the
borough and such rules and regulations which may from time to time be
established by the Police Commissioner.
B. Members of the Police Department shall devote their whole time and
attention to their duties. Notwithstanding that certain hours are
allotted to the members of the Police Department in the performance of
their duties, they shall at all times be prepared to return to duty
immediately upon notice that their services are required.
C. Members of the Police Department shall have the power to serve and
execute all processes issuing out of the municipal and criminal courts of
the State of New Jersey.
D. Members of the Department, while on duty at drills or in court on police
cases, shall wear the full regulation uniform unless excused by the
Chief of Police. Plainclothes officers appearing in court on police cases
shall wear their badge on the left breast of their outermost garment.
Members in uniform shall wear their badge conspicuously on the left
breast of their outermost garment.
E. Members of the Police Department, while on duty, shall carry full
equipment. In particular, firearms carried by members of the police
force shall be kept clean, well lubricated and safe at all times. All
members of the Police Department shall keep their firearms fully loaded
while actually on duty.
F. All members of the Police Department shall cause to be entered in the
police blotter the name and address of each person arrested, the time
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
§ 50-4 NORWOOD CODE § 50-5
46:64
§ 50-6. Vacations and sick leave.
§ 50-7. Chief of Police.
and place of arrest, the offense charged, the name and address of the
complaining party, the name of the officer making the arrest and a list
of all property taken from the prisoner.
G. Members of the Police Department shall make written reports of any
violations of law or ordinance coming to their knowledge.
H. Patrolmen reporting for duty shall report to the officer in charge of the
desk fully equipped for inspection and instructions before proceeding to
duty.
A. Each member of the Police Department shall annually be allowed a
vacation with pay, the length thereof to be determined according to the
following schedule: after one year of service, two weeks; after 10 years
of service, three weeks; after 20 years of service, four weeks.
Application for vacation shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police
at least 60 days in advance of the date on which the applicant desires
his vacation to commence. The Chief of Police shall give preference to
the applications in order of seniority of service.
B. Any member of the Police Department injured in the performance of his
duty may, at the discretion of the Mayor and Council, be excused from
duty without loss of pay for a period not exceeding one year from the
date of the injury.
C. Any member of the Police Department unable to report for duty when
required because of sickness or injury shall immediately report that fact
to the Chief of Police or, in his absence, to some other superior officer in
person if possible. If he cannot report in person, he shall send the
report by a member of his family or some other person or by signal box
or telephone.
D. No member of the Police Department shall be absent from duty unless
excused by the Chief of Police or, in the Chief's absence, some person
designated by him. After an officer has reported sick and is not able to
report for duty, he must not leave his house except in the case of an
emergency without notifying the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
person designated by him or the Police Commissioner. Members of the
Police Department shall be paid for time off while sick at the rate of one
day per month for each month of service in the past five years less days
already taken.
A. The Chief of Police is the ranking and commanding officer of the Police
Department. The Chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws and ordinances within the Borough, for the enforcement of all
ordinances and rules and regulations relating to the Police Department,
for the proper conduct of the members of the Police Department, and
§ 50-5 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-7
46:65
§ 50-8. Police Captain. [Added 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
The Police Captain will have the following powers and duties in addition to
those that may be prescribed by other laws or ordinances:
§ 50-9. (Reserved)14
§ 50-10. Sergeants.
for the efficient operation of the Police Department. [Amended
2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 05:01]
B. The Chief of Police shall have the power to assign any member of the
Police Department to his respective duties and to require any member
of the Department to perform any assigned duty.
C. The Chief of Police shall furnish to the Police Commissioner complete
monthly and yearly reports of departmental activities, covering such
matters as may be requested, as well as daily blotter reports when
requested and any other reports which the Police Commissioner shall
require.
D. The Chief of Police shall have under his control all records of property
of the Police Department. He may designate any member of the Police
Department to prepare these reports and keep the records in any
manner that he may prescribe, as well as to take charge of any property
belonging to or coming into custody of the Police Department.
E. The Chief of Police shall see that all persons connected with the Police
Department are properly instructed in their duties and shall give
particular attention to the training and instruction of new members of
the Department.
A. He or she will assume command of the Police Department whenever the
Chief of Police is absent or is unable to exercise command and will
perform all other duties that are assigned by the Chief of Police.
B. He or she will frequently test the knowledge and proficiency of all the
officers assigned to his or her command and will inspect conditions of
their posts and assume the responsibility of seeing that all general and
special orders of the Department are carried out.
C. He or she will promptly obey all orders received from the Chief of
Police; will carefully study and thoroughly understand all rules,
regulations and orders; and will note any case of misconduct or neglect
of duty by members of the Police Department.
A. Sergeants shall have immediate supervision of patrolmen assigned to
foot patrol, radio car patrol and traffic duty in their respective districts,
14.Editor's Note: Former § 50-8, Acting/Interim Chief, as amended, was repealed 11-29-2006
by Ord. No. 06:20.
§ 50-7 NORWOOD CODE § 50-10
46:66
§ 50-11. Special police.
The Borough Council may employ officers and men temporarily as special
policemen in the case of an emergency or for a term not exceeding one year,
and discharge these officers and men at the expiration of the temporary
appointment. Temporary officers and special policemen shall not be
members of the Police Department and their powers, rights and duties shall
cease at the expiration of the term for which they were appointed. Any
appointment of special policemen or temporary officers and men may be
revoked at any time without cause and without hearing. Special policemen
shall be citizens of the United States, able to read, write and speak the
English language, physically qualify and be of good moral character and
shall not have been convicted of any crime. Special policemen shall not
carry weapons when off duty. Special policemen shall be fingerprinted and
their fingerprints filed with the Division of State Police and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Special policemen shall comply with the rules and
regulations for the conduct and decorum of the regular members of the
Police Department. Before any appointment as a special policeman is made,
the Chief of Police shall ascertain whether the applicant for the appointment
is eligible and qualified and a report thereon shall be made to the governing
body.
§ 50-12. Rules and regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-21;
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 10:01]
§ 50-13. Discipline. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 10:01]
and shall constantly patrol the posts of the men under them, see each
one as often as practical and enforce the performance of duty.
B. Sergeants shall report to their commanding officer all delinquencies or
violations on the part of men under their command.
C. Sergeants shall inspect the memorandum books of the patrolmen under
their command and see to it that all reports required to be filed by the
men under their command are filed with the appropriate officer of the
Department.
D. Sergeants shall also perform such other duties as may be assigned to
them by the Chief of Police.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood is designated as the
appropriate authority to adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations for
the government of the Police Department, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118.
B. The Chief of Police shall review the rules and regulations on an ongoing
basis, and may recommend changes or updated provisions to the Police
Commissioner for consideration by the Mayor and Council.
§ 50-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-13
46:67
§ 50-14. Table of Organization.
The Chief of Police shall, with the advice and consent of the Police
Committee and subject to governing body review, prepare a Table of
Organization of the Police Department. This table shall be reviewed
periodically and revised, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, when
necessary to assure that the Department is properly organized to fulfill its
obligations. The Table of Organization may include both regular and civilian
members of the Police Department.
§ 50-15. Detective Bureau.
A. All officers and members of the Police Department, and all emergency
and special law enforcement officers, if any, shall comply with the rules
and regulations adopted for the government of the Department and
with the orders of their superior officers not inconsistent therewith, as
well as all policies and procedures established by the Chief of Police,
the Bergen County Prosecutor, and the Attorney General of the State of
New Jersey, and as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-181 regarding
guidelines for internal affairs.
B. Members and officers of the Police Department may be suspended,
removed from office, fined, or reduced in rank in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the rules and regulations adopted by the
appropriate authority, and all applicable provisions of state law
regarding police discipline, including but not limited to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147 to 40A:14-151 and 40A:14-181.
A. There is hereby created and established within the Police Department
of the Borough of Norwood a Detective Bureau.
B. A superior officer of the Police Department of the borough shall be in
command of the Detective Bureau, and the officer so assigned shall be
responsible for the proper and efficient operation of the Bureau.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the superior officer from being
assigned to other duties within the Department as may be required. The
officer so assigned shall be responsible for the appropriate and proper
operation of the Detective Bureau and shall supervise all of its activities
and make all assignments of all officers assigned to duty within the
Bureau, subject to the standing orders of the Chief of Police of the
Department as may be promulgated. The commanding officer of the
Detective Bureau shall submit such written reports concerning the
functioning of the Bureau as may be required by the Chief of the
Department.
C. The Chief of Police may assign up to two members of the Department to
duty in the Detective Bureau, and may change these assignments at any
time that the chief deems appropriate. [Amended 11-13-2013 by
Ord. No. 13:12]
§ 50-13 NORWOOD CODE § 50-15
46:68
§ 50-16. Clerk of Police Department.
There shall be a Clerk of the Police Department of the borough appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council for a term of one
year, ending on December 31 of each year. The first appointed person shall
serve for the balance of that calendar year. Prior to his appointment, the
Clerk of the Police Department shall be qualified by training and experience
to perform the duties of a clerk-typist and secretary within the Police
Department. He shall attend to all those duties as shall be required by
the Police Commissioner of the borough. He shall perform such clerical
duties as shall be necessary and appropriate to carry on the business of
the Police Department. The Clerk shall, under the direction of the Police
Commissioner and, where appropriate, under the direction of the Chief of
Police and other officers, keep records necessary, required and appropriate
for the efficient functioning of the Police Department of the borough.
§ 50-17. Reimbursement for police services by private contractors.
[Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 01:06]
D. The police officers assigned to the Detective Bureau will be designated
as Detective Sergeant and Detective. They will be paid the salaries and
other compensation that the Mayor and Council established by
ordinance. [Amended 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13:12]
E. The Detective Bureau shall function under the command of the superior
officer assigned to said duty and shall be subject to all of the provisions
of the ordinance establishing the Police Department within and for the
Borough of Norwood.
A. Police services. Members of the Police Department shall be available for
service as traffic direction or security personnel for private contractors
only at such time as will not interfere with the efficient performance of
regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the Borough, with the
approval of the Chief of Police. The applications for such services shall
be made in writing to the Chief of Police. The application by the private
contractor shall set forth pertinent information concerning the type of
work to be engaged in, the name and address of the prospective private
contractors and the estimated duration of such service. The application
for such services shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police to determine if
there is any reasonable probability that such outside employment will
interfere with a member's performance or compromise a member's
position with the Borough through a conflict of interest or if there is any
reasonable probability that the particular service requested would
reflect unfavorably upon the policemen involved or upon the Police
Department.
B. Payment.
(1) Private contractors shall pay the Treasurer of the Borough a
certain amount in cash, check or money order as is set forth herein
§ 50-15 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 50-17
46:69
Chapter 54
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 54-1. Establishment; Superintendent. [Amended 12-5-2000 by
Ord. No. 00:16]
There shall be a Department of Public Works in the Borough, the head of
which shall be the Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council.
The term of office of Superintendent shall be three years. Tenure shall be
granted to a person holding the position of Superintendent of Public Works
continuously for five years or more, during good behavior and efficiency
and shall not be removed therefrom for political or other reasons except
for good cause, upon written charges filed with the Municipal Clerk and
after a public, fair and impartial hearing. Vacancies occurring in the office
of Superintendent of Public Works shall be filled in the same manner for the
unexpired term only.
§ 54-2. Powers and duties.
Under the supervision and direction of the Superintendent, the Department
of Public Works shall:
or as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and
Council as compensation for such services.
(2) Rate of compensation to the Borough: $125 per hour. [Amended
3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:05; 5-4-2010 by Ord. No. 10:08]
C. Escrow. An escrow for the estimated cost of police services shall be
submitted to the Treasurer of the Borough in accordance with police
services anticipated as identified in the application before any work on
the proposed project shall begin.
D. In the event that the compensation for police services exceeds the
escrow mentioned, then the Police Chief shall prepare and submit an
invoice to the Chief Financial Officer, who in turn shall submit the same
to the private contractor, accounting for the total cost for such off-duty
work supplied, which amount shall be paid in full within 15 days of
receipt by the private contractor.
A. Have charge of all public works within the borough, including roads,
streets, sidewalks, curbing, sewage and drainage systems, highways,
public parks and public places.
B. See that any sewage and drainage systems of the borough are properly
flushed from time to time and that they are kept free from obstructions.
C. Carry out and enforce any provision of this Code or other ordinance of
the borough concerning sewers, storm drains and street maintenance.15
§ 50-17 NORWOOD CODE § 54-2
54:70
§ 54-3. Additional duties.
In addition to the powers, functions and duties specified in § 54-2, and such
other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by law or ordinance,
the Superintendent of Public Works shall perform the duties of Dog Warden
of the borough and, in addition to any other reports which he is required
to make, shall make a separate monthly report to the Mayor and Council
concerning his activities as Dog Warden during the preceding month.
§ 54-4. Recreational activities in parks and park facilities; permits.
D. Advise the Chairman of the Public Works Committee of the Borough
Council of all necessary repairs to be made to public roads in the
borough and see that repairs are carried out when authorized.
E. Remove or cause to be removed all obstructions or encumbrances upon
any streets, avenues, roads, highways, public parks and public places in
the borough.
F. The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the power, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council, to hire all necessary laborers and
other employees to carry out any work or duties assigned to him by any
provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the borough. He shall
keep suitable books and records in his office for the purpose of
maintaining an accurate account of all moneys expended by him and an
accurate account of all persons employed by him, indicating the time of
employment and nature of the work performed and the duration of the
work. This subsection shall not be deemed to authorize the
Superintendent of Public Works to expend any moneys of the borough
or to obligate the borough for the expenditure of any moneys without
prior written authorization of the Mayor and Council.
G. The Superintendent of Public Works shall furnish a monthly report to
the Mayor and Council in such form as they shall prescribe, which
report shall describe all of the activities of the Department of Public
Works during the preceding month.
A. In addition to the powers, functions and duties specified above, the
Public Works Department, under the supervision of the Public Works
Committee, shall issue permits for the reservation and use of athletic
fields and picnic areas or other portions of borough parks for specific
periods by individuals who are residents of the borough or by groups
serving local residents.
B. No person shall interfere with another person's use of a park area as
authorized by permit.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 189, Sewers and Water, and Ch. 202, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 54-2 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 54-4
54:71
§ 54-5. Adopt-a-park provisions for local landscape contractors and
volunteer civic groups. [Added 12-5-2000 by Ord. No. 00:15]
Local landscape contractors and/or volunteer civic groups may, at their sole
cost and expense, beautify and maintain any parcel of property owned by
the Borough provided:
Chapter 58
PURCHASING, JOINT
§ 58-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Borough of Norwood."
§ 58-2. Mayor authorized to enter agreement.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor of the
Borough of Norwood is hereby authorized to enter into a Cooperative
Pricing Agreement with the lead agency or any other contracting unit
within the County of Bergen or adjoining counties for the purchase of work,
materials, and supplies.
§ 58-3. Lead agency responsible for compliance with state statutes.
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Borough of
Norwood shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
C. The aforementioned condition of residence shall not apply to the use of
parklands where such parklands were acquired with funds, a condition
of which funding prohibited such exclusions of use.
D. For violation of Subsection B above, a person found guilty in a court of
competent jurisdiction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
A. Said contractor/civic group files plans with the Superintendent of
Public Works.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works approves said plans.
C. Said contractor/civic group files a copy of said plans with the Building
Inspector, certified as accurate by said contractor or civic group and
certified as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 54-4 NORWOOD CODE § 58-3
58:72
Chapter 62
(RESERVED)
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 68
ADVERTISING AND OTHER PRINTED MATERIALS
§ 68-1. Distribution of advertisements.
No person shall place or throw or cause to be placed or thrown any
advertisement, handbill, circular or other paper on any public street or
sidewalk or into the vestibule or yard or upon the porch of any dwelling
house or other building or into or on any vehicle on a public highway or on
private property. This section shall not apply to newspapers and addressed
envelopes delivered to the subscribers and addressees. Advertisements,
handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the borough, provided
that they are securely placed at each dwelling so as not to be blown away
by the wind.
§ 68-2. Distribution of printed matter and samples with
merchandise. [Added by Ord. No. 90-0-14]
A. Definition. The term, "printed matter," as used in this section, shall
mean any or all of the following: circulars, handbills, notices, cards,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets and leaflets; and that the term
"distribution," as used herein, means free distribution and/or delivery.
B. Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or for any
person, firm or corporation to cause the delivery of any printed matter
or samples of merchandise upon any public street, road, avenue, park
or other public place in the borough.
C. Exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or for any
person, firm or corporation to cause the delivery of any unsolicited
printed matter or samples of merchandise, except in accordance with
the following regulations:
(1) Such printed matter shall be placed only within a permanently
installed appurtenance to the premises designed and designated
for the receipt of such printed matter or, if there be none, on the
ground or floor within a three-foot radius of the place where such
premises receives its mail.
(2) There shall be no delivery of such printed matter or samples of
merchandise to premises after the owner or tenant of said premises
has notified the publisher or the delivery person that such delivery
shall cease or be suspended for a stated period of time.
§ 58-3 (RESERVED) § 68-2
62:73
§ 68-3. Display of temporary or commercial business advertising
without consent. [Added 7-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16:13]
(3) There shall be no delivery of such printed matter or samples of
merchandise upon the premises of any residence or other building
known to be vacant by the person distributing or causing to be
distributed such printed matter or samples of merchandise.
D. Nonapplicability. This section shall not apply to the distribution of
printed matter or samples of merchandise that shall have been
previously ordered or requested by the owner, tenant or occupant of the
premises where such distribution is made or to the distribution of
printed matter or samples of merchandise by mail.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this
section shall, upon a first conviction, be subject to a fine of at least $100
but no more than $250; upon a second conviction, shall be subject to a
fine of at least $250 but not to exceed the sum of $500; and, upon a
third or subsequent conviction, a fine of at least $500 and/or a jail term
not to exceed 30 days in the County Jail. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. No person may post or otherwise display any temporary commercial or
business advertisement, to induce directly or indirectly any person to
enter into any obligation or acquire title or interest in any property,
object, ware, good, commodity, or service, on any real property located
within the Borough, or any building, pole, post, or other structure on
the property, without the prior written permission of the owner of
record for the property, or the building or other structure thereon. This
subsection does not apply to a person posting or otherwise displaying a
temporary advertisement containing information and directional
indicators inviting the public to purchase or lease real property at a real
estate open house or similar event for that property.
B. This section will be enforced by the Borough's Construction Code
Official. Any person may report a violation to the Construction Code
Official for enforcement.
C. The Borough's Department of Public Works may remove any
advertisement posted or displayed in violation of this section upon the
conviction of the person violating this section.
D. In addition to the removal under Subsection C, if upon investigation the
Construction Code Official finds probable cause of a violation of this
section, he or she will notify the person who posted or otherwise
displayed the advertisement, or the business identified in the
advertisement, of the alleged violation. The notice will be served by
hand delivery or regular mail and will state that if the violation is not
cured within 10 days of the date of the notice that the Borough will
§ 68-2 NORWOOD CODE § 68-3
62:74
Chapter 73
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 73-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of local alarms, intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency
alarm devices whether by direct line radio, telephone or other means
actuating a device at police headquarters and requiring response thereto by
the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies of the
Borough of Norwood.
§ 73-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the police, Fire Department or other municipal agencies to any location in
response to any type of alarm signal. The forms of this chapter shall in no
way prohibit alarm companies from providing service by private source to
other offices within or without the borough so long as such activity is not
connected to an alarm console, except, however, that any person having a
remove the advertising and will charge the violator for the cost of the
removal.
E. Whenever the Borough removes, or causes to be removed, an
advertisement pursuant to this section, the Borough may present the
person who posted or otherwise displayed the removed advertisement,
or the business advertised in the removed advertisement, by certified
and regular mail, a detailed itemization of the costs of removal incurred
by the Borough, requiring a reimbursement by that person or business
of the removal costs. If the person or business does not provide
reimbursement within 30 days of receipt of the municipal itemization,
the Borough may enforce the payment of these costs, together with
interest and reasonable collection costs, by instituting an action at law
for the collection thereof. The Superior Court, or the municipal court,
shall have jurisdiction of any collection action.
F. The money collected by the Borough for advertisement removal shall be
credited, along with any other funds made available, to a municipal
advertisement removal fund, established pursuant to this ordinance.
The expenditure of money from the fund will be used exclusively to
remove advertisements and otherwise enforce the provisions of this
section, and to administer the fund.
G. Any person convicted of violating the terms of this section will be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code in addition
to the cost of removal incurred by the Borough.
§ 68-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-2
73:75
premises protected by an alarm device shall be responsible for registration
thereof in accordance with § 73-4B without fee.
§ 73-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices producing a
visual or audio response or both and located within the municipal building
of the borough.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device or mechanism used or designated for
detection and warning of unauthorized entry, fire smoke, flood or other
perils, but specifically excluding local alarm mechanism located entirely
within enclosed residential buildings.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or aggregate of alarm devices
installed on or within a single building or on or within more than one
building or other structure on a common site, at a specific location.
BURGLARY ALARM — Any police device actuated by a burglary, robbery or
theft at a specific location.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility operated by a private firm that
owns or leases a system of emergency alarm devices, which facility is
manned at all times by trained operators employed to receive, record and
validate alarm signals and to relay information concerning such validated
signals to the police or fire dispatch room.
DIAL ALARM — Any alarm device which automatically or electronically
selects a telephone trunkline of the Police or Fire Department of the
borough and then delivers a signal or reproduces a prerecorded message to
report a criminal act or other emergency.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm device connected directly by leased telephone
wires from a specific location to the radio dispatch room at the municipal
building.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal or message received by the Police or Fire
Department and to which either or both respond, which signal or message
was directly or indirectly brought about or produced by an alarm device of
any type but not the result of criminal activity or other emergency and not
created by malfunction of the alarm console within the building.
LICENSEE — Any private individual, partnership, corporation or firm which
is authorized by license of the municipality to maintain and operate the
alarm console, except for use by the Police and Fire Department.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which when actuated produces an
audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within audible or visible
range of the signal that a criminal act or other emergency is occurring or
has occurred.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Norwood or any department, agency or
officer duly authorized to act on behalf of the municipality.
§ 73-2 NORWOOD CODE § 73-3
73:76
PERMITTEE — Any private individual, partnership, corporation or firm
which holds a permit from the municipality to use an alarm device on
premises owned or leased by it.
§ 73-4. Registration and permits.
A. Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any individual,
partnership, corporation or firm to operate or maintain an alarm device
as defined by this chapter without obtaining a valid permit. Said permit
shall be obtainable through the Chief of Police upon payment of a fee of
$25 made payable to the Borough of Norwood.
B. Any person who owns, operates or maintains an alarm device or devices
shall make application to the Chief of Police of the Borough of Norwood
for a permit therefor on forms supplied by the Police Department. The
application shall specify the name, address and telephone number of
the owner and user of the alarm installation, the exact location of the
alarm device or devices, the name and address of the installer of said
device, the type of device, the name and address of the individual of the
firm regularly servicing said alarm device, if any, provision relating to
false alarm and testing procedures, a list of names and addresses of
persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm and other information
relating to the alarm device reasonable required by the Chief of Police,
and a consent form to be signed by such person or persons as a
prerequisite for a permit to be issued, which consent form shall
authorize the Police Department, Fire Department or their duly
authorized and designated representative to disconnect any alarm
device by whatever means possible and without any liability by the said
Police Department, Fire Department or their duly authorized and
designated representatives to such person for damage, upon violation
of the false alarm provisions of this chapter.
C. Applications for a permit must be filed within 60 days after the effective
date of this chapter.
D. The Chief of Police is the designated official of the municipality to issue
and renew permits, to remove or suspend permits and to otherwise
enforce and apply the provisions of this chapter.
E. An application for a permit or permit renewal may be denied by the
Chief of Police in the event he disapproves of the equipment intended to
be used or continued by the applicant, or the manner of use thereof, or
if the applicant has violated any other provisions of this chapter.
F. All permits as may be granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the
express conditions that:
(1) The permittee shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the
municipality and its authorized officials, agents and employees
from and against any and all damages, costs, expense and liability
arising out of the acts or failure to act of the municipality, the alarm
§ 73-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-4
73:77
§ 73-5. Alarm console license.
console licensee, permittee, alarm contractor or any one or more of
them, or arising out of any defects, deficiencies or inadequacies in
any alarm device or devices for which a permit has been granted or
in any installation, monitoring or maintenance thereof, or by reason
of any malfunction or defect in the operation or maintenance of the
alarm console.
(2) The permittee shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
A. There is hereby established a police alarm console license which shall
be granted upon recommendation of the Chief of Police as set forth in
§ 73-4. Any such licensee shall have exclusive use and control of the
alarm console except for use by the Police Department of the borough,
and such licensee will be responsible at no cost to the Borough of
Norwood for the establishment, construction and installation of a
console containing equipment and being of a design approved by the
Chief of Police and for the care, maintenance and management
thereafter of the console. The licensee shall locate the console and
relocate the console, if necessary, under the supervision of the Chief of
Police of the borough at no cost to the borough.
B. Any connection to the police alarm console shall be of a type inspected
and approved by the Chief of Police of the borough or his designated
representative, and any person aggrieved by his decision may appeal
that decision in writing within 10 days to the Mayor and Council.
C. All alarms existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter (except
dial alarm) shall be connected hereunder to the alarm console by the
licensee, and no connection cost for such transfer shall be permitted.
D. The licensee for the police alarm console shall be permitted to charge
subscribers a maximum installation fee of $50 and a maximum monthly
retainer or maintenance fee of $7, except, however, that no fee shall be
charged to the Borough of Norwood or the Board of Education of the
Borough of Norwood for monthly charges or console connection
charges for any existing or future systems in public buildings, and any
equipment or alarm devices installed by the alarm console licensee in
such public buildings shall be at wholesale cost exclusive of labor
charges.
E. The licensee shall install initially an annunciator or display console
having no less than 250 zones available for present systems and future
connections, which console shall be approved by the Underwriters'
Laboratories.
F. Except as provided in § 73-6, any license issued hereunder shall be for a
term of three years from the date of approval by the Mayor and Council
of the borough; such licensee shall post with the Borough Clerk a
performance bond in the amount of $5,000 noncancelable without
§ 73-4 NORWOOD CODE § 73-5
73:78
notification to the Mayor and Council guaranteeing performance for
three years of the obligation of the licensee and insuring maintenance
of the console and alarm system during the period when such license is
in force.
G. The licensee, for the privilege of obtaining the license, shall pay to the
borough a minimum annual sum of no less than 5% of the gross rental
earned annually by such licensee from subscribers connected to the
alarm console, which payment shall be made within 30 days of the close
of each fiscal year in which the license is in force, and such licensee by
acceptance of the license shall be deemed to have agreed to having the
books and accounts of the licensee open to inspection by the Borough
Auditor or other designated representative of the Mayor and Council to
verify the annual account which shall be submitted by the licensee
coincidental with the fee described aforesaid.
H. The licensee granted a license hereunder will assume all liability and
hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Norwood, its departments, agencies, officials and agents from and
against any and all damages, claims, suits, causes of action and cost
and expenses in connection with or arising out of the installation and
operation of the alarm console. The licensee shall at all times be
considered an independent contractor.
I. Insurance.
(1) The licensee shall provide prior to grant of license and maintain in
full force and effect, with responsible carriers satisfactory to the
borough, the following insurance:
(a) Workmen's compensation employers' liability insurance
covering all persons employed by the licensee. The licensee
shall also cause any of its subcontractors to provide and
maintain workmen's compensation and employees liability
insurance covering all persons employed by such
subcontractors.
(b) Comprehensive general liability insurance (including
contractor's contingent liability) covering bodily injury with
limits of $500,000 for each person injured or killed and
$1,000,000 for more than one person injured or killed in any
one accident. Property damage liability with limits of $100,000
per occurrence.
(2) All insurance policies are to carry cross coverage clauses, i.e.,
insure both the licensee and the borough.
(3) All insurance policies shall contain a statement that the same may
not be canceled or modified except upon 10 days' written notice to
the Borough of Norwood.
§ 73-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-5
73:79
(4) The policies shall otherwise be in a form satisfactory to the
Borough Attorney.
J. Except as otherwise herein provided, any license issued hereunder
shall be for a term of three years.
K. The licensee shall at all times observe and comply with all state and
local laws, ordinances, statutes, regulations and orders that in any
manner affect the installation, repair and operation of the alarm
console system and shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the
borough and all its various departments, agencies, officials and agents
against any claims, liability or expenses arising out of or based upon the
nonobservance of any of the foregoing.
L. The license shall pay all royalties and license fees necessary for the full
and free use and enjoyment by the borough of any and all rights to any
inventions, machines, processes, licenses or systems supplied by the
licensee, which may be included in the alarm console system, either in
the installation or use after completion. The licensee shall defend all
suits and claims for infringement of any patent right or rights of a
similar nature and shall indemnify and save harmless the borough in
connection herewith.
M. The licensee shall be responsible for and shall pay all federal, state and
local taxes of every type and description incident to the performance of
its duties and obligations hereunder.
N. The licensee shall keep and perform its duties and obligations under its
personal control and supervision and shall not assign, transfer, sublet
or otherwise dispose of any right or responsibility under the license
granted.
O. Only the borough and the Board of Education and such other public and
private individuals, partnerships, corporations and firms which shall
have applied to and been granted permission by the borough to connect
with the alarm console shall be permitted to use the services of the
alarm console system. The Borough of Norwood through its authorized
officials shall have the right to suspend or terminate a permittee's
service at any time for failure or neglect of such permittee to comply
with any requirement herein established, in which event the licensee
shall disconnect the permittee's service at no cost or expense to the
borough or to such permittee, except that the permittee shall be billed
to the date of termination of service.
P. Supervision or revocation.
(1) The license issued to the licensee hereunder may be revoked at any
time by the Borough Council upon 60 days written notice by
ordinary mail to the licensee for failure or neglect of the licensee to
comply with and fully perform any one or more of the requirements
or regulations herein established in manner satisfactory to the
borough. The licensee shall be entitled to a revocation hearing by
§ 73-5 NORWOOD CODE § 73-5
73:80
§ 73-6. Limitation of borough's responsibility.
The Borough of Norwood, its various departments, agencies and officials
shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee or to any alarm
console licensee hereunder or to any other person or persons with respect
to the adequacy, operation, installation, repair or maintenance of the alarm
console equipment and any allied or related equipment or services and
assumes no liability in connection therewith. Upon issuance of a permit
hereunder, the permit holder hereby agrees to hold and save harmless
the Borough of Norwood, its departments, agencies and officials from any
liability or damages suffered as a result of or arising out of any improper
or faulty installation, operation or maintenance of any police or fire alarm
the Borough Council, provided that written request therefor is
made to the Borough Clerk within 10 days after the mailing of the
notice of termination to the licensee.
(2) The Borough Council may at any time and without advance notice
suspend any issued license when it shall appear to them that to do
so would be necessary to the best interest of the borough. The
suspension shall be effective for such period of time as may be
required for the borough to investigate the matter. The borough
may request another individual or firm to service the alarm console
during the period of suspension, and the cost therefor shall be paid
by the licensee. The licensee may continue to collect the usual fees
during any period of suspension but not for any period following
termination.
(3) Any suspension or termination of the license as herein provided
shall be without cost, expense or liability to the borough. In the
event of termination of the license by the borough, the licensee
shall have the right to remove the alarm console system as may be
owned by the licensee at no expense to the borough, in manner and
at the time directed by the Chief of Police (not later than 30 days
after termination date) to permit installation of a substitute alarm
system by a successor-approved licensee. Any equipment as may be
owned by the licensee which is not removed when directed by the
Chief of Police shall become the property of the borough, and the
licensee shall have no further claim or right thereto or any part
thereof. The licensee may sell the alarm console equipment owned
by it to another individual or firm accepted and approved as a
licensee.
Q. All equipment installed as part of the alarm console shall be owned by
the licensee and satisfactory proof thereof shall be furnished to the
borough upon request.
R. The licensee shall enter into a contract with the borough in turn
approved by the Borough Attorney, which contract shall grant the
license hereunder and incorporate by reference all of the requirements
and regulations herein as an integral part thereof.
§ 73-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-6
73:81
system of the permittee or improper or faulty installation operation or
maintenance of the alarm console at the municipal building.
§ 73-7. Selection of licensee.
The licensee for the alarm console in the municipal building shall be
selected in the following manner:
A. Any individual or firm which desires to become the licensee of the alarm
console of the borough under the provisions of this chapter shall
complete and file an application therefor with the Borough Clerk on
forms supplied by that office. The application shall be filed no later than
the date specified for filing in the public advertisement therefor or as
posted on the bulletin board in the municipal building.
B. Applications for licensee shall be accepted for a reasonable period of
time, as fixed by the Borough Council, immediately preceding the
expiration of the then-current license, or in the event of termination of a
licensee prior to its natural expiration date applications shall be
accepted at any time after the mailing of the notice of termination to the
current licensee.
C. The application shall require satisfactory proof of financial ability to
perform experienced service capability, past performance, proposed
charges and fees to subscribers and such other information as may be
required by the Borough Council.
D. The Borough Council or its duly authorized agent may interview one or
more applicants for the licensee, but shall not be required to do so.
E. The license shall be awarded to the individual or firm which the
Borough Council shall determine, in its sole judgment, to be the most
advantageous and in the best interests of the borough, and the
determination of the Borough Council shall be conclusive. The Borough
Council shall take into consideration in making its determination the
financial ability of the applicant, the applicant's prior experience with
other municipal and governmental bodies, the applicant's service
capability on a twenty-four-hour basis, the proximity of the applicant's
office to the municipal building as bearing on the service and repair
availability, the applicant's past performance in this or other
municipalities, proposed fees and charges to subscribers and such
other factors as the Borough Council shall deem relevant to selecting
the applicant which will be in the best interests of the borough.
F. The Borough Council, if it determines it to be in the best interests of the
borough, may grant a license to expire on December 31 of the thencurrent
calender year rather than for a full three-year term. The grant
of license for this abbreviated term shall be with the consent of the
proposed licensee and subject to all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
§ 73-6 NORWOOD CODE § 73-8
73:82
§ 73-8. General regulations.
A. Dial alarm devices shall be permitted only in accordance with § 73-9.
B. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department in a manner to be prescribed
by rules and regulations in accordance with § 73-2. In addition, in the
case of false alarms the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be
made and keep a record of said alarms on file. For such false alarms the
Mayor and Council prescribes the following penalties: For the first,
second and third false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall
be issued; for the fourth false alarm and for each false alarm thereafter,
in the same calendar year, a fine of $25 for each such alarm shall be
paid to the Borough of Norwood. Where the investigation of the Police
Department discloses continued abuse of the privilege of connection to
the alarm console and a disregard of the permittee for failing to take
remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the Mayor and Council reserve the
right to require disconnection from the alarm console for a limited or
permanent time providing the permittee an opportunity to show cause
before the Mayor and Council why such action should not be taken. In
the event of reconnection, there shall be paid to the borough a
reconnection fee of $40.
C. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter, and any person installing or maintaining unauthorized
equipment shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each
and every day this equipment is in operation shall be considered a
separate violation. Any permittor shall by acceptance of the permit be
deemed as having consented to inspection of the premises on which the
alarm devices are installed at reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or
his designated representative.
D. Any licensee of the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any other alarm company connected to the console shall
provide a representative to be on call at all times and adequate service
shall be provided within eight hours of notification by the Police or Fire
Department of any malfunctioning or faulty equipment.
E. All alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
municipal and governmental laws, ordinances and requirements.
F. A permittee or his representative shall respond to the source of a signal
or transmission from an alarm device as promptly as possible after the
actuation of such device and shall contact the Police or Fire
Departments dispatched to the scene. He shall relieve the police or
fireman in charge whenever there is no apparent fire or criminal
activity at the scene of the alarm.
G. Any permittee shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of the
premises on which said alarm device(s) are installed, at reasonable
hours, by the Police or Fire Chief or their designated representatives.
§ 73-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-8
73:83
§ 73-9. Dial alarm devices.
This provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on the borough to
make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from inspecting, testing
and maintaining his own alarm device(s).
H. If the location of the fire or police communications facilities should be
changed at any time, permittees or licensees under this chapter shall
not be permitted to charge the municipality with any resulting cost of
moving the alarm equipment.
I. All costs and recurring charges incurred in the installation and
maintenance of alarm systems shall be borne by the permittee, except
where this chapter indicates that such costs shall be paid by the
licensee.
A. Dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special separate number, which
number can be obtained from the Chief of Police or designated
representative, and no dial alarm shall be coded to dial the number of
the general police switchboard of the Borough of Norwood. All dial
alarms existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall have 30
days within which to be recoded to dial the within mentioned special
separate number. Any person not complying shall be liable to a penalty
payable to the borough in the amount of $50.
B. No dial alarm device shall be permitted unless of a type approved by the
Chief of Police in accordance with the rules promulgated under § 73-2.
Any such equipment shall have the approval of the New Jersey Bell
Telephone Company or its successor.
C. The total length of any message must not exceed 15 seconds.
D. All messages shall conform to the approved format on the application
form as supplied by the Chief of Police of the borough.
E. For dial alarm devices the owner shall pay the Borough of Norwood a
permit fee of $25 to cover the cost of registration.
F. Any dial alarm device shall be coded as well to notify a relative,
neighbor or other third party who will be disclosed in the registration of
the equipment as required by this chapter.
G. Messages shall be received by the Police Department no more than two
times for each given alarm.
H. The device shall provide an automatic line seizure feature in the event
that the special separate phone number is busy with an incoming or
outgoing call.
I. All dial alarm devices shall be capable of disconnect to enable the
owner to call the police switchboard to indicate that a false alarm has
occurred.
§ 73-8 NORWOOD CODE § 73-9
73:84
§ 73-10. Local alarm devices.
Local alarms shall be registered in accordance with § 73-4 of this chapter
upon the payment of a registration fee of $10. All local alarms shall be
equipped with a fifteen-minute automatic shutoff device. In addition
thereto, those persons having local alarms may leave with the Police
Department the names of residents in the Borough of Norwood who have
keys to the premises or, in lieu thereof, a sealed key to the premises may
be left with the Chief of Police of the Borough of Norwood, provided that
in so doing the owner is willing to release the Borough of Norwood and the
Police Department from any claims for damages or loss in connection with
said entry. In the event of a malfunction of the equipment, and no person
can be located to secure the device, then the owner shall be liable to pay a
fine of $25. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, in the event that police have to
respond to a false alarm, the false alarm fine prescribed in subsection § 73-8
shall also apply.
§ 73-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Norwood for a violation for the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $200 or to such other penalty as shall be
prescribed for the violation of municipal ordinances, in the sole discretion
of the Municipal Magistrate.
J. Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general police
number upon discovery thereof shall receive notice in writing from the
Chief of Police requiring the owner to comply with the forms of this
chapter, and if the owner fails to do so within 30 days of the receipt of
this notice, he shall be liable to pay to the borough a penalty of $50.
K. All components of such equipment must be maintained by the owner in
good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been failure to
comply with the operation or the requirements of this chapter, the Chief
of Police or his designated representatives is then authorized to
demand that such device be disconnected until such time as compliance
with the current requirements is reestablished.
L. The sensory mechanism of such device shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibrations of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
M. Owners of dial alarm devices shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in § 73-8B.
§ 73-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-11
73:85
Chapter 77
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business and commercial
establishments — See Ch. 105.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 168,
§ 168-13.
§ 73-11 NORWOOD CODE § 73-11
73:86
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted as Ch. VI of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 77-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Norwood in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 77-3. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 77-1 and all other applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey or the United States.
B. Proof of publication. Proof of publication and notice of an application
for a license or the renewal or transfer of a license under the provisions
of this article shall be furnished to the Borough Clerk immediately after
the second publication and shall be in the form prescribed by state rules
and regulations.
C. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Borough Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
D. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the Borough without obtaining a license in accordance with the
act referred to in § 77-1 and the provisions of this article.
E. License fees; maximum number. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-0-12]
(1) The annual fees for licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough are as follows: [Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 97:08; 3-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:03; by Ord. No.
03:05; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 06:11; 4-28-2010 by Ord. No.
10:07]
§ 77-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 77-3
73:87
§ 77-4. Regulations of licenses.
Class of License/Year
Annual License
Fee
Number of
Licenses
Plenary retail
consumption
$2,500 7
Plenary retail
distribution
$2,500 7
Club $150 1
(2) The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on
the number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of
licenses presently issued.
A. Hours of sale. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served
or consumed in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day each year
as hereinafter provided.
B. Sundays. The provisions of Subsection A of this section do not apply to
Sundays. On Sundays, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered, or consumed on or in the licensed premises between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
10:11]
C. New Year's Day. Provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not
apply on January 1. On that day alcoholic beverages may not be sold,
delivered or consumed in the licensed premises from the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless January 1 is a Sunday, in which case alcoholic
beverages may not be sold, served, delivered or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:15 p.m.
D. Sales to certain persons. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall
sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to
any habitual drunkard, intoxicated person or minor or permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of
the above-named classes or persons or permit any such persons to
congregate in or about the licensed premises.
E. Room limitations. No person shall be served alcoholic beverages in any
room which is not open to the public generally.
F. Display of license. Each licensee shall display the license certificate
issued under this article in the licensed premises in such a manner and
place that it can be seen by anyone entering the licensed place of
business. The license certificate shall be framed and under glass.
G. Disturbances and nuisances. No licensee shall permit in any licensed
premises any brawl, act of violence, disturbance or unnecessary noise.
§ 77-3 NORWOOD CODE § 77-4
73:88
§ 77-5. Location restrictions. [Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05:06]
No licensee shall permit the licensed premises to be conducted in such
a manner as to become a nuisance.
H. Closing during prohibited hours. During the hours when the sale or
service of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, the entire licensed
premises shall be closed. This subsection shall not apply to premises
where a restaurant, hotel, motel, bowling alley or similar business is
conducted. The foregoing places may remain open during the
prohibited hours in order to carry on normal business activities, except
for the sale and service of alcoholic beverages. If the premises remains
open, however, the bar or any other place upon the licensed premises
from which the sale or service of alcoholic beverages is made shall be
closed.
A. Restrictions. No plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail
distribution license shall be issued, nor shall any place-to-place transfer
of an existing license be granted for the service or sale of alcoholic
beverages upon the premises that are within 200 feet of any existing
premises licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages under another
plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail distribution license.
The distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the
nearest licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises
sought to be licensed along the normal way that a pedestrian would
probably walk as provided in N.J.S.A. 33:1-76.
B. Exceptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following
cases:
(1) The renewal or person-to-person transfer of any plenary retail
consumption license or plenary retail distribution license that is in
existence at the time of the adoption of this article; or
(2) The transfer of a license to another place within 200 feet of the
premises for which the license was granted, measured in the
manner provided in Subsection A of this section, where the licensee
has been forced to vacate the licensed premises for any reason that
is not under its control and that could not have been foreseen when
the license was granted. Once a transfer is granted under this
section, future transfers of the same license shall be only to a place
within 200 feet of the premises initially licensed and vacated by the
licensee. Place-to-place transfers under the provisions in this
subsection are not a matter of right, but shall be granted only in the
discretion of the Mayor and Council.
(3) A licensee that has been permitted to relocate within 200 feet of
another licensed premises in accordance with Subsection B(2) shall
have the same right to expand or enlarge the premises covered by
its license as it would have had he remained at the premises
initially licensed and vacated.
§ 77-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 77-5
73:89
§ 77-6. (Reserved)16
§ 77-7. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough.
§ 77-8. Revocation of licenses.
C. Waiver on extraordinary circumstances. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Subsections A and B of this section, the Mayor and Council may issue
or transfer a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages of any category,
as the same are set forth and defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., within a
two-hundred-foot radius of the premises for which a license for the sale
of alcoholic beverages of any category is outstanding, if extraordinary
and exceptional circumstances necessitate an exception to the twohundred-
foot radius limitation.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough for the violation of any of the
provisions of this article or the violation of any provisions of N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 to 33:1-96 and the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the statutes cited by service of a fiveday
notice of charges preferred against the licensee. The licensee shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity for a hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions
provided for in the statutes cited and shall be in addition to any of the
penalties imposed for the violation of this article.
16.Editor's Note: Former § 77-6, Minors, was repealed 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:03.
§ 77-5 NORWOOD CODE § 77-8
73:90
ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted as Sec. 3-14 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 77-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Drinking or possession
in open containers or possession in nonoriginal containers of any alcoholic
beverages as defined by the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 77-10. Prohibitions.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages, except as contained in § 77-12
hereof, is prohibited in public parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities,
school grounds and facilities, places of public use and convenience, such as
train and bus depots, lavatories, rest rooms, vacant or unimproved Borough
lands and in parking lots owned or controlled by the Borough through
permission granted by the owner.
§ 77-11. Where alcoholic beverages prohibited. [Amended by Ord.
No. 95-0-06]
No person shall dispense, consume, drink or imbibe or sell any alcoholic
beverages as defined by the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey
upon:
§ 77-12. Exception for block parties.
Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, block
party permits or resolutions authorizing block parties shall include the right
to possess or consume alcoholic beverages on a public street and shall not
be deemed violative of this section.
A. Any public street, road, alley, avenue, sidewalk, public parking place,
recreation area or any other public or quasi-public place.
B. A public conveyance.
C. A private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in any
public street, land, public road, public parking place or quasi-public
place.
D. Any private property not his or her own, without the express permission
of the owner or other person having authority to grant such permission.
E. Any public facility, including but not limited to any eating or catering
establishments, unless such establishment is duly licensed by the State
of New Jersey for the service of alcoholic beverages.
§ 77-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 77-13
73:91
§ 77-13. Minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, transfer, give or by
any other means supply any beer, wine or alcoholic beverage to any person
under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in any public or quasipublic
place or while in or on a public street or thoroughfare or while in a
parked vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare in the Borough, except
transfers between a parent and his or her minor child.
§ 77-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision contained in this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court in the Borough, be subject to a
fine as stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
§ 77-13 NORWOOD CODE § 77-14
73:92
ARTICLE III
Possession and Consumption by Underaged Persons
[Adopted 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03:04]
§ 77-15. Prohibitions; penalties.
§ 77-16. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to persons under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages who possess or consume alcoholic beverages in the
presence of and with the permission of the parent, legal guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages or possess or consume alcoholic beverages in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony, or rite. This article shall also not apply
to possession of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person employed
by an alcoholic beverage licensee in the course of performing employment
duties or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in
a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational school
or post secondary educational institution.
§ 77-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
A. Any person under legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who,
without legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes
any alcoholic beverage in or on any school property, public conveyance,
public place or place of public assembly or on private property shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent
offense; perform community service for a period not to exceed 180
days; at the discretion of the court, have a New Jersey driving privilege
suspended or postponed for six months; and, if considered necessary by
the court, be referred to an alcoholic treatment program at the
defendant's expense.
§ 77-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 77-17
73:93
Chapter 81
AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The proposed operator, whether as owner-operator or by
lease or any other kind of arrangement, of one or more amusement or
entertainment machines or devices displayed for public patronage or placed
or kept for operation by the public within the borough. Under this section,
the term "applicant" shall not include the owner of the aforesaid amusement
or entertainment machines or devices unless said owner shall also be the
operator thereof.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT — Any automatic,
mechanical or electronic game, contrivance or device or skill or
entertainment, which is or are operated or set in motion by the deposit
therein of any coin or coins, tokens or slugs or the like thereof, purchased
for cash. This term shall include any device which registers a score or
not and shall further include, without limitation, such devices as pinball
machines, bagatelle machines, pong or other types of electronically
operated game devices, skill-ball, mechanical games, operation of
transactions similar to, by whatever name they may be called. Excluded
from this definition are music vending machines, commonly known as
"jukeboxes," as well as "vending machines."
LICENSEE — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which, being the operator or
owner-operator of one or more amusement or entertainment machines or
devices displayed for public patronage or placed or kept for operation by
the public within the borough, has qualified as an applicant under this
chapter and to which a license has been issued hereunder.
OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which leases, rents out or places
under any kind of arrangement, within the borough, one or more
amusement or entertainment machines or devices displayed for public
patronage or placed or kept for operation by the public.
OWNER-OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls premises
or a location within the borough in which any amusement or entertainment
machine or device, which is owned by said natural person, partnership,
firm, association, corporation or any other business entity, is displayed for
public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 81-2. License required.
§ 77-17 NORWOOD CODE § 81-2
81:94
§ 81-3. Applications.
A. General. No person shall install, place, maintain or operate, in any
store, place of business, building, public place or quasi-public place
wherein the public is invited or may enter, any coin-operated
amusement device or entertainment device within the limits of the
borough without first applying for or obtaining a license therefor for
each and every coin-operated amusement or entertainment device to be
installed, placed, maintained or operated.
B. Exemption. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the
contrary, there is hereby exempted from the aforementioned licensing
fee requirements all organizations, associations and corporations not
for profit, organized pursuant to the provisions of Title 15 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes or otherwise, whose primary activity is
religious, educational, eleemosynary or fraternal; provided, however,
that such organizations, associations and corporations shall not
maintain, place or install more than three coin-operated amusement
devices in or about any single premises or location.
A. Maximum number of licenses. No more than three licenses shall be
issued for the placement, installation, maintenance, operation or
possession of coin-operated amusement devices in or about any single
premises or location.
B. License fees. A license fee of $200, for each device licensed hereunder,
shall be payable annually by the licensee.
C. Information required.
(1) Applications for said license shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name, date and place of birth, home address and the home
telephone number and the business telephone of the applicant
and each of its stockholders, officers, directors and each
partner, member or principal.
(b) The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant
or person upon whom service of process is authorized to be
made.
(c) The name, date and place of birth, home address and telephone
number of the manager or other agent of the applicant who
shall be in charge of or conduct the business of the applicant,
within the borough.
(d) With respect to each person whose name is listed on the
license application, the fact of whether or not said person was
ever convicted of any crime, whether by or without jury, by
plea in any jurisdiction of an offense which, under the laws of
the state, is denominated as a misdemeanor or high
§ 81-2 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 81-3
81:95
§ 81-4. Processing of applications.
misdemeanor or an offense involving moral turpitude with full
disclosure of the nature of the offense, the time and place
of commission, legal proceedings in connection therewith and
punishment or penalty.
(e) The type and premise location of each machine or device to be
operated under the license applied for.
(f) If the applicant is a corporation, a corporation resolution, in
proper form, authorizing the execution of the license
application on behalf of the said corporation.
(g) A certification, under oath, made by the applicant, that the
information contained in the application and all attachments
thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his
knowledge and belief.
(2) All applications shall be accompanied by the license fee as set forth
herein.
(3) Upon receipt of an application, the Borough Administrator shall
promptly forward a copy of the application and accompanying
materials to the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments and the
Building Official for investigation, review and report.
A. Licensing standards.
(1) Upon receipt of all reports and information, in accordance with the
standards and requirements set forth, the Borough Administrator
may grant or refuse the license or may grant the license as to one
or more but not all of the coin-operated amusement or
entertainment devices and refuse the license as to the rest. If the
license is granted, the Borough Administrator shall forthwith issue
the license.
(2) The Borough Administrator shall ensure that the license
application and attachments thereto are complete, accurate and
truthful and that those persons whose names are required to be
disclosed on the license application are all persons capable of
owning, controlling and conducting the proposed business of
owning and/or operating amusement or entertainment devices
within the borough in a manner consistent with the public safety,
good morals and general welfare of the community; that all those
persons whose names are required to be disclosed on the license
application can reasonably be expected to own, control and
manage or operate the proposed business in accordance with the
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and free from
any gambling, immoral or illegal conductor activity and free from
unnecessary or unwanted noise or commotion, no criminal element
is in direct or indirect control or management of the business of the
§ 81-3 NORWOOD CODE § 81-4
81:96
§ 81-5. Contents of license; display; expiration.
§ 81-6. Use of machines for gambling.
applicant; that the granting of the application and the issuance of
the license thereunder will promote a fair and competitive market
for the operation of amusement or entertainment machines or
devices within the borough; that the granting of the application
and the issuance of the license thereunder will not create an
unwarranted burden on the law enforcement officers or agencies
and that the applicant has properly executed all agreements and
consent required by this chapter and has agreed to conduct his
business in accordance with all the requirements of this chapter
and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. No
operator's license shall be granted hereunder unless the licensed
premises shall meet all requirements of all fire regulations and the
Housing, Building, Sanitary, Electric and Plumbing Codes of the
borough.17
B. License denial and appeal. In the event the Borough Administrator
determines that such application does not meet the standards set forth
above, the license shall be denied. Upon the Borough Administrator's
denying any application, the unsuccessful applicant shall have the right
to appeal such a denial to the Mayor and Council within 10 days of
receipt of written denial, by a written notice of appeal served upon the
Borough Administrator. The Mayor and Council shall schedule a
hearing on such appeal within 30 days after such hearing.
C. Transferability; refunds. No license issued pursuant to this chapter is
transferable, and no license fee shall be refunded upon the revocation
or surrender of any license.
A. License cards issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the location
of the premises of which the licensed coin-operated amusement device
is to be used or kept, a brief description of the device, the device's
number or other means of identification and the name and address of
the owner and lessee or bailee of said device.
B. All license cards issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted and at
all times displayed in a conspicuous place at or near the licensed
device.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31
of each year. Upon the expiration of the license, the holder shall
surrender the license card forthwith to the Borough Administrator.
A. Any licensee who shall suffer, permit or approve of the use of any coinoperated
amusement device for gambling purposes shall be deemed to
be guilty of violating this subsection.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction, and Ch. 143, Housing Standards.
§ 81-4 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 81-6
81:97
§ 81-7. Revocation of license.
Every license issued hereunder is subjected to revocation by the governing
body should the owner-operator or operator operate any amusement or
entertainment machine or device contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or the standards set forth herein for the issuance of a license. Any material
misstatement or omission in the license application and any information
submitted therewith shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of
said license. The Mayor and Council, through the Borough Administrator,
shall serve upon the licensee notification of intention to revoke the license
and advise the licensee that he has 10 days from receipt of the notification
to request a formal hearing. In the event that no formal hearing is
requested, then the Mayor and Council shall be authorized, after said
ten-day period, to revoke the license. In the event that the licensee does
request a hearing, then he shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor
and Council and give testimony and produce witnesses as he shall deem
appropriate. The Mayor and Council shall listen to all witnesses and
testimony that it deems relevant and shall render a decision as to whether
or not the license should be revoked.
§ 81-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 85
ANIMALS
B. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain and use any such coin-operated
amusement device for the purpose of giving, directly or indirectly, any
prize, return or profit for the use of such device.
§ 81-6 NORWOOD CODE § 81-8
81:98
ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing
[Adopted as Ch. V of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding, selling or
breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except for a pet shop.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in any dog and every
person who has a dog in his custody and any person exercising control over
a dog or permitting a dog to remain on premises under his control.
PET SHOP — Any place, other than a kennel, where dogs are kept or
displayed for sale.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized under the
provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are kept or housed without
charge.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which has attacked or bitten or attempted to
attack or bite any human being without provocation or which habitually
attacks other dogs or domestic animals or destroys property.
§ 85-2. Licensing.18
A. License; when required.
(1) Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
(a) Any dog owned or kept within the Borough on the first day of
January of any calendar year.
(b) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the Borough for more than 10
days after acquisition.
(c) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the
calendar year.
(d) Any unlicensed dog brought into the Borough by any person
and kept within the Borough for more than 10 days.
18.Editor's Note: The statute that provides for the licensing of dogs is N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et
seq.
§ 85-1 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-2
81:99
(e) Any dog licensed by another state brought into the Borough by
any person and kept within the Borough for more than 90 days.
(2) Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any
licensing year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and the license and
tag issued by any other municipality of this state shall be accepted
by the Borough as evidence of compliance with this article.
B. Application for license. [Amended 3-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02;
12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:04]
(1) Each application for a dog license shall be made to the Borough
Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the Borough
Council, and shall give the following information:
(a) A general description of the dog sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, age, color and markings and whether the
dog is of long- or short-haired variety.
(b) The name, street and post office address of the owner of the
dog and the person who shall keep the dog if other than the
owner.
(2) Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which
applications are received. The information on the application and
the registration number issued for the dog shall be preserved by
the Borough Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the
Borough Council, for a period of three years. In addition, the
Borough Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the
Borough Council, shall forward similar information to the State
Department of Health each month on forms furnished by the
Department.
C. Application for license; when made. Applications for licenses for dogs
which are required to be licensed by the provisions of § 85-2A(1)(a)
shall be made before the last day of January of each year. In all other
cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the
date upon which the dog in question first became subject to the
provisions of this article.
D. Fees. The person applying for a license shall pay the following fees:
[Amended 3-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02; 12-6-2005 by Ord. No.
05:30; 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07:31]
(1) For a nonspayed or nonneutered dog of reproductive age, the fee
for a license shall be $13.20 for each dog of licensing age.
(2) For a spayed or neutered dog, the fee for a license shall be $10.20
for each dog of licensing age. To qualify for such reduced fee, the
owner shall be required to submit to the Borough Clerk, or any
other officer as may be designated by the Borough Council, a
certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the dog
§ 85-2 NORWOOD CODE § 85-2
81:100
§ 85-3. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
has been spayed or neutered. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
10:04]
E. Expiration date. Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on
the last day of January of the year following the year in which it was
issued.
F. Exceptions. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly
known as "Seeing-Eye dogs" shall be licensed in the same manner as
other dogs, except that the owner shall not be required to pay any fee.
G. Late fee. Any person applying for a dog license renewal will be subject
to a late fee of $10 for each license renewal applied for and issued after
March 1 of each year. [Added 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
A. License required. Any person who operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, pet shop or pound shall apply to the Borough Clerk, or any other
officer as may be designated by the Borough Council, for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. Any person
holding such a license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by him and kept at his establishment. Such
licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises. [Amended 3-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02; 12-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 05:30; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:04]
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where establishment is located, or proposed to
be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purpose for which the establishment is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
C. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee submits a written statement from the Heath Officer of the
Board of Health that the establishment or the proposed establishment
complies with the local and state rules governing the location of and
sanitation at such establishment.
D. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on the last day of January
of each year.
E. License fees. The annual license fee for kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds shall be as follows:
§ 85-2 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-3
81:101
§ 85-4. Disposition of fees. [Amended 3-1-19983-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-02]
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $10.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $25.
(3) Pet shop: $10.
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
(5) The fee for picking up a stray or unlicensed dog: $5.
F. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) Any license issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Mayor and Council on recommendation
of the State Department of Health or the Board of Health of the
Borough for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health or the Borough Board of Health after
the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department of Health or the Borough Health Board.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Borough
ordinances and rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation therein and the prevention of the spread
of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments.
G. Report to State Health Department. The Borough Clerk, or any other
officer as may be designated by the Borough Council, shall forward to
the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor are
issued, which list shall include the names and addresses of the
licensees and the kinds of license issued. [Amended 3-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-02; 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
10:04]
H. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. The Borough Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the
Borough Council, shall forward $7 from the license fee paid for all dogs
to the Borough Treasurer within 30 days after collection or receipt, and
this portion of the fee shall be placed in a special account separate from
any of the other accounts of the Borough to be used for the following
purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
seizure under this article; for local prevention and control of rabies; for
§ 85-3 NORWOOD CODE § 85-4
81:102
§ 85-5. Dog canvass. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30;
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:04]
The Borough Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the
Borough Council, shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough and shall report to
the Clerk, the Board of Health of the Borough and to the State Department
of Health the results, setting forth in separate columns the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such dogs, the number
of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with the
registration number of each dog and the number of unlicensed dogs owned
by each person, together with a complete description of each unlicensed
dog.
§ 85-6. Vaccination.
providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local Board
of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject and administering the provisions of this article.
[Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
10:04]
B. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Borough any amount then in such account that is in
excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the last
two fiscal years next preceding.
C. The Borough shall forward to the State Department of Health the
following portions of the license fees paid for each dog:
(1) Three dollars for each dog that has not had its reproductive
capacity permanently altered shall be forwarded to the Department
of Health for deposit in the Animal Population Control Fund
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 41:19-15.3b.
(2) Twenty cents for each dog licensed shall be forwarded to the
Department of Health to be placed in the Pilot Clinic Fund pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3c.
(3) One dollar for each dog licensed shall be the registration tag fee,
which shall be forwarded within 30 days of collection to the State
Department of Health for deposit in accordance with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.11.
A. Vaccination required. No person shall own a dog within the Borough
unless it has been vaccinated against rabies.
§ 85-4 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-6
81:103
§ 85-7. Regulations.
No person shall own a dog in the borough except in compliance with the
following regulations:
B. Procedure for vaccination. Vaccinations shall be performed by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey. The vaccine
used shall be from a manufacturer licensed by the Bureau of Animal
Industry of the United States Department of Agriculture, and the
dosage shall be as recommended by the manufacturer. All dogs shall be
revaccinated before expiration of the period of time for which the
vaccine used is known to be effective.
C. Exceptions.
(1) The Health Officer of the Board of Health may exempt any dog from
the provisions of this section if there is presented to him a
certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that it would be
undesirable to vaccinate a particular dog for a specified period of
time because of the dog's age, infirmity or other physical condition.
(2) No vaccination shall be required for any dog confined to a licensed
kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or veterinary hospital.
D. Certificate. The fact that a dog has been vaccinated against rabies shall
be evidenced by a certificate from the veterinarian performing the
vaccination. The certificate shall either be on a form approved by the
Health Officer of the Board of Health or a standard immunization
certificate used by the veterinarian. The certificate shall be presented
to the Health Officer within 10 days after each vaccination. In the case
of dogs vaccinated before being brought into the Borough, the
certificate shall be presented to the Health Officer within 10 days after
the dog is brought into the Borough.
E. Certificate required prior to issuance of license. No dog license shall be
issued until the certificate required by Subsection D of this section or
the certificate provided for in Subsection C of this section, duly
endorsed by the Health Officer of the Board of Health, is presented to
the Borough Clerk, or any other officer as may be designated by the
Borough Council. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30;
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:04]
A. Registration tags. At the time of the issuance of each dog's license, a
metal registration tag shall be issued for each dog licensed. All dogs
shall wear a collar or harness with the registration tag for that dog
securely fastened to it.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog without the consent of the owner or attach a
registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
§ 85-6 NORWOOD CODE § 85-7
81:104
C. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own any dog which habitually
barks or cries in a manner that would disturb a reasonable person,
particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. Running at large. No person owning a dog shall permit it to run at large
upon the public streets or in any public park or in any public building or
in any public place in the borough nor permit a dog to run at large upon
private property without the permission of the owner.
E. Leashing of dogs. No person owning a dog shall permit it to be upon the
public streets or in any other public place in the borough unless the dog
is accompanied by a person capable of controlling it and is securely
fastened to an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
F. Property damage. No person owning or in control of a dog shall permit
it to damage any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or other property.
G. Dogs not permitted on municipal or school-owned property. No person
owning or having the control, custody or possession of a dog shall
permit or suffer such dog to enter upon any municipal or school-owned
property or premises whatsoever as posted, including but not limited to
the following property and premises:
(1) Buffer strips.
(a) Along the railroad track or right-of-way adjacent to Railroad
Avenue running from Broadway south to South Street.
(b) Valley Place along and adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or
tracks.
(c) Dale Court.
(d) One-hundred-fifty-foot wide buffer zone situated across the
street from Kennedy Park.
(2) Municipally owned property.
(a) Public school parking lots and surrounding area.
(b) Public library parking lots and surrounding area.
(c) Kennedy Park.
(d) Borough Hall Complex.
(e) Brook Street Pump Station.
(f) Area around the skating pond adjacent to Kennedy Park.
(g) Piermont Road Pump Station.
(3) Other specific municipally owned land.
(a) Southeast corner of Chestnut Street and Broadway.
§ 85-7 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-7
81:105
§ 85-8. Vicious dogs.
§ 85-9. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs.
(b) Northwest corner of Tappan Road and Blanche Avenue.
(c) Southeast corner of Broad Street and Broadway.
(d) 14th Street Circle (Columbus Circle).
(4) General. Any and all other municipally owned or controlled lands
and premises.
A. Complaint; investigation; report. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police or a police officer designated by him to receive and investigate
complaints against dogs. If he deems any dog complained of to be a
vicious dog, as defined in § 85-1, he shall report his findings in writing
to the Municipal Judge.
B. Notice; hearing. The Municipal Judge shall notify in writing the owner
of an allegedly vicious dog that a complaint has been made and require
the owner to appear before him at a stated time and place for a hearing.
The Municipal Judge shall conduct the hearing in the same manner as
he would conduct the trial of a criminal case. If the Municipal Judge
decides that the dog complained of is a vicious dog, he shall so notify
the owner of the dog.
A. Causes for impounding. The Secretary to the Board of Health or his
agents shall take into custody and impound any of the following dogs:
[Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner which the Dog Catcher has
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of the dog without a current
registration tag on its collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner.
(4) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog in the
manner of § 85-8 which is not muzzled.
B. Notice of seizure. If any dog impounded or seized wears a registration
tag, collar or harness having inscribed on or attached to it the name and
address of any person or the owner of the dog, a notice shall
immediately be served on the person whose address is given on the
collar or on the person owning the dog stating that the dog has been
seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after the service of the notice. A notice under this
subsection may be served either by delivering it to the person on whom
it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known
place of abode or at the address given on the collar or forwarding it by
§ 85-7 NORWOOD CODE § 85-9
81:106
§ 85-10. Quarantine.
mail in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his usual or last
known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
C. Disposition of impounded dogs. Any impounded dog may be destroyed
in as humane a manner as possible, under any of the following
contingencies:
(1) When any dog seized has not been claimed by any person within
seven days' notice or within seven days of the dog's seizure when
notice cannot be given, as set forth in the previous subsection.
(2) If the person owning the dog seized has not paid all the expenses
incurred by reason of its seizure, including a maintenance charge
not to exceed $1 per day.
(3) If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the
person owning, keeping or harboring such dog has not procured a
license and registration tag as required by this article. The
Secretary to the Board of Health is authorized to charge the owner,
if known, the sum of $1 for each animal destroyed. A similar charge
may be made by the Secretary to the Board of Health for the
destruction of any animal whose destruction is requested by the
owner. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
A. In general. When any dog attacks or bites a human being, the Secretary
to the Board of Health or the Health Officer of the Board of Health may
order the owner of the dog to confine it, either on the owner's premises
or at any other reasonable location which the Secretary to the Board of
Health or the Health Officer designates, for a period of 10 days. The
expense of confining the dog shall be borne by the owner. [Amended
12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
B. Examination. The Health Officer or any other person designated by the
Borough Health Department shall have the right to examine any dog
confined under the provisions in Subsection A of this section at any
reasonable time, including daily examinations, for a period of 10 days
after the dog has attacked or bitten any person to ascertain whether the
animal shows symptoms of rabies.
C. Release from quarantine. Regardless of whether or not the period of
time from which the owner was directed to confine the dog has expired,
no dog confined under the provisions of Subsection A of this section
shall be released from quarantine until the Borough Health Department
issues a certificate of release. The certificate shall only be issued after
either the person designated by the Health Department to examine the
dog or some other licensed veterinarian has certified in writing that the
animal appears to be healthy and free from rabies.
D. General quarantine. Whenever the Secretary to the Board of Health or
the Board of Health is notified by the State Department of Health or
§ 85-9 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-10
81:107
§ 85-11. Enforcement.
§ 85-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article or who fails or refuses
to comply with the provisions of the statute herein referred to or any rules
and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health, pursuant
to said statute, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense in the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A person
who refuses or neglects to pay a fine imposed hereunder and costs incident
thereto may be committed to the County Jail for a period not exceeding 10
days in the case of a first conviction, and in the case of a conviction for a
second, subsequent or continuing violation for a period not exceeding 30
days in the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
determines himself or itself that there is danger of an epidemic of
rabies in the borough, he shall order all persons owning or having
custody of dogs in the borough to keep their dogs confined to their
own premises. Notice that an order has been issued may be either
written or oral and may be served personally, by mail, by publication in
a newspaper circulating in the borough, by conspicuously posting it in
public places or by any other method calculated to actually reach the
persons affected. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
A. Access to premises. Any officer authorized or empowered to perform
any duty under this article may go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound
when he is in immediate pursuit of such a dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids it.
B. Interference with official duties. No person shall interfere with anyone
authorized or empowered to perform under this article.
§ 85-10 NORWOOD CODE § 85-12
81:108
ARTICLE II
Dog Littering and Soiling
[Adopted 11-10-1981]
§ 85-13. Prohibitions; exceptions.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or work or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property, except under the
following conditions:
§ 85-14. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty in the Municipal Court for the violation of any
provision of this article may be fined up to $25.
A. The person in control of said dog shall immediately remove feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method.
B. The feces removed shall be deposited by the person owning, harboring,
keeping or in charge of any dog in a sanitary manner.
C. The permission of the owner of private property is obtained first.
§ 85-13 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-14
81:109

ARTICLE III
Licensing of Cats
[Adopted by Ord. No. 90-0-09]
§ 85-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Norwood or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 85-16. Rabies vaccinations.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough of Norwood unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those
held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
§ 85-15 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-16
81:111
§ 85-17. Licensing requirements.
C. Vaccination certificates. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the
state.
D. Exemption. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Clerk of the municipality or other official designated
by the governing body thereof to license cats in the municipality in
which he/she resides a license and official registration tag with license
number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored
and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license
number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include, but are not limited to,
breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make
application for license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Borough of Norwood for no longer
than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into the Borough of Norwood.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this
borough any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing registration tag or sleeve, and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the borough for a period of more
than 90 days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Norwood an unlicensed cat, and shall keep same or permit same
to be kept within the borough for a period of more than 10 days,
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve
for each such cat.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
§ 85-16 NORWOOD CODE § 85-17
81:112
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other local official designated to license cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the borough and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the borough.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. No Municipal Clerk or other official
designated by the governing body of any municipality to license cats
therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag or
sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the
cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 85-16. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
G. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of
$8 for each unneutered cat and $6 for each neutered cat. [Amended
11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07:31]
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) The person applying for the license and registration tag and/or
sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal
of the license and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for
the original. Licenses, tags or sleeves shall expire on December 31
in the year in which they are issued. Renewals shall be for one-year
terms, January 1 to December 31.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in the Borough of Norwood. Any valid
New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by this municipality as evidence of
compliance.
I. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
J. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
K. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this section shall be forwarded to
the Treasurer of the municipality and shall be placed in a special
§ 85-17 AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES § 85-17
81:113
§ 85-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
10:04]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates the
provisions of this article, or who fails or refuses to comply with the terms
of this article, will be liable upon conviction to a fine of not less than $5
and not more than $50 for each offense or violation, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court judge.
account separate from any of the other accounts of the municipality
and shall be used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping
and disposing of cats liable to seizure for local prevention and control
of rabies, providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the
local Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies and for administering the provisions of this article.
Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the said
third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from such special account to the general
funds of the municipality any amount then in such account which is in
excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the last
two fiscal years next preceding.
L. Late fee. Any person applying for a cat license renewal will be subject to
a late fee of $10 for each license renewal applied for and issued after
March 1 of each year. [Added 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:30]
§ 85-17 NORWOOD CODE § 85-18
81:114
Chapter 94
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 94-1. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of any owner or tenant or other person in possession
of any land in the borough to keep his land free of brush, weeds, dead
and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash
and other debris which may constitute a fire hazard or which is otherwise
detrimental to the public health or safety.
§ 94-2. Public streets.
It shall be the duty of any owner, tenant or other person in possession of any
land in the borough bordering upon any public street to remove all grass,
weeds, brush and other debris from that part of the street bordering upon
his property.
§ 94-3. Notice to remove.
Whenever the Mayor and Council shall determine, as a result of
investigation by any municipal official of a complaint of any borough
resident, that the owner, tenant or person in possession of any land in
the borough has failed to comply with §§ 94-1 and 94-2, they shall direct
the Borough Clerk to notify in writing the owner, tenant or person in
possession of the land in question to remove the brush, weeds, dead or
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or other
debris within 10 days after receipt of notice. Notice may be served either
personally or by mailing a copy of it by registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the person affected by it at his last known address. The
Mayor and Council shall also direct the Superintendent of Public Works
or some other appropriate municipal official to reinspect the property in
question after the ten-day period has expired and to report in writing to the
Mayor and Council that the conditions complained of have been abated or
removed.
§ 94-4. Removal by borough.
In the event that the owner, tenant or person in possession of the land
in question has refused to abate or remedy the condition complained of
within 10 days after receipt of notice, the Mayor and Council may order
the condition complained of to be abated or removed by an appropriate
municipal official or agency. The official or agency directed to remove or
abate the condition complained of shall keep a record of all costs and
expenses incurred in connection with the removal or abatement and shall
certify it to the Mayor and Council, who shall examine the certificate and, if
found correct, cause the cost of removal or abatement to be charged against
the land benefited. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the
land benefited and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
§ 85-18 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 94-4
94:115
assessed upon that land and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner as taxes. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to
any penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 98
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 101.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 110.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 98-1. Enforcing agency established.
§ 98-2. Board of Appeals established; terms; compensation.
A. There is hereby established in the borough a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as "Norwood
Construction Code Department," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended and supplemented19 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq., provided that,
in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency
may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one
such official position may be held by the same person, provided that
such person is qualified pursuant to the above cited laws and
regulations to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such Board shall
consist of five members, at least one of whom shall be a registered
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 94-4 NORWOOD CODE § 98-2
94:116
§ 98-3. Fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-18; Ord. No. 90-0-04;
3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:02;4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10:05]
architect or licensed professional engineer of building construction
experience. At least one member shall be as qualified as a plumbing
subcode official and at least one member shall be as qualified as an
electrical subcode official. No more than two Board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession. Each Board member
shall have at least three years' experience in construction, design or
supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect or, in the
alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision
as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture
or engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher
education or, as a further alternative, 10 years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction
trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector.
B. The Borough Council shall appoint the Board members and any
alternative members. For the member first appointed, the Borough
Council shall designate the appointees' term so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a
term of three years and two for terms of four years. At the expiration of
such terms, and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of
four years each. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. The
Borough Council shall appoint such number of alternatives, as may be
appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years or, in the alternative,
may appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis. No regular or alternate
Board member may be a member of the enforcing agency, the decisions
of which are subject to the review of the Board.
C. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation but shall be
reimbursed for all expenses incurred as a result of their duties.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsections B, C and D hereof and shall be paid before the
permit is issued. In addition thereto, for all plans received, the following
base fee shall be paid:
(1) Filing fee, residential construction plans: $15.
(2) Filing fee, commercial construction plans: $30.
(3) Review fee, residential construction plans: 20% of permit fee.
(4) Review fee, commercial construction plans: 20% of permit fee.
B. The building subcode fees shall be:
(1) For new construction: $0.036 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume, provided that the minimum fee shall be $200 for principal
buildings and $75 for accessory structures.
§ 98-2 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-3
94:117
(2) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $18 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of the work, provided that the minimum fee shall be
$40. For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant
shall submit to the Department such cost data as may be available,
produced by the architect or engineer of record or by a recognized
estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The Construction Official shall make
the final decision regarding estimated cost.
(3) For additions: $0.036 per cubic foot for building or structure
volume for the added portion, provided that the minimum fee shall
be $60.
(4) For roofing and siding: minimum permit fee shall be $50.
(5) For tents: $92.
(6) For decks: $18 per $1,000 of estimated cost of the work, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $50.
(7) For combinations of renovations and additions: the sum of the fees
computed separately as renovations and additions.
(8) Swimming pool fees: up to $50,000: $24/$l,000; and more than
$50,000: $18/$1,000. For in-ground and aboveground swimming
pools, each applicant will deposit a fee of $500 and thereafter
maintain an escrow account of not less than $500 with the Borough
to reimburse the Borough for the cost of site and grade plan review
to be made by the Borough Engineer for preconstruction approvals.
The unused portion, if any, of this deposit shall be returned to the
applicant upon completion and final approval of the improvements.
This fee shall be in addition to the permit fees required for the pool
erection and any accessory building. The construction costs will
also be issued and the plans will be reviewed by the Building
Department.
(9) Asbestos removal: $12 per $1,000, provided that the minimum fee
is $50.
(10) The fee for construction of a fence shall be $50.
(11) For all construction modifying the footprint of any principal
building or structure greater than 250 square feet, each applicant
will deposit a fee of $500 for one-family and two-family residential
dwellings and $1,000 for all other uses, and thereafter maintain an
escrow account of not less than the applicable amount set forth
herein with the Borough, to reimburse the Borough for the cost of
site and grade plan review to be made by the Borough Engineer for
preconstruction and postconstruction approvals. The unused
portion, if any, of the escrow deposit shall be returned to the
applicant upon completion and final approval of the improvements.
§ 98-3 NORWOOD CODE § 98-3
94:118
This fee shall be in addition to the permit fees that are otherwise
required by the Building Department.
(12) Demolition of structure: $100.
C. The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) For each fixture, device and plumbing stack: $18.
(2) Sewer connection: $60.
(3) Central air conditioning: $42.
(4) Disposal units: $42.
(5) Slab inspection for underground: $30.
(6) Ventilation equipment: $21.60.
(7) Swimming pool water supply: $48.
(8) Water softeners: $42.
(9) Drywell construction or relocation: $48.
(10) Oil burners and furnaces: $42.
(11)Water heaters and tankless heaters: $40.
(12) Swimming pool water heaters: $30.
(13) Gas heating systems: $30.
(14) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum plumbing subcode
fee shall be: $48.
(15) Special devices. The fee shall be $55 per special device for the
following: grease traps, oil separators, water-cooled airconditioning
units, refrigeration units, utility service connectors,
backflow preventors, steam boilers, hot water boilers (excluding
those for domestic water heating), gas piping, gas service
entrances, active solar systems, sewer pumps, interceptors and
fuel oil piping.
D. Electric subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Outlets:
Type of Outlet Fee
Switching, 1-25 $36
Lighting, 1-25 $36
Receptacle, 1-25 $36
Receptacle, light, switch, each additional 25 $20
§ 98-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-3
94:119
(2) Electrical devices/generators/transformers:
Kilowatts Fee
Over 1 to 10 $25
Over 11 to 45 $46
Over 46 to 112.5 $92
Over 112.5 $457
(3) Motors:
Horsepower Fee
Over 1 to 10 $25
Over 11 to 50 $46
Over 51 to 100 $92
Over 100 $457
(4) Service panels/service entrance/subpanels:
Amperes Fee
1-225 $60
226 to 1,000 $110
Over 1,000 $475
(5) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors, except those in
plug-in appliances, shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(6) Electric stove, oven, cooking equipment, and similar appliances:
each $35, except as noted below:
Type Fee
Burglar alarm/intercom systems $60
Smoke detectors (include number in
fixture total)
Whirlpool/spa $50
Pool bonding (including GFI receptacle) $50 each
Pool filter motor (1 horsepower or over) $25
Pool lights (include in fixture total)
[subpanel for pools]
By size as listed
above
Water heater, electric $30
Central heat By kilowatt size as
listed above
§ 98-3 NORWOOD CODE § 98-3
94:120
Type Fee
Baseboard heat By kilowatt size as
listed above
Thermostats (include in fixture
total)
Heat pump By horsepower size
as listed above
Pumps By horsepower size
as listed above
Motor control center/subpanels By ampere size
Signs $25
Light standards $7 each
Motors, frac. horsepower (include in fixture
total)
Motors (all others) By horsepower size
as listed above
Transformers/generators By kilowatt size as
listed above
Service/service entrance By size as listed
above
Minimum fee $50
(7) Communication points and receptacles in commercial work will be
counted as outlets.
E. The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be $200. The
fees for elevator testing and inspection shall be as published in the
Uniform Construction Code 5:23-12.5.
F. The fee for plan review will be 20% of the amount to be charged for the
construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are reviewed.
The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the amount of the
fee to be charged for the construction permit.
G. The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall be $5
per $1,000 with a minimum of $100 for a principal building and $5 per
$1,000 with a minimum of $50 for an accessory building.
H. The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one
lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $10 per
$1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving, for new
foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, provided that the minimum fee shall be $100.
I. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $2.50 per square foot of
surface area of the sign, provided that the minimum fee shall be $50. In
§ 98-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-3
94:121
the case of a double-faced sign, the area of the surface of only one side
of the sign shall be used for purposes of the fee computation.
J. The fire subcode fees shall be:
(1) Sprinkler heads:
Sprinkler Heads Fee
1 - 20 $46
21 - 100 $85
101 - 200 $163
201 - 400 $423
401 - 1,000 $585
Over 1,000 $748
(2) Heat/smoke detectors.
Heat/Smoke Detectors Fee
1 - 20 $12
21 - 100 $85
101 - 200 $163
201 - 400 $423
401 - 1,000 $585
Over 1,000 $748
(3) Each standpipe: $163.
(4) Each independent pre-engineered system: $65.
(5) Each gas- or oil-fired appliance which is not connected to the
plumbing system: $40.
(6) Each kitchen exhaust system: $40.
(7) Each incinerator/crematorium: $260.
(a) Minimum fee: $50.
(b) Boilers: $50.
(c) Fireplaces or chimneys: $50.
(d) Wood or coal stoves: $50.
(e) Commercial cooking equipment: $50.
(f) Oil and fuel tanks: $50.
(g) Gasoline and diesel tanks: $100.
§ 98-3 NORWOOD CODE § 98-3
94:122
§ 98-4. Fire limits.
The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Borough Council,
biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire limits within the
borough. This report shall indicate the recommendation of the Construction
Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire Subcode Official
regarding those areas which should be designated as within fire limits, with
the reasons therefor. Such report and evaluation or reevaluation shall list
boundaries of closely built commercial areas as they exist or are developing,
(h) Gasoline pumps: $30.
(i) Remove tanks, per tank: $50.
K. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy letter shall be
$150.
(2) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $100 per
thirty-day period. No temporary certificate of occupancy shall
extend beyond 90 days in duration.
(3) The fee for a change of use of occupancy in any nonresidential
building shall be $200.
(4) The fee for each commercial certificate of occupancy shall be 10%
of the fee charged for the construction permit, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $100.
(5) The fee for each certificate of approval shall be $30.
L. The fee for each reinspection of a final inspection made by any of the
inspectors, including building, fire, electrical, plumbing and heating,
shall be $50.
M. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $423 for Class I structure and $85 for Class II and
Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an application for a
variation shall be $163 for Class I structures and $46 for Class II and III
structures.
N. In order to provide the training, certifications and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0014 per cubic foot of volume of
new construction. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of
Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly
basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March
31 and June 30 and not later than one month next succeeding the end of
the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, said fee shall be collected and
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
§ 98-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 98-4
94:123
and the governing body, by ordinance, may establish such fire limits
thereafter.
§ 98-5. Inspection and certificate of occupancy.
A. Inspection required. At all times during the course of the erection of
any building, the Construction Official shall be permitted access thereto
for the purpose of inspecting such building and determining its
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the terms of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall at all
times during the erection of the building be posted conspicuously upon
the building to which it refers, and if at any time the Construction
Official shall determine that the building is being erected or altered or
removed in violation of the terms of this chapter, he may remove the
permit from the building until such violation is discontinued or
removed. All workmen, mechanics and laborers of any description are
hereby forbidden to do or perform any work upon any building where a
permit for the erection, alteration or removal of the same has been
refused, or where a permit has been removed therefrom by reason of
violation of this chapter as herein provided, except that such workmen,
mechanics or laborers may be employed for the correction or removal
of such violation. [Added 7-2-1986]
B. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used nor tenancy changed, and no
building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used or
tenancy changed, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever,
until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Construction Official stating that the building or premises complies
with all the provisions of applicable borough ordinances, state
statutes and regulations.
(2) No change or extension of use and no alteration shall be made in a
nonconforming use or premises without a certificate of occupancy
having first been issued by the Construction Official that such
extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of
applicable borough ordinances, state statutes and regulations.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, no certificate of occupancy shall be
required upon change of tenancy in any residential premises,
provided that such change does not involve enlargement,
expansion or extension of the building structure.
(4) Certificates of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the
erection or alteration of the building shall have been complete. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Construction Official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected. The fees for a certificate of occupancy are established in
§ 98-3K.
§ 98-4 NORWOOD CODE § 98-5
94:124
Chapter 101
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Building construction — See Ch. 98.
§ 101-1. Numbering system.
There shall be a system for the assignment of street numbers which shall
be in accordance with a plan or map adopted by the Mayor and Council of
the borough and entitled "Numbering Map, Borough of Norwood, Bergen
County, New Jersey, September 4, 1941," prepared by Elmer A. E. Blackwell,
Borough Engineer.
§ 101-2. Size of numerals.
The numbers required to be displayed by this chapter shall be Arabic
numbers of such a size and so located as to be clearly visible to persons
passing the building on the abutting street.
§ 101-3. New buildings.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building until the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
§ 101-4. Corrections.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to correct any errors which
may be discovered with regard to the assignment of street numbers.
§ 101-5. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the assignment of a street number may appeal that
assignment to the Mayor and Council of the borough.
Chapter 105
BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 73. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
(5) All fees are collected by the Construction Official for issuance of
certificates of occupancy, and copies thereof shall be remitted by
the Construction Official to the Borough Treasurer at the end of
each quarterly period throughout the year.
§ 98-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 101-5
101:125
§ 105-1. Purpose; scope.
§ 105-2. Closing hours; security personnel.
§ 105-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
Chapter 106
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited in the interest of the protection of the employees,
patrons and law enforcement officers. It has been determined that
unprotected and understaffed business and commercial enterprises are
prey to the criminal element in our society during the late night and
early morning hours and that certain security devices must be provided
in order to protect the general public who use these establishments.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor
include any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or a
permit to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws of
the United States, the State of New Jersey or other municipal ordinance
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.20
A. No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited
shall be opened between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless
there are two employees on continuous duty in that part of the business
or the commercial establishment to which the public is invited.
B. In addition thereto, the business or commercial establishment shall
employ a security officer or the premises shall have in operation a
security device approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Norwood which may consist of a silent and/or audible burglar alarm
connected to a central security monitoring system designed to activate
police response, a closed-circuit television connected to a central
security monitoring system designed to activate police response or such
device which can be activated instantaneously to notify law
enforcement officers that a crime or disorderly persons activity is in
progress.21
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Alcoholic Beverages.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Alarm Systems.
§ 101-5 NORWOOD CODE § 105-3
105:126
CERTIFICATES OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Penalties and fines — See Ch. 174.
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 106-1. Certificate of continued occupancy required.
A. Any change in use, ownership, or occupancy of an existing building or
structure shall require approval of a certificate of continued occupancy
by the Construction Code Official.
B. Upon receipt of an application for approval of a certificate of occupancy,
the Construction Code Official shall determine whether the use is in
compliance with the Borough's Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law, and whether any proposed use is of a
nature, extent, and intensity that is so similar to the previous use to not
constitute a change in use. The Construction Code Official may either
issue a certificate of continued occupancy or refer the matter to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board. In either event, the applicant for a
certificate of continued occupancy shall pay any fee established for this
purpose.
C. The applicant for a structure other than a one- or two-family residence
shall be required to submit with the application a sketch plat indicating
the location and layout of all existing structures, lot configuration,
general parking and loading areas, lighting, drainage, landscaping, and
other general site factors. In lieu of a sketch plat, the applicant may
refer to prior site plans for the premises filed with the approving
authority with appropriate notations indicating any changes made on
the premises since the earlier site plan approval.
D. If the Construction Code Official determines that any proposed change
in the nature, extent, or intensity of any use does not require additional
improvements or approvals, then the Construction Code Official may
approve the application or conditionally approve the application.
E. If the Construction Code Official determines that improvements are
required or that the nature, extent, or intensity of the use should be
reviewed, he or she shall deny the application and require submission
of the application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of a partial or
complete site plan application or other appropriate development
application as provided by this chapter.
F. No certificate of continued occupancy may be issued as to a residential
building or any portion thereof unless approved smoke detectors, fire
§ 105-3 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 106-1
105:127
§ 106-2. Fees.
The fees for certificates of continued occupancy shall be $100 for the
application and initial inspection and $25 for each reinspection.
§ 106-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough's Construction Code Official.
Any person convicted on a charge of violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174.
Chapter 107
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 107, Contractor Licensing, adopted 4-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04:04, was repealed 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17:12.]
Chapter 108
CONTRACTS
extinguishers, and carbon monoxide detectors have been installed as
required by applicable state statute and local ordinances.
§ 106-1 NORWOOD CODE § 106-3
105:128
ARTICLE I
Public Contracts and Political Contributions
[Adopted 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14:1422]
§ 108-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, will have the
meanings set forth in this section, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood or any of its purchasing agents or
agencies or those of its independent authorities, if any.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A natural or legal person, business, corporation,
professional services corporation, limited-liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association, or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state or of any other
state or foreign jurisdiction. The term "business entity" includes for profit
and nonprofit entities and includes all directors, officers, partners,
members, principals, or any person holding or owning an interest in the
business entity, or any subsidiaries directly controlled by the business
entity.
CANDIDATE —
CANDIDATE COMMITTEE — A committee established by a candidate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-9(a), for the purpose of receiving contributions
and making expenditures.
COMMISSION — The New Jersey Election Law Enforcement Commission.
CONTINUING POLITICAL COMMITTEE —
An individual who:
Is seeking election to a public office of this state or of a county,
municipality or school or fire district at any election;
(1)
Has been elected or failed election to an office, other than a party
office, for which he or she sought election, and who receives
contributions and makes expenditures for any of the purposes
authorized by N.J.S.A. 19:44A-11.2;
(2)
Has received funds or other benefits or has made payments solely
for the purpose of determining whether the individual should
become a candidate as defined in Subsection A(1) and (2) above.
(3)
A.
This definition does not include an individual seeking federal elective
office or state, county, or municipal political party office.
B.
Includes any group of two or more persons acting jointly, or any
corporation, partnership, or any other incorporated or unincorporated
A.
22.Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted as Ch. 48 but was renumbered to maintain the
organizational structure of the Code.
§ 108-1 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 108-1
105:129
CONTRACT or AGREEMENT — Any contract, agreement, or purchase order
authorized or entered into on or after January 1, 2013, between the Borough
and a business entity for the provision of any goods or the provision of any
services in excess of $17,500, or any combination of goods and services in
excess of $17,500, except:
CONTRIBUTION — Includes every loan, gift, subscription, advance, or
transfer of money or other thing of value, including any in-kind contribution,
made to or on behalf of any candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political party committee, or legislative leadership committee
and any pledge or other commitment or assumption of liability to make
such transfer. For the purposes of this chapter, any such commitment or
assumption will be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date
when the commitment is made or liability assumed. Funds or other benefits
received solely for the purpose of determining whether an individual should
become a candidate are contributions.
CONTRIBUTION REPORTABLE BY THE RECIPIENT — A contribution or
contributions in excess of $300 in the aggregate per candidate made to or
received by a candidate committee, joint candidates committee, or political
committee or $300 in the aggregate per calendar year made to or received
association, including a political club, political action committee, civic
association, or other organizations, which in any calendar year
contributes or expects to contribute at least $4,300 to aid or promote
the candidacy of an individual, or the candidacies of individuals, for
elective public office, or the passage or defeat of a public question or
public questions, and which may be expected to make contributions
toward such aid or promotion or passage or defeat during a subsequent
election, provided that the group, corporation, partnership, association,
or other organization has been determined by the Commission to be a
continuing political committee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 19:44A-8(b).
A continuing political committee does not include:
A candidate committee, joint candidates committee, political
committee, a political party committee, or a legislative leadership
committee; or
(1)
A contributor not involved in fundraising (that is, not soliciting
or accepting contributions to aid or promote candidates, or the
passage or defeat of public questions) and not conducting any
election-related activity, other than making contributions from its
own funds to a candidate committee, joint candidates committee,
political committee, continuing political committee, political party
committee, or legislative leadership committee.
(2)
B.
Contracts that are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder as a result
of open public bidding as set forth under the Local Public Contracts
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.; and
A.
Contracts that are awarded pursuant to the competitive contracting
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1 to 40A:11-4.5.
B.
§ 108-1 NORWOOD CODE § 108-1
105:130
by a political party committee, legislative leadership committee, or
continuing political committee.
COUNTY COMMITTEE OF A POLITICAL PARTY — A committee organized
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:5-3.
DIRECTOR — Any member of the governing board of a corporation,
including a nonprofit corporation, whether designated as a director, trustee,
manager, governor, or by any other title.
FAIR AND OPEN PROCESS — A process for awarding contracts adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.5, which provides, at a minimum, that the
contract will be:
IN-KIND CONTRIBUTION — A contribution of goods or services received
by a candidate committee, joint candidates committee, political committee,
continuing political committee, political party committee, or legislative
leadership committee, which contribution is paid for by a person or entity
other than the recipient committee, but does not include services provided
without compensation by an individual volunteering a part of or all of his or
her time on behalf of a candidate or committee.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits or
assets of a business entity or more than 10% of the stock, in the case of a
business entity that is a corporation for profit, as appropriate.
JOINT CANDIDATES COMMITTEE — A committee established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 19:44A-9(a) by at least two candidates for the same elective public
offices in the same election in a legislative district, county, or municipality,
but not more candidates than the total number of the same elective public
offices to be filled in that election, for the purpose of receiving contributions
and making expenditures. For the purpose of this definition, the offices of
members of the Senate and members of the General Assembly are deemed
to be the same elective public offices in a legislative district; the offices
of members of the Board of Chosen Freeholders and County Executive are
deemed to be the same elective public offices in a county; and the offices of
Mayor and members of the municipal governing body are deemed to be the
same elective public offices in a municipality.
LEGAL PERSON — A corporation that possesses legal rights.
LEGISLATIVE LEADERSHIP COMMITTEE — A committee established,
authorized to be established, or designated by the President of the Senate,
the Minority Leader of the Senate, the Speaker of the General Assembly,
Publicly advertised in newspapers or on the Internet website
maintained by the public entity in sufficient time to give notice in
advance of the contract;
A.
Awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of
proposals or qualifications and awarded and disclosed under criteria
established in writing by the public entity prior to the solicitation of
proposals or qualifications; and
B.
C. Publicly opened and announced when awarded.
§ 108-1 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 108-1
105:131
or the Minority Leader of the General Assembly, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44A-10.1 for the purpose of receiving contributions and making
expenditures.
LOCAL UNIT — A county, municipality, agency, or instrumentality of a
county or municipality, independent authority, board of education, or fire
district.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED CONTRIBUTION — For each election and for each
primary election a maximum of $300 per election and $300 per primary
election per candidate to any candidate for or holder of the office of Mayor
or Councilperson or candidate committee or joint candidates committee
supporting any such candidate or officeholder, or $300 for each election and
$300 for each primary election per candidate to any Norwood municipal
committee of a political party.[Amended 11-11-2015 by Ord. No.
15:1623]
MEMBER — A member of a limited-liability company.
MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE OF A POLITICAL PARTY — A committee
organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:5-2.
NATURAL PERSON — A human being.
OFFICER — A president, vice president with senior management
responsibility, secretary, treasurer, chief executive officer, or chief financial
officer of a corporation, including a nonprofit corporation, or any person
routinely performing such functions for a corporation.
PARTNER — One of two or more natural persons or other entities, including
a corporation, who or which are joint owners of and carry on a business for
profit, and which business is organized under the laws of this state or of any
other state or foreign jurisdiction, as a general partnership, limited-liability
company, limited partnership association, or other such form of business
organization.
POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEE —
PRINCIPAL — A natural person or other entity who or which owns or
controls more than 10% of the profits or assets of a business entity or 10%
of the stock in the case of a business entity that is a corporation for profit.
§ 108-2. Awarding public contracts to certain contributors
prohibited.
The state committee of a political party, as organized pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 19:5-4;
A.
Any county committee of a political party, as organized pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 19:5-3; or
B.
Any municipal committee of a political party, as organized pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 19:5-2.
C.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also set forth that it is effective retroactively to 12-10-2014.
§ 108-1 NORWOOD CODE § 108-2
105:132
§ 108-3. Contributions made before effective date.
No contribution made by a business entity to any candidate for or holder of
the office of Norwood mayor or councilperson, or candidate committee or
joint candidates committee supporting any such candidate or officeholder,
or to any Norwood municipal committee of a political party, will be deemed
a violation of this chapter, nor will an agreement for property, goods, or
services, of any kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution
was made by the business entity before the effective date of this chapter.
§ 108-4. Disclosures by business entity.
A. The Borough will not enter into any contract or agreement to procure
any goods and services, or both, including those awarded pursuant to a
fair and open process, from any business entity that has solicited or
made any contribution to any candidate or holder of the offices of
Norwood Mayor or Councilperson, or candidate committee or joint
candidates committee supporting any such candidate or officeholder, or
to any Norwood municipal committee of a political party, in excess of
the maximum permitted contribution, within one calendar year
immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No business entity that enters into negotiations for or agrees to any
contract or agreement with the Borough for any goods and services,
including those awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, will solicit
or make any contribution in excess of the maximum permitted
contribution to any candidate for or holder of the office of Norwood
Mayor or Councilperson, or candidate committee or joint candidates
committee supporting any such candidate or officeholder, or to any
Norwood municipal committee of a political party, between the time of
the first communications between that business entity and the Borough
regarding a contract or agreement and the later of the termination of
negotiations or the completion of the contract or agreement.
[Amended 11-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15:1624]
A. Within 10 days before awarding any contract or agreement to procure
any goods or services to any business entity, the Borough will receive a
sworn statement from the business entity made under penalty of
perjury stating the following:
(1) The names of all of the following to which the business entity made
a contribution reportable by the recipient during the twelve-month
period preceding the date of the resolution awarding the contract
with the Borough:
(a) Any political party committee;
(b) Any legislative leadership committee;
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also set forth that it is effective retroactively to 12-10-2014.
§ 108-2 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 108-4
105:133
§ 108-5. Types of contributions deemed business entity
contributions.
A contribution will be deemed to be a contribution by a business entity as
follows:
(c) Any continuing political committee; and
(d) Any candidate committee or joint candidates committee of a
candidate for, or holder of, an elective office in the Borough or
in Bergen County, another local unit within Bergen County, and
the legislative district in which the Borough is located;
(2) The date of the contribution; and
(3) The amount of the contribution.
B. As used in this section, the term "elective office" includes an office,
other than party office, for which candidates appear on the ballot in a
primary, general, municipal, school, or special election.
C. When a public emergency, as determined by the Borough pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6, requires the immediate delivery of goods or services,
then the disclosure required by this section will be made and filed by
the business entity as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after
the delivery of the goods and services.
D. The business entity has a continuing duty to report any violation of this
section that may occur during the negotiation of or duration of a
contract. The certification required under this subsection will be made
before the Borough enters into the contract or agreement with the
business entity, and it is in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
A. When a business entity is a natural person, a contribution made by that
person's spouse or child, residing therewith, will be deemed to be a
contribution by the business entity.
B. When a business entity is other than a natural person, a contribution
made by any of the following will be deemed to be a contribution by the
business entity:
(1) A person or other business entity having an interest in the business
entity;
(2) A principal partner, officer, director, or trustee of the business
entity;
(3) The spouse of a principal partner, officer, director, or trustee of the
business entity;
(4) A subsidiary directly or indirectly controlled by the business entity;
and
§ 108-4 NORWOOD CODE § 108-5
105:134
§ 108-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity or any candidate for or holder of the office of Norwood
mayor or councilperson, or candidate committee or joint candidates
committee supporting any such candidate or officeholder, or any Norwood
or Bergen County county committee of a political party, municipal
committee of a political party, or any legislative leadership committee that
regularly engages in, or has as its primary purpose the support of municipal
elections or municipal parties, may cure a violation of this chapter if, within
30 days after the date on which an ELEC report disclosing the contribution
is published, the business entity notifies the Borough Council in writing and
seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution.
§ 108-7. Breaches of contract; penalty.
(5) A continuing political committee organized under Section 527 of
the Internal Revenue Code that is directly or indirectly controlled
by the business entity.
C. If a corporation owns sufficient shares or voting interest in a second
corporation to elect a majority of the directors or trustees of the second
corporation, or if a business entity has sufficient control of a second
business entity to direct the decisionmaking of the second corporation
or a second business entity will be a subsidiary directly or indirectly
controlled by a business entity, the contribution will be deemed to be a
contribution of the controlling business entity or corporation.
D. The criteria to be applied to determine whether or not a business entity
directly or indirectly controls a continuing political committee include,
but are not limited to, whether or not the business entity participates as
an organizer of the continuing political committee, participates in
decisionmaking with regard to the specific activities of the continuing
political committee, or participates in formation of the policies of the
continuing political committee.
A. It will be a breach of the terms of the contract or agreement between
the Borough and a business entity to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office in Norwood;
§ 108-5 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 108-7
105:135
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the business
entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
chapter;
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
chapter.
B. Any business entity that violates Subsection A(2) through (8) will be
disqualified from eligibility for future contracts with the Borough for a
period of four calendar years after the date of the violation.
§ 108-7 NORWOOD CODE § 108-7
105:136
Chapter 109
DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 168.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 109-1. Adoption of school properties map.
§ 109-2. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with P.L. 1999, Chapter 185, the following is a list of
designated school crossings in the Borough of Norwood:
Blanch Avenue and Summit Street
Blanch Avenue and Tappan Road
Broad Street and Blanch Avenue
Broadway and Broad Street
Broadway and Summit Street
Hudson Avenue and Tappan Road
Kensington Avenue and Tappan Road
South Street and Livingston Street
South Street and Summit Street
Summit Street at Norwood Public School
Tappan Road and VerValen Street
Villa Court and Tappan Road
A. The map titled "Drug Free Zones, Borough of Norwood" prepared by
Daniel C. Kaufman, Borough Engineer, is approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of the location and areas in the Borough of
properties that are used for school purposes and that are owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school on school land and of the
areas on or within 1,000 feet of school property.
B. The areas designated on the map referred to in Subsection A will apply
for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, which prohibits drug offenses
within 1,000 feet of schools, and P.L. 1999, Chapter 185, which
prohibits drunk driving and other offenses within 1,000 feet of school
property.
§ 108-7 BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL § 109-3
105:137
§ 109-3. Adoption of map for drug-free zones.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the map titled "Drug Free Zones, Borough
of Norwood," last revised March 10, 1993, and prepared by Joseph Neglia,
Borough Engineer, is approved as the official finding and location of drugfree
zones in the Borough of Norwood pursuant to the provisions of the
above-referenced statutes.
§ 109-4. Map and list to constitute official findings.
The map approved and adopted pursuant to this chapter will continue to
constitute an official finding and record as to the location and boundaries
of areas on or within 500 feet of parks and public buildings and 1,000 feet
of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board that is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this
chapter will be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect
to the location and boundaries of these properties and zones. The list of
school crossings will continue to constitute an official finding and record of
the location of school crossing zones within the Borough until such time, if
any, that this chapter will be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to school crossing zones in the Borough.
§ 109-5. Changes in school locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer of any private or
parochial school, is directed and will have the continuing obligation to
promptly notify the Borough Clerk of any changes in, or contemplated
changes in, the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and that is used for
school purposes or of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 109-6. Original maps and school crossings list to be on file;
copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the maps approved and adopted pursuant to this chapter and
the list of school crossings, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy
thereof to any person, agency, or court that may from time to time request a
copy, along with a certification that the copy is a true copy of the map or list
approved and adopted herein and kept on file. True copies of this chapter
and the approved maps and lists will be provided without cost to the Bergen
County Clerk and to the office of the Bergen County Prosecutor.
§ 109-7. Use of maps and list as evidence.
The map and school crossings list approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state, and
that, pursuant to state law, the maps and list will constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
§ 109-3 NORWOOD CODE § 109-7
105:138
Chapter 110
DWELLINGS, UNFIT
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation, or intended to be so used, and shall include any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually connected
therewith.
OWNER — The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations who
have interest of record in a dwelling, and any who are in possession thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer or officers authorized under this chapter to
exercise the powers set forth in this chapter.
§ 110-2. Finding of fact.
It is hereby declared that the existence and occupation of dwellings in the
borough which are unfit for human habitation are inimical to the welfare
and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the residents of the
borough, and public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of
such dwellings.
§ 110-3. Authority.
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
B. The boundaries of the real property that is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas that are on or within 1,000 feet of
such school property.
E. The location of all school crossings in the Borough.
F. The location of public housing, parks and buildings.
G. The location and boundaries of areas that are on or within 500 feet of
public housing, parks and buildings.
A. Whenever the proper officials of the borough, designated herein, find
that there exists in the borough a dwelling or dwellings unfit for human
habitation due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire,
§ 109-7 DWELLINGS, UNFIT § 110-3
110:139
§ 110-4. Powers and duties of public officer.
The public officer or other official designated under this chapter may
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to the following powers, in addition to others herein granted:
§ 110-5. Determination of unfitness.
The public officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are
dangerous and injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
dwellings, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the
borough, and such conditions may include but shall not be limited to the
following:
accident or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe,
unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety, or
otherwise inimical to the welfare, of the residents of the borough, the
officials designated shall exercise the power vested under this chapter
and under the laws of the state to repair, close or demolish the dwelling
or dwellings in the manner set forth in this chapter.
B. The Chairman of the Building Committee of the Borough Council is
hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers set forth in
this chapter. In the event that the Chairman of the Building Committee
is unable to act, then any member of the Committee may act in his place
and stead. The Mayor and Council may from time to time, by resolution,
designate any other person or persons to act in the place of the
Chairman of the Building Committee.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the borough in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
C. To enter upon the premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that entry is made in such a manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
§ 110-3 NORWOOD CODE § 110-5
110:140
§ 110-6. Filing of petition; notice; hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by the Construction
Official, the Health Inspector or any other officer in charge of any
department of the borough relating to health, fire, building regulations or
activities concerning dwellings in the borough, or by at least five residents
of the borough, charging that any dwelling or dwellings in the borough
are unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for a charge or charges, issue and cause to
be served upon the owner of and the parties in interest in such dwelling or
dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated
agent at a place set forth in the notice and at a time that shall not be less
than 10 days or more than 30 days after the service of the complaint. A
complaint or order issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall
be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the
whereabouts of such persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or
order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each
week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the
borough. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected, and a copy shall be recorded or lodged for
record with the Clerk of the County of Bergen. The owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place
fixed in the complaint. The public officer shall not be bound by the rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity.
§ 110-7. Order to repair, alter or improve dwelling.
After notice and hearing, if the public officer determines that the dwelling
or dwellings under consideration are unfit for human habitation, he shall
state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner or parties in interest an
order requiring the owner within a certain time to repair, alter or improve
the dwelling, to render it fit for human habitation. If the repair, alteration
or improvement cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the
value of the dwelling, the order may require the owner within the time
specified in the order to remove or demolish the building. For the purpose
of determining what may be reasonable for such purpose, the percentage is
fixed at 50% of the value of the dwelling.
C. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
D. Failure to have included in the dwelling running water or inside toilet
facilities.
§ 110-5 DWELLINGS, UNFIT § 110-8
110:141
§ 110-8. Failure of owner to comply; posting of placard.
If the owner shall fail to comply with the order to repair, alter or improve
or, at his option, to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may
cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and
closed, and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of the dwelling so closed a placard with the following words: "This building
is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for
human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 110-9. Removal or demolition of building by borough.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
§ 110-10. Recovery of costs.
The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, improvements or vacating
and closing or removal or demolition shall be a municipal lien against the
real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the dwelling is removed
or demolished, the public officer shall sell the materials of such dwelling
and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal
or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Court of
Chancery, subject to the order of the Court.
Chapter 115
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health fees — See Ch. 240.
§ 110-8 NORWOOD CODE § 110-10
110:142
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Fees25
[Adopted 3-3-2009 by Ord. No. 09:01]
§ 115-1. Miscellaneous fees established.
Fees are hereby established for the following:
A. Initial and annual renewal fee for clothing donation bins: $25 per
application.
25.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Summer Recreation Programs, adopted by Ord. No. 89-0-10
(Sec. 2-30 of the Revised General Ordinances), amended in its entirety 6-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 01:07, was repealed 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04:09. See now § 168-14.
§ 115-1 DWELLINGS, UNFIT § 115-1
110:143

ARTICLE II
Moderate-Income Apartment Application
[Adopted by Ord. No. 87-0-4 (Sec. 2-27 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 115-2. Application fee for Norwood moderate-income apartments.
The following fees are hereby established for the acceptance and processing
of applications filed with the Borough of Norwood:
A. Moderate income apartment application fee: $20.
§ 115-2 DWELLINGS, UNFIT § 115-2
110:145
Chapter 120
(RESERVED)
Chapter 122
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202.
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape,
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on video receivers, television or in theaters or for
institutional use.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, or sidewalk within
the Borough, which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough.
§ 122-2. Permits.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Norwood
without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall set forth
the location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall
take place. A permit is required to be applied for at least three days
prior to the first date that filming is to take place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Clerk during
normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Borough Clerk and shall be accompanied by a permit
fee in the amount established by ordinance of the Borough of Norwood.
C. One permit shall be required for each location.
D. One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on two days
and indoor filming on two days within a period of not more than 10 days
beginning on the date of issuance of the permit, provided that each date
on which filming is to take place shall be specified in the permit.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
§ 115-2 NORWOOD CODE § 122-2
122:146
§ 122-3. Rules and regulations.
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Borough of Norwood unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury for any one
person in the amount of $1,000,000 and for any aggregate
occurrence in the amount of $3,000,000. The Borough of Norwood
shall be named as an additional insured on the policy, and a
certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough at the
time that the permit is issued.
(2) Agrees in writing to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Norwood from any and all liability or damages resulting from the
use of such public lands.
(3) Posts a bond in an amount to be determined by the Borough Clerk
to guarantee and secure the Borough against any damage to person
or property and to guarantee clean-up and restoration of the areas
in which the filming takes place or other areas which may be
damaged or destroyed because of the activities of the filming. If no
claim is made upon the bond, the bond shall be returned to the
permittee within 30 of the completion of the filming.
B. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Borough
Police Department with respect thereto.
C. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
D. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
E. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier.
F. The Borough Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever he/she
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department or by other
§ 122-2 FILMING § 122-3
122:147
§ 122-4. Permit fee.
The fee for a filming permit shall be $150 per day.
§ 122-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
within the Borough of Norwood.
borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or time set forth in the application would violate any
law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the public's use
of public lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of
adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or
welfare.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection
H may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk. An appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be filed
within 10 days of the Borough Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council
shall set the matter down for hearing within 30 days of the day on which
the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and Council
shall be in the form of a resolution. A resolution supporting the decision
of the Borough Clerk or granting relief pursuant to Subsection H shall
be approved by the Mayor and Council at the first regularly scheduled
public meeting of the Borough Council after the hearing on the appeal
unless the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision. If
such a resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision
of the Borough Clerk shall be deemed to be reversed and a permit shall
be issued in conformity with the application or the relief pursuant to
Subsection H shall be deemed denied.
H. Borough Clerk may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements or
limitations of this chapter, and may authorize filming on other public
property not defined as "public lands" and may authorize filming other
than during the hours herein described, or may extend the duration of a
permit beyond 10 days or may waive any other limitation or
requirement of this chapter whenever he/she determines that strict
compliance with such limitations will pose an unreasonable burden
upon the applicant and that such a permit may be issued without
endangering the public's health, safety and welfare.
I. The applicant shall notify the Fire Department and the Police
Department 24 hours before filming takes place and permit the Fire
Department and the Police Department to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all fire and
safety instructions issued by the Fire Department and the Police
Department.
§ 122-3 NORWOOD CODE § 122-5
122:148
Chapter 124
FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Hunting — See Ch. 146.
§ 124-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge any firearm or bow and arrow within the
borough.
§ 124-2. Exceptions.
Section 124-1 shall not apply to the following:
Chapter 127
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25. Alarm Systems — See Ch. 73.
A. The discharge of a firearm by a law enforcement officer in the course of
performing his official duties.
B. The use of a firearm in the defense of life, limb or property, provided
that such use is otherwise lawful.
C. Shooting with firearms or bows and arrows for practice, sport or
recreation upon a supervised firing range provided with proper
facilities for the protection of persons and property. In the case of
firearms, plans for the firing range prepared by or under the
supervision or auspices of the National Rifle Association shall be used
as a guide for determining if a firing range is equipped with proper
safeguards. Any range constructed in accordance with plans prepared
by or under the auspices of the National Rifle Association shall be
conclusively presumed to have proper safeguards.
§ 122-5 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 124-2
124:149

ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code
§ 127-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Borough of Norwood.
§ 127-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which is
hereby created in the Borough of Norwood.
§ 127-3. Duties of Fire Prevention Bureau.
The Norwood Fire Prevention Bureau shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the geographical boundaries of the Borough
of Norwood, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings
(unless so invited by the owner), and shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 127-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 127-2 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 127-5. Organization.
§ 127-6. Appointment of Fire Official, term of office, removal.
A. The local enforcing agency established by § 127-2 of this article shall be
under the supervision of the Fire Official of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
B. A report of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Mayor and Council by the Fire Official. [Added
11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 03:12]
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The Norwood Fire Prevention Bureau shall
be under the direct supervision of the Fire Official pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.).
[Amended 11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 03:12]
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of two years. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. [Amended 11-5-2003
by Ord. No. 03:12]
§ 127-1 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-6
124:151
§ 127-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved by any order of the
local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the Construction
Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 127-8. Additional required inspections and fees.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and employees as may be
necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor
and Council upon recommendation of the Fire Official.
D. Removal from office. The Mayor and Council may remove the Fire
Official and any inspectors and other employees for inefficiency,
misconduct or other just cause. The Fire Official and each inspector or
employee so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by
the Mayor and Council.
A. Inspections. In addition to the inspections required pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations adopted thereunder, all
buildings, structures and uses within the Borough of Norwood, except
for owner-occupied one- and two-family dwelling units and dwelling
units within two-family and multifamily dwellings, shall be inspected for
compliance with the Uniform Fire Code not less than once per year.
B. Fees. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall impose and collect those fees
required to be charged pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
regulations adopted thereunder (N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.9).26 The fees to be
charged for those inspections conducted pursuant to Subsection A of
this section shall be as provided in N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.9, as amended from
time to time, and shall be paid on an annual basis within 60 days of
notification, with a late charge penalty of one half the original fee.
C. Additional fees. [Added 5-2-2000 by Ord. No. 00:04; amended
11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 03:12]
Type of Use Fee
Class A: up to 2,000 square feet $ 45.00
Class B: 2,001 to 5,000 square
feet
$ 75.00
Class C: 5,001 to 10,000 square
feet
$150.00
Class D: more than 10,001 square
feet
$200.00
Class E: multifamily units $25.00 per dwelling unit (minimum
charge $50.00)
26.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 002-1998, Chapter 18, Uniform Fire
Code, was recodified as N.J.A.C. 5:70, effective July 1, 1998.
§ 127-6 NORWOOD CODE § 127-8
124:152
§ 127-9. Smoke detectors.
§ 127-10. Certificate of compliance.
§ 127-11. Violations and penalties.
An owner who sells, leases, rents or otherwise permits to be occupied for
residential purposes any premises subject to the provisions of § 127-9 of
this chapter when the premises do not comply with the inspection and
certification requirements of § 127-10 shall be subject to a fine of not
(1) All life-hazard uses as registered by the State of New Jersey are
exempted from the additional fees.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1, a structure used or intended
for use for residential purposes by not more than two households shall
have a smoke-sensitive alarm device on each level of the structure and
outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the
bedrooms and located on or near the ceiling in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standards No. 74-1984 for the
installation, maintenance and use of household fire-warning equipment.
The installation of battery-operated smoke-sensitive alarm devices shall
be accepted as meeting the requirements of this section. The smokesensitive
device shall be tested and listed by a product certification
agency recognized by the Bureau of Fire Safety.
B. Smoke detectors as required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1 shall be required
in all buildings of mixed use where residential use is included. The
regulations for maintenance of hotels and multiple-family dwellings
concerning smoke alarms is hereby incorporated by reference to
determine the type of equipment and placement requirements.
A. In the case of change of occupancy of any building subject to the
requirements of § 127-9 of this chapter, no owner shall sell, lease or
otherwise permit occupancy for residential purposes of that building
without first obtaining from the Norwood Fire Prevention Bureau a
certificate evidencing compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1 and 52:27D-198.2.
B. The fee will be based on when the application is received: [Amended
11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 03:12]
(1) More than 10 business days prior to change of occupant: $50.
(2) Four to 10 business days prior to change of occupant: $100.
(3) Less than four business days prior to change of occupant: $150.
C. Smoke detectors, that are required to obtain a certificate of
compliance, may be purchased and installed by the Fire Official at a fee
of $40 per smoke detector. [Added 3-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:04;
amended 11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 03:12]
§ 127-8 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-11
124:153
more than $500 which may be collected and enforced by the Norwood
Fire Prevention Bureau by summary proceedings pursuant to "The Penalty
Enforcement Law," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.
§ 127-11 NORWOOD CODE § 127-11
124:154
ARTICLE II
Fire Zones
§ 127-12. Scope.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle or
place any obstruction on lands in the Borough of Norwood, whether publicly
or privately owned, after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by
the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking. (NOTE:
When on emergency responses, police and emergency medical service
vehicles are hereby exempt from the requirements of this section.)
§ 127-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
FIRE LANE/ZONE — Areas designated by the Fire Official and properly
posted and marked in accordance with this article; the terms " fire zone"
and "fire lane" shall be interchangeable.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Norwood official or the designated
representative, as defined N.J.A.C. 5:18, Uniform Fire Code.27
§ 127-14. General regulations.
A. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Borough of Norwood.
B. Fire lanes on private property.
(1) Designation. The Fire Official, with the approval of the Fire Chief
and the chief law enforcement officer, may designate fire lanes on
private property to which the public is invited or which is devoted
to public use or if it is necessary to provide safety for the public or
to provide proper access for Fire Department operations in the
event of an emergency.
(2) Notification. Whenever a determination has been made for the fire
lane designation pursuant to Subsection B(1), the Fire Official shall
notify the owner of the property in writing, by registered or
certified mail or by hand delivering such notice specifically
describing the area designated.
C. The marking of fire zones shall be the responsibility of, and at the
expense of, the owner and shall be accomplished within 30 days of the
receipt of notification. Suitable signs and/or markings bearing the
words "No Parking Fire Zone," shall be posted and marked and striped
in accordance with standards established by the Fire Official. Defacing,
tampering with, damaging such signs or allowing them to deteriorate so
27.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 002-1998, Chapter 18, Uniform Fire
Code, was recodified as N.J.A.C. 5:70, effective July 1, 1998.
§ 127-12 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-14
124:155
§ 127-15. Standards for delineation of fire zones.
All fire zones shall be striped and signs posted in the following manner:
§ 127-16. Violations and penalties.
as to reduce their effectiveness to notify when posted shall constitute a
violation of this article.
D. Removal of obstructions. A police officer shall remove or have removed
such obstructions or vehicles as may violate this article at the expense
of the owner of the premises, in the case of obstructions, or at the
expense of the owner of the vehicle.
A. Signs.
(1) All signs shall be 12 x 18 inches in size.
(2) Light-reflective material shall be used for the sign background and
lettering.
(3) All signs shall be placed not more than one 100 feet center to
center. Whenever the fire zone changes angle or direction more
than 60 degrees, a sign is to be placed at the point of change, and a
sign is required at the beginning and end of the zone. In all
circumstances, a sign shall be visible from another sign. Additional
signs may be required at the discretion of the Fire Prevention
Bureau, the Municipal Code Official or the Norwood Police
Department.
(4) The sign shall be placed at a height of seven feet as measured from
the ground surface to the bottom of the sign at a forty-five degree
angle facing the direction of flow.
(5) The sign shall state NO PARKING FIRE ZONE.
B. Striping.
(1) Striping shall be four inches wide.
(2) All fire zones shall be striped at a width of four feet as specified by
the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(3) The lettering NO PARKING FIRE ZONE shall be placed within the
striped outer boundary lines at a minimum of one-hundred-foot
intervals.
(4) The lettering shall be 18 inches in height and shall be placed within
the center of fire zone.
(5) Paint for all lettering and striping shall be yellow in color. Striping
and lettering must be reflectorized.
§ 127-14 NORWOOD CODE § 127-16
124:156
A. Any person who violates Article II, Fire Zones, Chapter 127, Fire
Prevention, shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court thereof, be
punished by a fine not less than $100. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. An owner who fails to comply with the regulations specified in § 127-12
shall result in a penalty of $500. Penalties shall be assessed by the Fire
Official in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:18, Uniform Fire Code.28
28.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 002-1998, Chapter 18, Uniform Fire
Code, was recodified as N.J.A.C. 5:70, effective July 1, 1998.
§ 127-16 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-16
124:157

ARTICLE III
Key Boxes
§ 127-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that Fire Department personnel gain
immediate and reliable access to structures within the Borough in order to
facilitate proper lifesaving and other fire-fighting purposes, where access to
structures is unduly difficult because of secured openings or other hazards.
§ 127-18. Key box required.
Where access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because
of secured opening, or where immediate access is necessary for fire-fighting
or lifesaving purposes, the Fire Official or the Fire Subcode Official may
require a key box to installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be
a type approved by the Fire Official or Fire Subcode Official so that all key
access of this type within the Borough of Norwood may be accomplished
with one system. The key box shall contain the keys necessary to gain
access as required by the Fire Department.
§ 127-19. Installation.
Installation of the key box shall be in accordance with specifications
maintained and approved by the Fire Official or Fire Subcode Official as
required. The Fire Official or Fire Subcode Official shall have the authority
to implement a uniform system throughout the Borough so that access to
the designated key boxes may be accomplished by the utilization of one
uniform key system.
§ 127-20. Enforcement.
The Fire Official and Fire Subcode Official shall enforce the provisions of
this article.
§ 127-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall be punishable as provided in § 127-28, Standard maximum
penalty.
§ 127-17 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-21
124:159

ARTICLE IV
Fire Alarms
§ 127-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of fire alarm devices whether by direct line, radio, telephone
or other means actuating a device at the Police Department of the Borough
of Norwood or by indirect or transfer of notice of an alarm requiring
response thereto by the Fire Department or other municipal agencies.
§ 127-23. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon,
directly or indirectly, the Fire Department or other municipal agencies to
any location in response to any type of alarm.
§ 127-24. Definitions.
As use in this article, the following definitions shall have the meanings
indicated:
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of any alarm actuated by
inadvertence, carelessness, negligence or intentional or unintentional act
of a person, and including as well alarms caused by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Norwood Fire Official or his designated
representative (as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18, Uniform Fire Code).29
§ 127-25. General regulations.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Borough Fire Official.
B. In the event of any occurrence of a false alarm, the alarm user shall,
within three days after written notice to do so, file a complete written
report to the Fire Official, setting forth the cause of the false alarm, the
corrective action taken, a statement as to whether the alarm system has
been inspected by an alarm service company and such other
information as the Fire Official may require on the designated forms.
C. Any person testing the alarm system shall notify the Police/Fire
Department immediately prior to and after the testing is completed.
Failure to do so shall constitute a false alarm.
D. If, upon the arrival of the Fire Department at the location of an
activated fire alarm, the premises are found locked with no one in
29.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 002-1998, Chapter 18, Uniform Fire
Code, was recodified as N.J.A.C. 5:70, effective July 1, 1998.
§ 127-22 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-25
124:161
§ 127-26. False alarms.
§ 127-27. Responsibility to reset system.
It shall not be the responsibility of the Fire Department, Fire Official and/or
Fire Prevention Bureau to reset any alarm.
attendance, forcible entry shall be used to gain entrance to inspect the
interior to determine the cause of the alarm.
E. The Fire Official shall, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this article in order to provide for the
efficient management of the same. Said rules shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body.
A. First false alarm. A written notice of violation will be issued by the Fire
Official. Said notice will require a written response in accordance with
§ 127-25 of this article.
B. Second false alarm. A written notice of violation will be issued by the
Fire official. Said notice will require a written response in accordance
with § 127-25 of this article and a mandatory inspection of the alarm
system by the alarm service company.
C. Subsequent false alarms. A written notice of violation will be issued by
the Fire Official. Said notice will require a written response in
accordance with § 127-25 of this article and a mandatory inspection of
the alarm system by the alarm service company, and the following
penalties shall be assessed by the Fire Official in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:18 Uniform Fire Code.30
(1) Third false alarm: $100.
(2) Fourth false alarm: $200.
(3) Fifth false alarm: $300.
(4) Each subsequent false alarm: $500.
D. Failure to comply. Failure to submit the written response and/or
conduct the mandatory inspection of the alarm shall result in a penalty
of $100.
E. After a period of 12 consecutive months without a transmission of a
false alarm, the procedure for the enforcement of violations will revert
to § 127-26A of this article and proceed as described in § 127-26 et al.
30.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 002-1998, Chapter 18, Uniform Fire
Code, was recodified as N.J.A.C. 5:70, effective July 1, 1998.
§ 127-25 NORWOOD CODE § 127-28
124:162
§ 127-28. Standard maximum penalty.
For violation of any chapter or article and whenever no specific penalty is
provided in this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough for punishment
of an act that is prohibited or that is declared to be unlawful, or any offense
or for the nonperformance of any act that is required to be done, the
violation of any such provisions shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by punishment in the county or Borough jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both; provided, however, that in lieu of a sentence
of imprisonment, the Court may, in its discretion, impose a sentence of
community service for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 127-28 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS § 127-28
124:163
Chapter 131
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98. Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 127-28 NORWOOD CODE § 127-28
131:164
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 131-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood
of New Jersey does ordain as follows
§ 131-2. Findings of fact.
§ 131-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of Borough of Norwood are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection, and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
§ 131-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-3
131:165
§ 131-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 131-5. Definitions.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
§ 131-3 NORWOOD CODE § 131-5
131:166
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation systems.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area
of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water, and adequately anchored so as not impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In an area of special flood hazard elevated building also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 131-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-5
131:167
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 131-5 NORWOOD CODE § 131-5
131:168
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (FOR OTHER THAN NEW
CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS UNDER THE
COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES ACT, P.L. NO. 97-348) — Includes
substantial improvements and shall mean the date the building permit
was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvements was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure, nor a substantial alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
§ 131-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-5
131:169
§ 131-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Norwood.
§ 131-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-25; 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05:21]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study of Bergen County, New Jersey, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Map Panels 113, 114, 201, 202, and 206 of 332 dated
September 30, 2005," is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at Borough Hall,
455 Broadway, Norwood, New Jersey, and is available for public inspection.
§ 131-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expense involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Norwood
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 131-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, convenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 131-5 NORWOOD CODE § 131-10
131:170
§ 131-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 131-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Norwood, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder.
§ 131-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-11
131:171

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 131-12. Establishment of development permit
§ 131-13. Designation of Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 131-14. Duties and responsibilities of Construction Code Official.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 131-7. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Construction Code Official and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 131-17B.
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Construction Code Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 131-18A are met.
§ 131-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-14
131:173
§ 131-15. Variance procedure.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 131-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Code Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 131-17A, Specific standards (residential
construction), and § 131-17B, Specific standards (nonresidential
construction).
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction Code
Official shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level).
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 131-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Code Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the Bureau of Water Control in
the Department of Environmental Protection prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Code Official shall
make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided
in § 131-15.
A. Appeal Board.
§ 131-14 NORWOOD CODE § 131-15
131:174
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Borough of Norwood
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decisions or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of New Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effect of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 131-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-15
131:175
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsections A(4)(a) through (k) of this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure, and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4) of
this section or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 131-15 NORWOOD CODE § 131-15
131:176
ARTICLE III
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 131-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters in the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
§ 131-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-16
131:177
§ 131-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 131-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 131-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements that fully enclose areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 131-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
§ 131-16 NORWOOD CODE § 131-17
131:178
§ 131-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 131-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 131-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial flood
hazard reduction provisions of Article III, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction, shall apply.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 131-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 131-18
131:179
Chapter 135
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 135-1. Sunday hours.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and 5:8-58, operating and
conducting of the games of chance known as "bingo" and as "raffles" shall
be authorized during the hours of midnight to 2:45 a.m. on Sunday of
each and every week. The authorization provided hereby for the holding,
operating and conducting of such games of chance known as "bingo" and as
"raffles" on Sunday shall be strictly limited to the hours between midnight
and 2:45 a.m. and shall not be construed to permit the holding, operating
and conducting of such game at any other hour on Sunday.
§ 135-2. License specifically shall provide for Sunday.
The games of chance known as "bingo" and as "raffles" shall not be
conducted on Sunday under any license issued by the borough, unless the
license specifically so provides.
§ 135-3. Issuing authority. [Added 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11:05]
The Borough Clerk will serve as the issuing authority who, in accordance
with the Borough's ordinances and all state statutes and regulations, will
act on the applications of qualified applicants seeking the Borough's
approval of licenses to conduct bingo and/or raffle games in the Borough.
Applicants seeking licenses to conduct bingo and/or raffle games must file
applications with the Borough Clerk on forms provided by the Borough
Clerk.
Chapter 137
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and fines — See Ch. 174.
§ 137-1. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
GARAGE SALES — All sales of goods entitled "garage sale," "yard sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale
of tangible personal property that is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
§ 131-18 NORWOOD CODE § 137-1
131:180
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other property capable
of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, companies, voluntary associations,
and corporations.
§ 137-2. Conduct of sales.
The following regulations shall limit the conduct of garage sales within the
Borough:
§ 137-3. Permits; fees.
A. No person shall hold or conduct a garage sale without obtaining a
permit from the Borough pursuant to this chapter.
B. No person shall conduct a garage sale within 90 days of the date of any
previous garage sale conducted by that person.
C. No location or address shall serve as a site of any garage sale within 90
days of the date of any previous garage sale held at the location.
D. All garage sales shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on any given day.
E. No single garage sale shall continue for more than two days.
F. No signs shall be used to advertise garage sales except those
authorized by this chapter.
G. All signs advertising garage sales must be removed within 48 hours
after 6:00 p.m. of the last day of the sale.
H. Permits must be prominently displayed at the time and location of the
sale.
I. Applicants will have the option of requesting by telephone from the
Borough Clerk the approval of one one-week extension of any permit
issued if the sale is not conducted on the date permitted because of
weather conditions.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage
sale in the Borough without first filing with the Borough Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from the Borough Clerk
a permit for the garage sale.
B. Fee. The fee for a garage sale permit is $5 per day.
C. Frequency of permits. No permit shall be issued to any one person
within 90 days of the issuance of a permit to that person, nor shall any
permit be issued for any location for a garage sale within 90 days of the
issuance of a permit for that location.
§ 137-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 137-3
131:181
§ 137-4. Contents of permit application.
The following information shall be filed with the Borough Clerk for each
permit for a garage sale.
§ 137-5. Signs. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17:16]
All signs advertising garage sales:
§ 137-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
D. Display of permit. Each permit issued under this chapter must be
prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is
conducted throughout the entire period of the sale.
A. The name of the person or organization conducting the sale.
B. The name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted.
C. The location or address where the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days and the dates of the sale.
E. The dates of previous sales by the applicant and the dates of previous
sales at the location.
F. A statement by the applicant confirming that the information provided
in the application is complete and known by the applicant to be true.
A. Will comply with the regulations for temporary signs for private sales
and events, which are contained in Chapter 233 of this Code; and
B. Will have a space for the insertions of the sale's location, the permit
number, and the name(s) of the person(s) or entity conducting the sale.
The names may be excluded if a Norwood resident is holding the sale.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Person acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property that are specifically named or described in the advertisement
and that separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine, or other publication or other
communication media that publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive, or misleading character or
§ 137-3 NORWOOD CODE § 137-6
131:182
§ 137-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough's Police Department,
Construction Code Official, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer; provided,
however, that the Police Department shall notify the Construction Code
Official or Zoning Enforcement Office of any violations of this chapter
that come to the attention of the Department either by complaint or by
observation of a patrolling officer.
§ 137-8. Liability.
Adherence to this chapter shall be the responsibility of the person to
whom a permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on
which a sale is conducted. In addition to any other duties or obligations
imposed by this chapter, the responsible persons, as set forth herein, shall
cooperate with the members of the Police Department of the Borough, the
Construction Code Official, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer in ensuring
that the conduct of the sale does not impede the normal flow of traffic or
otherwise endanger the health, safety, and welfare of persons present at the
sale and other the residents of the Borough.
§ 137-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174, except that the fine for
each sign in violation of this chapter shall be $10 per sign.
Chapter 139
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein the sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Borough or under the
protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale
conducted by a manufacturer, dealer, or vendor that would be
conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited
in the Code of the Borough.
F. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural, or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming the exemption. Organizations
claiming this exemption must still apply for a permit and use signs
permitted by this chapter; however, the fee for the permit shall be
waived.
§ 137-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 139-1
139:183
§ 139-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Hazardous Waste Cost Recovery
Ordinance."
§ 139-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of a hazardous substance into the air or waters or onto the lands of
the state, or into the air or waters outside the jurisdiction of the state, when
damage may result to the lands, waters, air or natural resources within the
jurisdiction of the state.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which cannot
be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire,
leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to fire-fighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums
and specialized protective equipment to include but not be restricted to acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance defined as such pursuant to
Section 3 of the Spill Compensation and Control Act.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment registered or unregistered, including
but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractor-trailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — A duly incorporated volunteer fire,
ambulance, first aid, emergency or rescue company or squad.
§ 139-3. Purpose.
§ 139-4. Person responsible for reimbursement.
Any person or entity responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized
or otherwise negligent discharge of a hazardous substance that requires
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by
state and federal regulations to be made available in the borough in
case of fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material.
B. This chapter entitles the Borough of Norwood to reimbursement for any
expendable items used by the borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
any spill or discharge of hazardous materials.
§ 139-1 NORWOOD CODE § 139-4
139:184
emergency action by a unit or volunteer organization of the Borough of
Norwood in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare or the
environment is liable, jointly and severally, to the Borough of Norwood
or any such unit or organization for the necessary and reasonable costs
incurred in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating the
spill or discharge.
§ 139-5. Enforcement.
A. The volunteer organization of the Borough of Norwood which is
responsible for responding to the emergency caused by the spill or
discharge of a hazardous substance shall keep a record of the costs
attributable thereto and provide copies of that record to the governing
body within which the spill or discharge occurred.
B. A volunteer organization of the Borough of Norwood which is
responsible for responding to the emergency caused by the spill or
discharge of a hazardous substance may request the Borough Attorney
to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of
costs permitted pursuant to this chapter against the person and/or
entity responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized spill or
discharge. Upon receiving such a request, the Borough Attorney shall
submit a written, itemized claim for the total certified costs incurred by
the volunteer organization to the responsible person with a written
demand that those costs be paid. Within a reasonable period of time
before bringing a civil action for recovery of those costs, the Borough
Attorney shall mail written notice to the responsible person and/or
entity informing them that, unless the total certified costs are paid
within 30 days after the date of mailing of the notice, the Borough
Attorney shall bring a civil action for that amount.
C. In making a determination of the amount required to be reimbursed
pursuant to this chapter, the status of a person liable pursuant to
§ 139-4 this chapter as a taxpayer to the Borough of Norwood may be
taken into consideration.
D. The volunteer organization responding to the emergency caused by the
spill or discharge of a hazardous substance may compromise and settle
any claim for costs permitted pursuant to this chapter in such amount in
the discretion of the organization as may appear appropriate and
equitable under all of the circumstances.
E. Any recovery of costs shall be credited to the appropriate funds of each
organization from which moneys were expended in responding to the
emergency caused by the spill or discharge of a hazardous substance as
set forth in this chapter.
§ 139-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 139-5
139:185
Chapter 143
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 29.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 110.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177.
§ 143-1. Code established.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey
Housing Code as approved by the Departments of Health and Conservation
and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of State's office
January 31, 1962, is hereby adopted as a standard governing supplies,
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
make dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, and governing the condition of dwellings. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is attached to and made a part of this chapter without
the text being included therein.
§ 143-2. Where code may be examined.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code, plainly marked, have
been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall remain on
file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 143-3. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Chairman of the Public Works and Building Committee
determines that there has been a violation of the New Jersey State Housing
Code or of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by him under the
authority granted by this chapter, he shall serve notice of a violation upon
the person responsible. The notice shall be in writing and shall contain the
following:
A. A description of the real estate affected sufficient to identify it.
B. A statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
C. A provision allowing a reasonable time to perform any act required.
D. An explanation of the rights of the person upon whom the notice has
been served to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by a
petition to the Chairman of the Public Works and Building Committee
for a hearing.
E. A statement that the notice shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed within 10 days after the notice
is served and that any permit which has been suspended by a notice
§ 139-5 NORWOOD CODE § 143-3
143:186
§ 143-4. Appropriate permits.
Whenever repairs, alterations, additions or replacements are required to
the building or facilities, the notice provided for in § 143-3 shall direct
the person in violation to make application to the appropriate municipal
authority for a permit to make them.
§ 143-5. Failure to request hearing.
A notice issued under the provisions of § 143-3 shall automatically become
an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed with the Chairman of
the Public Works and Buildings Committee within 10 days after the notice
is served.
§ 143-6. Request for hearing.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement for the New Jersey State Housing Code, any provisions
of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the Chairman of the
Public Works and Building Committee under the authority granted by this
chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Chairman. A request shall be made by a written petition requesting a
hearing filed with the Chairman in person or by mail within 10 days after
the date the notice was served. Upon the filing of the petition, the Chairman
shall set a time and place for a hearing which shall not be more than 10
days after the request is received unless in his judgment the petitioner has
demonstrated a good reason for postponing the hearing. In any case, the
petitioner shall be given at least five days' notice of the time and place of
the hearing.
§ 143-7. Conduct of hearing.
At the hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show cause why the notice should not be modified or withdrawn.
Any person affected by the notice shall have the right to appear, to be
represented by an attorney, to testify or to present witnesses in support
of their position, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and, at their own
expense, to have a stenographic record made of the proceedings. The rules
of evidence prevailing in the court shall not be controlling in any hearing
held under the provisions of this chapter.
shall be automatically revoked if a petition for a hearing is not filed
within 10 days.
F. A form of a petition for a hearing shall be attached to the notice and
shall indicate the place to which the petition must be sent.
G. The notice shall contain an outline of the remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
New Jersey State Housing Code or rules and regulations adopted by the
Chairman under authority granted by this chapter.
§ 143-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 143-8
143:187
§ 143-8. Findings.
Within 10 days after the hearing, a copy of the written decision of the
Chairman of the Public Works and Building Committee shall be served
either personally or by registered or certified mail on the person who has
filed the petition for the hearing. The proceedings of the hearing, including
the findings and the decision of the Chairman, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
§ 143-9. Modification of notice.
After the hearing the Chairman of the Public Works and Building Committee
shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings
as to whether the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code, this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted under the authority granted
to him by this chapter have been violated. The Chairman may also modify
any notice so as to authorize a variation from the provisions of the New
Jersey State Housing Code when, because of special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the code will result in practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships, provided that the spirit of the code will be
observed, the public health and welfare secured and substantial justice
done.
§ 143-10. Order for compliance.
If the Chairman of the Public Works and Buildings Committee sustains
or modifies the notice, it shall be an order, and the owner, manager or
occupant of the premises affected, as the case may be, shall comply with all
the provisions of the order within a reasonable period of time as determined
by the Chairman and set forth in the order.
§ 143-11. Institution of legal actions.
No provision or requirement for a hearing shall in any way impair the right
of the Chairman of the Public Works and Buildings Committee to institute at
any time any legal procedures, actions or prosecutions which are otherwise
permitted by law or ordinance.
§ 143-12. Emergencies.
Whenever the Chairman of the Public Works and Buildings Committee
determines that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, safety or welfare, he may, without notice or
a hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of an emergency and
requiring that action be taken which he deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such an
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom the emergency
order is directed shall comply with it immediately, but upon petition to the
Chairman shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
§ 143-8 NORWOOD CODE § 143-13
143:188
§ 143-13. Occupancy of substandard dwellings prohibited.
No person shall use as his living quarters or furnish to another for
occupancy as living quarters any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises which does not comply with all the provisions of the New Jersey
State Housing Code.
Chapter 146
HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and other weapons — See Ch. 124.
§ 146-1. Prohibited.
No person shall hunt or shoot any game or wildlife by means of a gun, bow
and arrow or otherwise within the territorial limits of the borough.
Chapter 148
LANDSCAPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177.
Soil removal — See Ch. 194.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
§ 148-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the Borough of Norwood as a
landscape contractor without first having registered as set forth herein.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The New Jersey Contractors' Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-136 et
seq.[Added 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16:06]
DEBRIS — Any organic or inorganic substance including grass, grass
clippings, branches, twigs, mulch, soil or other natural parts of foliage,
including stumps or trees, products of the earth, including any residue from
§ 143-13 HUNTING § 148-2
146:189
any of the foregoing. Leaves shall not be considered debris for purposes of
this section.
LANDSCAPERS and LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR — Any individual person,
partnership, firm, association, business, or legal entity regularly doing
business with customers to provide the following services as a commercial
undertaking for consideration: mowing of grass or lawns; trimming or
cutting of trees, bushes, or shrubbery; restoration, or installation of lawns,
grass, foliage, leaves, or trees from a given property; any and all services
relating to the placing, installation, care, or cultivation of lawns, shrubbery,
trees, foliage or other plant life, installation of sprinkler systems, but
excluding the tree care services as defined by Chapter 220 of this
Code.[Amended 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16:06]
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietor, corporation, partnership,
limited-liability company, or any other business.[Added 5-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:06]
§ 148-3. Application for registration. [Amended 5-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:06]
A. All applications for registration will be in writing on forms furnished by
the Borough Clerk, signed by the applicant or the authorized agent of
the applicant, and presented to the Borough Clerk. The application will
state the applicant's name, the business name and address, telephone
number and email addresses, and other information the Borough Clerk
deems necessary for registration, including proof of any current
registration of the applicant under the Act and proof of liability
insurance covering the work to be provided, as required by the Act.
B. If the applicant presents proof that it is registered under the Act, and
has the required liability insurance, then the Borough Clerk will issue a
registration certificate permit with a copy of the Borough's ordinances
relating to landscapers without the payment of the registration fee.
C. If the applicant is not registered with the state under the Act to perform
landscaper services, then the applicant will provide any other
information requested by the Borough Clerk that is necessary to
confirm that the applicant is qualified to perform these services and has
adequate liability insurance covering the work to be performed. The
Borough Clerk will, after appropriate investigation, present the
application to the Mayor and Council, which may or grant or refuse the
application. If the application is approved, the Mayor and Council will
authorize and direct the Borough Clerk to issue the registration
provided that the applicant has paid the fee as hereinafter provided.
D. All registrations expire on December 31 of each year.
E. Property owners are not required to register to provide landscaper
services on their own property in the Borough.
§ 148-2 NORWOOD CODE § 148-4
146:190
§ 148-4. Registration fee.
The registration fee shall be $25 per calendar year, and no part of said fee
shall be prorated for any part of the year. Upon payment of the fee, the
Borough Clerk shall issue a registration certificate for the calendar year for
which the application was filed.
§ 148-5. Landscaper's responsibilities.
§ 148-6. Revocation of registration.
Any landscaper or excavator who violates Borough ordinances, such as
those covering (but not limited to these examples) dumping, littering,
causing excessive noise or causing damage to roadways or curbing, shall,
upon conviction for any of these violations, be required to return his permit
for that year to the Borough Clerk and refrain from further work within the
Borough until he obtains a new permit for a future year.
A. No landscaper shall operate within the confines of the Borough without
possession of a current registration.
B. The removal of debris resulting from landscaping services shall be the
responsibility of the landscaper, and no such debris shall be placed at
the curbside for collection, swept, or deposited into any public and/or
private street and/or residence or left on a given property such that
same may be caused to be blown into a public and/or private street and/
or residence.
C. No landscaper shall perform any landscaping services within the
confines of the Borough of Norwood on Sunday.
D. No landscaper shall dump or allow the dumping of leaves which do not
originate within the boundaries of the Borough of Norwood.
Landscapers will be able to rake leaves into the curbline during the
period of September 30 through December 31. (No clippings, sticks,
rocks, etc.) The leaves are to be placed evenly along the property line in
a neat and orderly fashion. No landscaper shall bag leaves.
E. No person shall allow the piling of leaves so as to block accessibility to
storm sewer drains.
F. No one shall spill or dump oil, gasoline or other petroleum products or
any pesticides on the public highway or right-of-way or anywhere on the
ground. No equipment shall be filled or refilled except over a drop cloth
or other device designated to catch and retain any accidental spillage.
G. The permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or a photocopy of the permit
signed by the permit holder, must be in the actual possession of the
person performing landscaper services. [Amended 5-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:06]
§ 148-4 HUNTING § 148-7
146:191
§ 148-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-2016 by Ord. No.
16:06]
Any person convicted of violating the terms of this chapter will be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code.
Chapter 149
LIMOUSINE AND LIVERY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 211. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 149-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the
meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity of
not more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided that such
a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers,
not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity
of the vehicle, not including the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing
in this definition contained shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel
buses or buses employed solely in transporting school children or teachers,
vehicles owned and operated directly or indirectly by businesses engaged in
the practice of mortuary science when those vehicles are used exclusively
for providing transportation related to the provision of funeral services,
autobuses that are subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or
regulations of the Department of Transportation to carry insurance against
loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers
for hire by limousines.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers
appointed by any court whatsoever.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the limousine service in the Borough where limousine service
is conducted, where limousines are dispatched or where limousine drivers
report for duty.
§ 148-7 NORWOOD CODE § 149-1
146:192
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
§ 149-2. License required for limousines.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a limousine or livery service having its
principal place of business in the Borough to operate a limousine wholly or
partly along any street in the Borough unless the owner of the limousine has
obtained a license from the Borough Clerk.
§ 149-3. Application; requirements.
§ 149-4. Annual fee and term of license.
A. Applications for limousine licenses shall be made in writing, upon forms
to be furnished by the Borough Clerk, signed by the applicant, and filed
with the Borough Clerk. Applications shall contain or be accompanied
by the following information:
(1) If the applicant is an individual, the name, age and residence of the
applicant; if a partnership or limited liability company, the names,
ages, and residences of all the partners or members, together with
the business name and address of the partnership or company; and
if a corporation, the names, ages and residences of the president
and secretary and the period of residence in the state, county and
municipality, together with the business name and address of the
corporation.
(2) A copy of an insurance policy complying with N.J.S.A. 48:16-14.
(3) The name of the applicant's insurance company, the number and
the date of expiration of the policy required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14
and a description of every limousine insured thereunder and the
registration number of each.
B. Applications made by corporations shall be signed in the name of the
corporation by the president and attested by the secretary. A certified
copy of a corporate resolution authorizing the application shall be
attached.
C. Applications shall be duly verified by the applicant before a notary
public or some other person duly authorized to administer oaths.
D. Each application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the
required license fee. All licenses are issued subject to collection of any
check received in payment.
A. The annual fee for a license for each limousine or livery service is $50
plus $10 for each limousine or livery vehicle that is covered under the
required insurance policy. Each application must be accompanied by
the full amount of the license fee. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No.
10:13]
§ 149-1 HUNTING § 149-4
146:193
§ 149-5. Limousine license, contents, filing and posting.
§ 149-6. Revocation of license.
Any limousine license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by
the Mayor and Council, after notice to the licensee and a hearing, if it
shall appear that the licensee has failed to keep in full force and effect the
insurance policy, required by this chapter and the applicable state laws,
or has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of any license, this
chapter, or the applicable state laws.
§ 149-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation required by this chapter to register as a
limousine service who violates its terms shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for a period of 90 days, or both.
Chapter 150
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising and other printed
materials — See Ch. 68.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177.
B. All limousine licenses shall be for a term of one year.
A. The Clerk, upon the approval of an application for a limousine license,
shall issue a license to operate, in duplicate, showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq.
B. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine
insured thereunder and the registration number of the same.
C. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor Vehicles
before any such car is registered as a limousine.
D. The original license shall be retained within the limousine in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
E. The insurance provisions of this section may be waived only in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-19 to 20.31
31.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 48:16-19 and 48:16-20 were repealed by L.1999, c. 356, § 21,
effective 4-13-2000.
§ 149-4 NORWOOD CODE § 150-1
150:194
§ 150-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 150-2. Litter in public places.
No person shall sweep, throw or deposit litter in or upon any occupied,
open or vacant property, whether owned by such person or not, or in
or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place or any pond,
lake, stream or other body of water within the borough, except in public
receptacles or authorized private receptacles for collection or in official
borough dumps. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 150-3. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within
the borough the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 150-4. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the borough or upon
private property.
§ 150-1 LITTERING § 150-5
150:195
§ 150-5. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the borough
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 150-6. Transportation from outside borough.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the borough, or into the borough, for the purpose of dumping or
disposing thereof, unless so authorized by the borough.
§ 150-7. Duties of owners and tenants to maintain premises free of
litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 150-8. Notice to remove.
The Construction Official is authorized and empowered to notify the owner
of any open or vacant private property within the borough, or the agent
of the owner, to properly dispose of litter located on the owner's property
which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall be
by registered mail addressed to the owner at his last known address and
shall state the acts to be performed by the owner or tenant, as well as the
penalty for failure to comply with the notice.
§ 150-9. Cost of removal.
If the owner or tenant to which notice is sent neglects or refuses to comply
with the notice within 10 days of receipt of same, the Construction Official
shall arrange to perform the acts required by the notice at the cost of the
borough. He shall certify the costs to the Mayor and Council who shall
examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the costs shown on
the certificate to be charged against the lands benefited. The costs shall be
added to the taxes next assessed and levied upon the lands benefited and
shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
Chapter 154
LOITERING
§ 150-5 NORWOOD CODE § 154-1
154:196
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly and
shall also include the colloquial expression hanging around.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or
custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of
any court or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the
front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
person charged with violating this chapter, or in the case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 154-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 154-3. Discretion of police officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 154-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 154-4. Loitering by minors.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 154-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose
hearing, they are made.
§ 154-1 LOITERING § 154-5
154:197
§ 154-5. Notice of violation.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation
of this chapter, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the
Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 154-6. Presumption.
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
§ 154-5, the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this chapter, it
shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor
did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
§ 154-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II.
Chapter 157
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 157-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms herein are defined
as follows:
CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER — A person who is certified by the
State of New Jersey to provide massage, bodywork and somatic services
pursuant to the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapist Certification
Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 to 45:11-67, and the regulations promulgated
thereunder, N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 to 13:37-16.16.[Added 7-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 04:13]
EMPLOYEE — Any person other than a massage practitioner who renders
any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and
receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — A registered environmental health specialist or
health officer representing the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior
Services or the Norwood Board of Health.
LICENSEE — The operator of a massage establishment.
§ 154-5 NORWOOD CODE § 157-1
157:198
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands, feet, or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oil, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments, or such other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in,
carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in the definition of massage.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER — A person, whether or not certified by the
State of New Jersey, who provides massage services as defined by this
Code.[Amended 12-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05:31]
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances
that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give other
consideration therefor.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint-stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Genitals, anus or perineum of any person,
or the breasts or vulva of a female.
§ 157-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating massage and/or somatic
therapies business, as defined in this chapter, is a business affecting the
public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 157-3. Massage establishment license requirement. [Amended
12-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05:31; 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:01]
No person shall operate a massage establishment in the Borough without
obtaining from the Borough Clerk a massage establishment license. The
person operating a massage establishment shall require that all persons
working in the massage establishment wear and display the required photo
identification card issued by the Norwood Police Department pursuant to
the requirements of § 157-4.
§ 157-4. Massage practitioner license requirement. [Amended
12-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05:31; 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:01]
No person shall work as a massage practitioner in the Borough without
obtaining from the Borough Clerk a massage practitioner license, which
shall be in the form of a photo identification card issued by the Norwood
Police Department. Massage practitioners shall wear and display this photo
identification card on their outermost garment at all times while working at
a massage establishment.
§ 157-1 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 157-5
157:199
§ 157-5. Requirements for licensure.
A. Massage establishment. No such license shall be issued to any
person(s):
(1) Under 18 years of age;
(2) Convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or any sex-related offenses;
(3) Unless documentary proof is submitted to the Department of
Health establishing the applicant's satisfactory completion of a
minimum of 500 hours study of massage, anatomy or physiology;
(4) Unless the applicant provides the Department of Health with an
affidavit from a duly licensed physician of the State of New Jersey
establishing that the applicant is free from contagious and
communicable diseases, within 30 days of date of application;
(5) Unless the person is in compliance with the standards and
applicable laws pertaining to massage therapy as regulated by the
New Jersey Board of Nursing;
(6) Unless the applicant accurately and correctly completes a
comprehensive written application, in a form to be provided by the
Police Department, which application, to include photographing
and fingerprinting by the Norwood Police Department, and prior
residence and employment of the last ten years, to include
addresses and points of contact;
(7) Unless a license fee of $250 is received. An additional fee will be
charged for State Police fingerprinting fee made payable to New
Jersey State Bureau of Investigation;
(8) Unless that person is a member of a nationally recognized massage
therapy association;
(9) Unless that person has disclosed the funding source for opening
the establishment and all parties who hold an interest in the
establishment of 10% or greater;
(10) Unless documentary proof of liability insurance is submitted; and
(11) Unless all building, zoning, health, and fire codes are complied
with and satisfactory inspection certificates are granted.32
(12) Only the requirements of the following subsections of this § 157-5A
shall apply to massage establishments operated by state-certified
massage practitioners: Subsections A(7), (9), (10), and (11).
[Added 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04:13]
B. Massage practitioner. No such license shall be issued to any person:
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction, Ch. 127, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 233,
Zoning.
§ 157-5 NORWOOD CODE § 157-5
157:200
§ 157-6. Display of license; photograph. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 04:13]
Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the massage
establishment so that persons entering the premises may readily see same.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall include a current
photograph of the person to whom the license is issued.
§ 157-7. Term of license.
(1) Under 18 years of age;
(2) Convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or any sex-related offenses;
(3) Unless documentary proof is submitted establishing the applicant's
satisfactory completion of a course of massage therapy, minimum
of 500 hours by a Department-of-Education-recognized school;
(4) Unless that person is in compliance with the standards and
applicable laws pertaining to massage therapy as regulated by the
New Jersey Board of Nursing;
(5) Unless that person is a member of a nationally recognized massage
therapy association;
(6) Unless documentary proof of liability insurance is submitted;
(7) Unless the applicant provides an affidavit from a duly licensed
physician of the State of New Jersey establishing that the applicant
is free from contagious and communicable diseases, within 30 days
of the date of application;
(8) Unless the applicant accurately and correctly completes a
comprehensive written application, in a form to be provided by the
Norwood Police Department to include among other things, a
detailed description of the applicant to include photographing and
fingerprinting and prior residence and employment of the last 10
years to include addresses and points of contact; and
(9) Unless a license fee of $100 is received.
(10) The requirements of this § 157-5B shall not apply to massage
practitioners who are certified by the state, but only to the extent
that the massage practitioner performs massage, bodywork and
somatic services for which he or she is certified. [Added 7-6-2004
by Ord. No. 04:13]
A. Massage establishment. Every massage establishment license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year or
unless sooner suspended or revoked and may be renewed upon
compliance with the licensure requirements above, except that the
renewal fee shall be $100 annually.
§ 157-5 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 157-7
157:201
§ 157-8. Sanitation and hygiene. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04:13]
Except for massage establishments that are operated by massage
practitioners who are certified by the state:
B. Massage practitioner. Every massage practitioner license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year or
unless sooner suspended or revoked and may be renewed upon
compliance with the licensure requirements above, except that the
renewal fee shall be $100 annually.
A. All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such
accoutrements of the establishment shall be regularly treated with
disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
at all times.
B. Uniform Construction Code officials, Health Authority, fire prevention
officials, plumbing, electric and building inspectors shall be given
access to any part of a massage and/or somatic therapies business for
the purposes of inspection at all reasonable times. Refusal to permit
entry by any of the above officials or obstruction of any investigation
shall be grounds for revocation of license.
C. No massage and somatic therapies business shall knowingly serve any
patron infected with any fungus or other skin infections, nor shall
service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or
eruptions, provided that a duly licensed physician may certify that a
person may be safely served, prescribing the conditions thereof.
D. All personnel shall wash their hands in hot running water, using a
proper soap or disinfectant, before giving any service or treatment to
each separate patron.
E. All personnel, including massage practitioners shall wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas.
F. Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one
patron.
G. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels or
cloths and undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
massage therapist.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of
his or her body, or to fondle in any manner a sexual or genital area of
any other person.
I. No massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform offer or
agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the
patron's genital area.
§ 157-7 NORWOOD CODE § 157-8
157:202
§ 157-9. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage or somatic therapies business shall
be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping quarters, nor shall
any person sleep in such massage or somatic therapies business except for
limited periods incidental to and directly related to a massage or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a massage or somatic therapies
business in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or other separate
businesses or clubs.
§ 157-10. Equipment standard. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04:13]
Except for massage establishments that are operated by massage
practitioners who are certified by the state:
§ 157-11. Revocation of license.
§ 157-12. Violation hearings.
Any violation by the licensee of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be grounds for the immediate revocation of a license. However, the license
shall not be revoked until a hearing therein shall have been had before
J. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area and in each massage room in a location available to all prospective
customers. Such posting shall include a statement as follows:
Pursuant to the ordinances of the Borough of Norwood: The genital
areas of all customers shall be covered at all times when in the
presence of an employee or massage therapist. No employee or
massage therapist shall touch or fondle in any manner the sexual
or genital area of any person. Any person or customer violating this
ordinance shall be subject to prosecution under this and applicable
state law.
A. All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except the reception and
administrative areas, shall be made of nonporous materials which may
readily be disinfected.
B. Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste materials.
A. The conviction of any applicant or licensee of any criminal offense,
quasicriminal offense, or sanitary code violation related to the
licensee's business, or any sex-related offense shall constitute a
forfeiture of their license and the license shall be deemed revoked.
B. Each licensee shall be deemed responsible for a clean and safe business
operation on the premises. The violation of any law at said premises
shall be grounds for the revocation of the licenses of all licensees
operating on the premises.
§ 157-8 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 157-12
157:203
the Health Authority. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be served upon the licensee at least 72 hours prior to the date set
for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the
grounds to be relied upon for revoking the license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery or by regular mail to the address listed on
the license. At the hearing before the Health Authority, the licensee shall
have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due
consideration and deliberation by the Health Authority, the license may be
revoked or the complaint may be dismissed. The decision of the Health
Authority shall constitute final administrative action of the municipality.
§ 157-13. Unannounced Department of Health visits.
The business operation is subject to unannounced Department of Health
and Police Department visits to insure the protection of the citizens.
§ 157-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No.
07:01]
Chapter 161
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noisemaking by peddlers — See Ch. 172,
§ 172-16C.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $2,000, and/or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of
the judge of the municipal court. In addition to the foregoing, any
person convicted of violating the requirements of § 157-3 or § 157-4
shall be punished by a minimum fine of $150 for the first offense, $500
for the second offense, and license revocation and a fine and jail term as
set forth above for the third offense.
B. A violation of any section of this chapter shall also be ground for
revocation of any license, certificate of occupancy or permit issued by
the Borough of Norwood for the premises.
C. Every day that the provisions of this chapter are violated by any person,
as defined herein, shall be a separate and distinct violation of this
chapter.
§ 157-12 NORWOOD CODE § 161-1
161:204
§ 161-1. Prohibited noises.
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to make or cause or
permit to be made upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by
him, or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the borough, any
unnecessary noise or sound by means of the human voice or by other means
or methods which is physically annoying to persons or which is so harsh
or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in its use, time or place as to
cause physical discomfort or which is injurious to the lives, health, peace or
comfort of any inhabitant of the borough.
§ 161-2. Prohibited acts enumerated.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration is intended to be
typical only and shall not be construed as being exclusive:
A. Radios, television, phonographs. The playing of any radio, receiving
sets, television, musical instruments, phonographs or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound at a louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person playing, using or
operating the instrument or device and the persons who are voluntary
listeners to it, as well as playing any such instrument in a manner that
will disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
B. Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The playing for
advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of
the passing public of any radio receiving sets, musical instruments,
phonographs, loudspeakers, sound amplifiers or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound on the streets or
public places of the borough, or in any place where the sound from any
such instruments is broadcast directly upon the public streets or public
places, or which is placed and operated in such a manner that the sound
can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any
street or public place or to persons on any neighboring premises.
C. Sound trucks. The playing for any purpose whatever on any public
street, alley or thoroughfare in the borough of any device known as a
sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier or radio or phonograph
with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument known as a
calliope or any instrument of any kind which emits loud and raucous
noises and is attached to any vehicle operated or standing upon any
street or public place in the borough.
D. Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or warning device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when
required by law, or when necessary to give a warning of impending
danger to persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street,
as well as the sounding of any horn or warning device on any
motorcycle, automobile, bus or other vehicle which emits an
§ 161-1 NOISE § 161-2
161:205
Chapter 163
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Filming — See Ch. 122.
Landscapers — See Ch. 148.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Inoperable or abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
224.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
LANDSCAPING WORK — Any work performed by a landscaper as defined
in § 148-2 of this Code, and does not include landscaping work performed
by residential property owners on their residential property or by the legal
occupants of residential property.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company, or any other legal entity, association, or group of
entities or individuals owning, occupying, or operating property located in
the Borough of Norwood.
PROPERTY — Real and/or personal property located in the Borough of
Norwood.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot or parcel of real property that is
improved with a one- or two-family residential dwelling.
§ 163-2. Nuisances prohibited.
The following specific acts or omissions, or the maintenance or allowance of
any of the following conditions, are hereby declared to be or to constitute
nuisances and are prohibited:
unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
A. Any use of property of any kind by any person, which use is in a manner
that is unnecessary and so unreasonable as to be injurious to other
persons by the production or emission of odors, dust, smoke, soot,
refuse matter, noise, vibration, or other similar conditions that are
dangerous and/or injurious to the comfort, peace, enjoyment of
property, or the health or safety of persons in the Borough.
B. Any use of property of any kind resulting in the unnecessary and
unreasonable emission of smoke, soot, dust, gasses, or fumes in
sufficient quantities to cause injury to health or to cause actual
discomfort to persons in the Borough.
§ 161-2 NORWOOD CODE § 163-2
163:206
§ 163-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174.
Chapter 164
OUTDOOR SIDEWALK CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
Business or commercial
establishments — See Ch. 105.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 245.
§ 164-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words will have the meanings
set forth in this section:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, or place of
business where food and/or other refreshments are served for on-site
consumption.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
C. Any use of property of any kind maintaining or causing the maintenance
or existence of any offensive matter, foul or noxious odors, soot, gasses
or vapors, and all causes of disease, which are injurious to the health or
cause actual discomfort to persons in the Borough.
D. Any use or operation, or the permitting of any person to use or operate,
any tools or equipment employed in the furtherance of any landscaping
work, or any construction, demolition, or similar work, at any time on
Sundays or legal holidays, or at any time other than between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays and between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
E. The provisions of subsection D do not apply to:
(1) Landscaping, home repair, and maintenance operations conducted
by residential property owners on their residential property, or on
the residential property as to which they are the legal occupants,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and legal
holidays; and
(2) Any otherwise prohibited work that is of urgent necessity or that is
necessary to advance the interest of the public health or safety.
§ 163-2 NUISANCES § 164-1
163:207
immediately in front or along the side or rear of the eating establishment,
or at any other location on the premises of an eating establishment outside
of the interior portion of the building occupied by the eating establishment.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
limited-liability company, or organization of any kind.
SIDEWALK — The area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing a proposed or
existing outdoor cafe.
§ 164-2. License required.
No person may create, establish, operate, maintain, or otherwise be
engaged in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe in the Borough
unless that person holds a currently valid license issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter.
§ 164-3. Standards for licensing.
No license will be issued hereunder unless the licensee meets the following
conditions:
A. The licensee must operate an eating establishment lawfully operating
and existing in the Borough in the following locations: Livingston Street
between Rockland Avenue and Broadway, Broad Street between
Broadway and Blanch Avenue, and 595 Broadway. The licensee must
have existing approved indoor seating, and the total combined indoor
and outdoor seating will not exceed the maximum number of indoor
seating allowed by state and local regulation. [Amended 4-13-2016
by Ord. No. 16:02]
B. The licensee will demonstrate that a minimum of four feet of
unobstructed paved surface will be available for pedestrian traffic
around or through the outdoor cafe and that the outdoor cafe be
contiguous to an eating establishment as hereinabove defined.
C. The hours of operation for outdoor cafes will not extend after 12:00
midnight on Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, and not after 10:00
p.m. on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays.
D. All furniture, umbrellas, barriers, and other property used in the
outdoor cafe must be safe, sturdy, and structurally sound.
E. Outdoor seating may not displace parking spaces required by building
and zoning regulations.
F. No food or drinks served at an outdoor cafe may be prepared or stored
other than in the interior of the eating establishment.
G. The licensee will demonstrate adequate controls to prevent vermin
entrance into the interior of the food establishment, such as air curtains
and pass-through windows.
§ 164-1 NORWOOD CODE § 164-3
163:208
§ 164-4. Application forms.
H. Tables and chairs must be removed from the public sidewalks when the
establishment is not open for business.
A. Applications for the licenses required by this chapter will be filed with
the Borough Clerk and will be signed by the applicant. The application
must contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner, partner, or, if a domestic corporation, the names,
residence addresses, and telephone numbers of the directors and
officers owning a 10% or greater interest in the corporation and the
Chief Operating Executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address, and telephone number
of the managing officer for service of process within the State of
New Jersey and a copy of the qualification of said nondomestic
corporation to conduct business in the State of New Jersey.
(2) A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
(3) The address and description of each place where the applicant
intends to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
(4) The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application.
(5) Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings
clearly illustrating the number, type of material, color, and location
of all tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other furnishings, or fixtures
intended to be located in the outdoor cafe. The perimeter of the
outdoor cafe may, if appropriate, be defined and set off by a
portable-type enclosure, which may include live plantings. The
enclosure will define the perimeter of the area to be used as an
outdoor cafe and will separate it from the pedestrians traversing
the adjacent sidewalk. The enclosure will not contain doors or
windows nor air-conditioning or heating equipment and will be
open at all times to the air from a height of not more than three
feet. Awnings or outdoor umbrellas extending over the enclosure
are permitted, subject to approval by the Mayor and Council.
B. The scaled drawings also will illustrate the following:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No doors may be obstructed in any manner.
(2) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor
cafe.
§ 164-3 NUISANCES § 164-4
163:209
§ 164-5. Approval of licenses.
§ 164-6. Standards for operation.
(3) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to be
prepared.
(4) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating the
eating and serving area of each outdoor cafe from pedestrian
traffic.
(5) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees, and any other
fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the eating
establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any side.
(6) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.
(7) The application fee and annual license fee will be $200 and will be
submitted with the application.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application, the Borough Clerk will submit
same for review by the Health Officer and Chief of Police, who will
complete their review within 14 days and submit any objections in
writing to the Borough Clerk.
B. The Mayor and Council may approve any license if the application is
complete and conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
C. Licenses will expire annually on March 1.
A. The license granted pursuant to this chapter is personal to the
applicant and any change or transfer of ownership of the outdoor cafe
will terminate the license and will require a new application and a new
license in conformance with all of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Acceptance of the license by the applicant will operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police, and building officials of the Borough to inspect
the outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
C. No license required by this chapter will be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until the applicant has filed with the Borough
Clerk a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Borough, its agents, servants, representatives, or employees from any
or all claims, damages, judgment costs, or expenses including
attorneys' fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to
pay because of any personal injury, including death or property
damage, suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in
any way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which
the license is issued.
§ 164-4 NORWOOD CODE § 164-6
163:210
D. Insurance coverage.
(1) No license required by this chapter will be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person will have first filed with
the Borough Clerk a comprehensive general liability policy issued
to such person by a public liability insurance company authorized
to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the coverages
set forth below in the amounts specified. The insurance policy will
name the Borough of Norwood, 455 Broadway, Norwood, New
Jersey 07648, its agents, officers, servants, representatives, and
employees as additional insured with respect to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following amounts:
(a) Bodily injury:
[1] Each person: $300,000.
[2] Each accident: $1,000,000.
(b) Property damage:
[1] Each person: $300,000.
[2] Each accident: $1,000,000.
(2) The insurance coverage required by this section will at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by
this section to be filed with the Borough Clerk will contain a clause
obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30
days' written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation will
not relieve the company issuing the policy of liability for any injury
or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The
cancellation of any policy will have the immediate effect of
suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of
this section is filed with the Borough Clerk and a letter confirming
the new effective date of the license is issued by the Borough Clerk.
E. Every insurance policy required hereunder will contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof
notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured
will not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured,
and that until the policy is canceled the insurance company will not be
relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium or of any
act or omission by the named insured. The policy of insurance will be
further conditioned for the payment of any and all judgments up to the
limits of the policy.
F. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
and the adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter
generated by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned at the time that business
§ 164-6 NUISANCES § 164-6
163:211
§ 164-7. Revocation or suspension of license.
is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not later than
9:00 a.m.
G. No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
H. No signs are permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe, including signs
on the awnings or umbrellas, unless permitted by the Sign Ordinance of
the Borough.
I. If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to laws of the State of New Jersey, it will be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcohol beverage control license to be
amended to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in
order to serve alcoholic beverages therein.
J. Outdoor cafes will be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31 in
any calendar year. The license, when issued, will be valid for one
season.
K. No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe will be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, or
other fixtures, curb, or sidewalk, within or near the licensed area.
L. No music or any other form of entertainment, whether live, recorded, or
in any manner electronically transmitted, is permitted. No
loudspeakers, public address systems, sound amplifiers, or similar
devices may be used for any purpose. [Added 4-13-2016 by Ord. No.
16:02]
A. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license,
which will be subject to revocation or suspension by the Borough
Council, after a hearing held on notice to the licensee, for failure of any
licensee to comply with this chapter or for violation of any other
applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation, or
ordinance. Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the express
understanding that the licensee obtains no property right thereunder,
nor any interest in the continuation of said license.
B. It is unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license.
C. In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the Borough reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license
on 10 days' written notice if the Borough determines that pedestrian
traffic is, in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of
the outdoor cafe or because of any other safety issue that the Borough
determines adversely affects the Borough because of the operation. The
license may also be suspended or revoked, on 10 days' written notice, if
the Borough determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any
§ 164-6 NORWOOD CODE § 164-7
163:212
Chapter 165
PARKING, HANDICAPPED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 165-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — A person who has been issued a special vehicle
identification card by the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 when using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a
certificate for which a special vehicle identification card has been issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
PARKING — The standing or waiting of a vehicle not actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise unless in obedience to
traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS — Any building, structure, facility or complex used by
the general public.
§ 165-2. Required parking at public buildings.
Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be constructed according to
the following guidelines:
part thereof for the maintenance or installation of underground
utilities. In the event of an emergency, which emergency is certified by
the Borough, the license may be suspended or revoked without notice.
A. Within 90 days subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, any owner of
a public building within the Borough of Norwood shall provide no less
than one handicapped parking space for the first 15 spaces of public
parking available to it and one more for each additional 30 spaces.
B. The handicapped parking spaces shall be conveniently located adjacent
to the public building entrance. Determination of said location shall be
made by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of the handicapped with the
wording "Handicapped Parking Only - Special Vehicle Identification
Required." The center of each parking space shall have painted thereon
the symbol for the handicapped.
§ 164-7 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 165-2
165:213
§ 165-3. Parking prohibited.
No persons shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and
marked as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking
facility unless the operator of the vehicle is the holder of an identification
card issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, and said operator's vehicle shall
have affixed thereto an identification certificate or marker issued by the
Director of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 165-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:05; 7-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05:15]
Chapter 166
PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 165. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 166-1. Applicability.
No person may park or leave standing any vehicle on lands of another,
whether publicly or privately owned, in the Borough of Norwood, after a
sign or signs complying with this chapter have been posted by the owner,
D. Each parking space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of an
automobile. The parking space shall be located on a level, paved
surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Any parking facility with less than 10 existing parking spaces shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
A. Failure to provide parking spaces. Any property owner or occupant
failing to provide parking spaces in accordance with the terms of this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 39:4-207.9 shall be liable for a penalty of not less
than $200 or more than $500, and up to 90 days of community service
on the terms and in the form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.
B. Operators of motor vehicles. Any operator of any motor vehicle, which
does not bear a special vehicle identification certificate located in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, who
parks the motor vehicle in a space reserved as provided by this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense, and for
subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250, and up to 90 days of
community service on the terms and in the form as the court shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 165-2 NORWOOD CODE § 166-1
165:214
occupant, lessee, or licensee prohibiting unauthorized parking. This chapter
does not apply to any lands lying within the bounds of any public street,
highway, or right-of-way.
§ 166-2. Posting of signs.
Chapter 168
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
Amusement or entertainment devices — See
Ch. 81.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
A. The signs required by this chapter will comply with the provisions of all
state laws and regulations regarding the towing of motor vehicles,
including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 56:13-13. In addition to and to the
extent not inconsistent with these requirements, the signs must be at
least 36 inches high and 36 inches wide and must be posted at all
vehicular entrances to the property. The sign must state:
(1) The purpose or purposes for which parking is authorized and the
time during which such parking is permitted;
(2) That unauthorized parking is prohibited and unauthorized motor
vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the towing company
that will perform the towing;
(4) The charges for the towing and storage of towed motor vehicles;
(5) The street address of the storage facility where the towed vehicles
can be redeemed after payment of the posted charges and the
times during which the vehicle may be redeemed; and
(6) The contact information for the Division of Consumer Affairs as
may be required by regulation.
B. Tampering with or damaging signs posted pursuant to this chapter is a
violation of this chapter.
§ 166-1 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 166-2
165:215

ARTICLE I
Recreation Committee
§ 168-1. Establishment; composition.
§ 168-2. Appointment of members.
§ 168-3. Terms of members; vacancies.
A. There shall be a Recreation Committee, which shall serve in an advisory
capacity in matters concerning the Recreation Department and its
facilities and programs.
B. The Recreation Committee of the Borough of Norwood shall consist of
11 members as follows: five at-large members and one member
representing each of the following six recreation activities: [Amended
12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 04:21; 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:02]
(1) Knickerbocker Boys Baseball: Grades seven through 10.
(2) Recreation Football: Grades one through eight.
(3) Recreation Basketball: boys and girls grades one through eight.
(4) Girls Cheerleading: Grades one through eight.
(5) Recreation Baseball/Softball: boys grades K through six/girls
Grades K through eight.
(6) Recreation Soccer: boys and girls, Grades K through eight.
C. The Recreation Committee here established shall not be deemed to be a
Recreation Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12 et seq.
D. The Director of Recreation shall serve as an ex officio member.
E. The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
A. The Mayor shall nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of
the Council, shall appoint all members of the Recreation Committee in
the manner provided by law for the appointment of Borough officers.
B. One member of the Borough Council shall serve as ex officio (liaison)
member of the Recreation Committee but shall have no vote unless he
also is formally appointed a member of said Committee.
A. All members of the Recreation Committee shall be appointed for a
period of three years and until their successors are duly appointed and
qualified; provided, however, that in the case of the initial appointment
of members of the Board, the initial terms shall be for periods of one,
two, and three years, respectively, in such a manner that the terms of at
least one member and not more than four members shall expire each
year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of three years.
§ 168-1 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-3
165:217
§ 168-4. Organization; officers.
§ 168-5. Meetings.
The Recreation Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at the
same time and day of each month in the Municipal Building as set in its
organizational meeting in January. Special meetings may be called by the
Chairman on three days' notice to each member of the Board; or upon three
days' notice to all members signed by at least two members of the Board.
The Committee may make and amend rules and regulations concerning the
conduct of its meetings.
§ 168-6. Powers and duties.
The Recreation Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
B. The Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council shall fill
vacancies occurring in the membership of the Board for the unexpired
term only.
A. The Recreation Committee shall elect a Chairman at its organizational
meeting in January.
B. The Director of Recreation shall automatically assume the duties of
Secretary to the Advisory Board and shall keep on file minutes of all the
meetings and copies of official correspondence of the said Board.
A. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning or
touching upon the day-to-day operation and administration of the
recreation program of the Borough of Norwood, which recommendation
or recommendations, after study by them, shall be considered by the
Mayor and Council. If the Mayor and Council shall approve of such
recommendation or recommendations or any part thereof, the Board
shall be notified of this approval, and the Board may, in the discretion of
the Mayor and Council, be directed to carry into effect the
recommendations or any approved part thereof.
B. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning or
touching upon matters of policy affecting the recreation program for
the Borough of Norwood. Such recommendations shall be considered
by the Mayor and Council after a report thereon from the Chairman.
Notice of any action on such recommendation shall be forwarded to the
Committee.
C. To adopt a constitution and/or bylaws governing the affairs of the Board
within 30 days of final passage of this chapter. However, such
constitution and/or bylaws must be approved by a majority of the Mayor
and Council and may only be amended with the approval of the majority
of the Mayor and Council and shall be inoperative to the extent said
constitution and/or bylaws is in conflict with any provision of any
ordinance of the Borough of Norwood or any state or federal statute.
§ 168-3 NORWOOD CODE § 168-6
165:218
ARTICLE II
Use and Control
§ 168-7. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide for the protection, care, and control
of public parks and recreation areas in the Borough and to regulate the
conduct of persons using such facilities.
§ 168-8. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Includes all public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, and other
facilities within the Borough and under the ownership of the Borough
or under the control and supervision of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough.33
SPECIAL EVENTS — Any activity or event conducted, sponsored, or
organized by a group other than the Borough Recreation Committee.
§ 168-9. General use.
§ 168-10. Permits for special events; procedure.
Permits shall be required for special events as follows:
A. The parks are for the enjoyment of Norwood residents and guests for
any proper purpose, subject to the restrictions set forth in Article I and
Article II of this chapter.
B. The use of parks by any person or persons shall be subject to the prior
right of use by the Borough Recreation Committee while engaged in
actual conduct of its recreational programs.
A. The person or persons seeking issuance of such a permit shall file an
application, in writing, with the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Norwood stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and the hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) A reliable estimate of the anticipated attendance.
33.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 03:14, adopted 12-2-2003, amended this chapter to reconfirm the
designation of the following blocks and lots as parklands in the Borough: Block 33, Lot 1
Block 45, Lot 1 Block 40, Lot 1 Block 30, Lot 1 Block 64, Lot 1
§ 168-7 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-10
165:219
§ 168-11. (Reserved)34
§ 168-12. Liability.
The person or persons to whom any permit is issued hereunder shall be
fully liable for any and all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reasons of the willful misconduct or negligence of the person,
persons or one of them to whom such permit shall have been issued.
§ 168-13. Prohibited activities; park hours.
(6) The type of activity for which such permit is desired.
(7) The anticipated age group of the expected participants.
(8) The names and addresses of the adult persons who would supervise
and be responsible for the proposed activity.
(9) A hold harmless agreement and certificate of insurance, naming
the Borough of Norwood as an additional insured.
(10) Such other information as may be reasonably required.
B. Permits shall be issued by the Director of Recreation, after submission
to and approval by the Mayor and Council, based upon the following
criteria, and permits may contain special conditions as appropriate:
[Amended 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:02]
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) That the nature and character of the proposed activity or use of the
park is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or
disorderly conduct.
(3) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense of police operation by the
Borough.
(4) That the park area or facility desired has not been reserved for
other use at the date and hour desired in the application, and that it
does not conflict with any other activity of the Borough Recreation
Committee.
A. No person or group of persons shall, while upon any Borough park,
playground, or recreational facility: [Amended 10-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 08:09]
34.Editor's Note: Former § 168-11, Appeal by persons aggrieved by issuance or nonissuance
of permit, was repealed 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:02.
§ 168-10 NORWOOD CODE § 168-13
165:220
(1) Be in or use the scene for any purpose during the hours such
facility is closed or when such facility or part thereof is posted
"Closed."
(2) Damage, deface, injure, destroy, remove or interfere with any
property of the Borough, including plant life or wildlife.
(3) Bring in any domesticated animal or animals or ride a horse, except
that dogs may be walked while on a leash on paved walking paths.
(4) Kindle, build, or maintain a fire of any sort.
(5) Picnic or bring foodstuffs into any area except such area, if any, as
may be clearly marked therefor by signs posted.
(6) Bring, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
(7) Bring in or dump upon, deposit or leave upon any bottles, broken
glass, trash, garbage or other refuse, except in connection with the
proper use of the property and placed in the proper receptacles
where provided by such matters, and where receptacles are not
provided, such matters shall be carried away by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(8) Post or otherwise place any sign, placard or advertisement
whatever, unless authorized by proper authority.
(9) Carry or possess firearms of any description, which prohibition
shall not apply to law enforcement officers, or air rifles, spring
guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries are forbidden. The Canada Goose Abatement
Program shall be exempt from these conditions.
(10) Have in his possession or cause to be exploded or discharge any
firecrackers, fireworks or similar thing. This shall not apply to the
annual fireworks display authorized by the Mayor and Council.
(11) Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road designated for
that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a
bicycle by hand over any grassy area or trail or paved area
reserved for pedestrian use.
(12) Drive, operate use or bring into any park any automobile,
motorbike, minibike, moped, motorcycle or any other motor
vehicle, except that properly licensed vehicles may be brought to
designated parking areas, if any, using designated roads for that
purpose.
§ 168-13 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-13
165:221
§ 168-14. Fees for recreational programs.
(13) Gamble or participate in any way in a game of chance or engage in
wagering or participate in any game or sport for money or other
valuable thing.
(14) Bring golf clubs or similar equipment or use same in any park
facility.
(15) Solicit contributions or support for any purpose, public or private.
(16) Sell or offer to sell any article of merchandise or thing or display for
sale any article or thing, unless authorized by the Mayor and
Council.
(17) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or persons
occupying any area or participating in any activity under authority
of a permit.
(18) Conduct himself in a disorderly or indecent manner or commit any
indecent act or use profane, indecent, or obscene language or
gesture or interfere with or disturb any other person using or
enjoying such facility.
(19)No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any park except
under the direction or by permission of the Recreation Committee.
B. No person may use or remain in a public park between the hours of
sunset and sunrise, except where posted.
(1) Borough parks located at Kennedy Memorial Park are to be closed
to the public at 11:00 p.m. from April 15 to August 15; and from
August 16 to April 14, the park is to be closed at 10:00 p.m., except
where otherwise authorized by the Recreation Committee.
Kennedy Memorial Park complex shall consist of the Knickerbocker
and Little League Baseball Fields, the Girls Softball Field, and the
Basketball Courts.
A. The following schedule of fees shall be charged for recreational
programs as follows:
(1) Use of athletic fields by non-recreation-sponsored teams or
activities: $75 per team or activity per date of use, plus $100 per
date of use when the use of the lights is required. An escrow
deposit of $250 shall also be paid to the Borough by the applicant
as security for the Borough's costs in the cleanup of the fields and
the repair of any damage to the fields caused by the applicant's use
of the fields. The Borough will return the deposit to the applicant,
minus any expenses incurred by the Borough, after use of the
fields. All charges for these expenses will be approved by the
Mayor and Council upon the recommendation of the
§ 168-13 NORWOOD CODE § 168-14
165:222
§ 168-15. Closing of parks or recreational facilities; lightning risk
warnings. [Added 10-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13:09]
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. [Amended
7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07:13; 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:07]
(2) Summer recreation program registration fees: [Amended
6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04:09; 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11:04]
(a) For the first child: $125.
(b) Additional fee for the 2nd child: $100.
(c) Additional fee for the 3rd child: $75.
(d) Four or more children: no additional fee charged.
(e) A late fee of $25 will be assessed.
(3) Norwood Kid's Running Program: $30 per child per year. [Added
9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15:1335]
(4) Any such other fees recommended by the Committee and fixed by
the Mayor and Council.
B. The recreational program fees shall be collected by an agent or
representative of the Recreation Department.
C. The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to waive the collection
of any recreational program or permit fees on the application of any
charitable, religious, veterans, or eleemosynary organization and any
Borough of Norwood volunteer emergency service organization.
[Amended 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:07]
A. Definitions: When used in this section the terms listed below are
defined as follows:
ALL PERSONS — Includes all employees of the Borough of Norwood,
volunteers, coaches, team members and their families, umpiresreferees,
as well as all members of the public.
ENFORCING AUTHORITIES — Members of the Police Department of
the Borough of Norwood; members of the Norwood Fire Department;
designated agents of the Department of Public Works and Recreation
Department; the Mayor and Council members; and any other agents
designated by the Mayor and Council.
LIGHTNING RISK WARNING — Notice to the Borough of a lightning
risk, the activation of the lightning warning system siren or strobe, or
the happening of any event deemed by any of the enforcing authorities
to be a risk to health and safety due to lightning.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(3) as Subsection
A(4).
§ 168-14 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-15
165:223
§ 168-16. Smoking prohibited. [Added 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
14:13]
B. If a lightning risk warning occurs, all parks and recreational facilities
will be closed, including (but not limited to) the Norwood Municipal
Pool, municipal fields and lots, and other similar outdoor areas.
C. If a park or recreational facility is closed, as provided in this section:
(1) All activities within the park or recreational facility will
immediately cease until the lightning warning system provides the
all-clear sound or any of the enforcing authorities authorizes the
facility (or facilities) to re-open; and
(2) All persons within the park or recreational facility when the
lightning risk warning occurs will immediately exit the park or
recreational facility, and they will not return until the lightning
warning system provides the all-clear sound or any of the enforcing
authorities authorizes the facility (or facilities) to re-open.
D. The Borough may act to temporarily close or limit the use of parks,
recreational facilities, including (but not limited to) the Norwood
Municipal Pool, school, and municipal fields and lots, whenever, in the
judgment of any of the enforcing authorities, this action is deemed
necessary or desirable for the protection of public health or safety.
E. Nothing in this section is intended to negate the authority of the
enforcing authorities to take any action as deemed necessary or
desirable for the protection of the public's health or safety.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) If the Code of the Borough of Norwood provides for the licensing or
permitting of any person or entity who/which violates the terms of
this section, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood
reserves the right to revoke that permit or license.
(2) Any person or entity found guilty of violating this section of the
Code of the Borough of Norwood will be subject to a penalty
consisting of a fine not to exceed $1,000.
A. Definitions. When used in this section the terms listed below are
defined as follows:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be
used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from
the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar,
cigarillo, or pipe.
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS — The areas defined as parks and
recreation areas in this chapter and all other applicable Borough
ordinances, except any parking lots for these parks and recreation
areas.
§ 168-15 NORWOOD CODE § 168-16
165:224
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from,
or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter
or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can
be smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an
electronic smoking device.
B. Smoking is prohibited in Norwood's parks or recreation areas.
C. Signs designating each Norwood park and recreation area as a smokefree
zone will be posted on the property where smoking is prohibited by
this section. The sign will include the words "Smoke Free Zone" in
lettering that is not less than two inches in height and will contain the
international no-smoking sign or symbol.
D. The provisions of this section are enforceable by a police officer,
employee, or elected official of the Borough, as well as by any other
person who observes a violation. Any person seeking to enforce the
provisions of this section is authorized to file a complaint in the
Municipal Court of the Borough.
E. Unless a greater fine is permitted under N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq. (New
Jersey Smoke Free Air Act) for smoking in the specific areas defined by
this section, in which case such higher level of fine will be imposed, any
person who smokes in an area in which smoking is prohibited by this
section will upon conviction be guilty of a disorderly persons offense
and will be subject to a maximum fine of $200 for each violation,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.
F. Any person found guilty defacing, tampering with, or removing nosmoking
signs that are required by this section will upon a conviction
be guilty of a disorderly persons offense and will be subject to a
maximum fine of $200 plus the cost of replacing the sign.
G. Any juvenile adjudicated to have violated the provisions of this section
will be subject to all penalties, fines, or other discipline as may be
imposed upon an adult pursuant to this section, to the extent permitted
by law.
§ 168-16 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-16
165:225

ARTICLE III
Background Checks
[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17:02]
§ 168-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms will have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF — The Chief of the Borough's Police Department.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
whether a person has a criminal record, which is completed by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the New Jersey
State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police, or both.
YOUTH — A person younger than the age of 18 years.
YOUTH RECREATION PROGRAMS — All programs and activities sponsored
or conducted by the Borough for youths.
§ 168-18. Background checks required.
§ 168-19. Disqualification.
A. All persons 18 years of age or older, including but not limited to
coaches, assistant coaches, or those serving in similar positions
involved in educating, directing, supervising, or in any way assisting a
youth recreation program, will submit sufficient information on forms
supplied by the Chief and obtained from the New Jersey State Police,
for the purpose of obtaining a criminal history background check with
the State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police. The
Chief will process all applications for criminal history background
checks.
B. All league officers or other persons in charge of a youth recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this article and will file
an annual roster of persons that are required to comply with the
background check procedures of this article. The roster will be on
forms supplied by the Borough and will contain a certification as to the
activities in which some control and responsibility for youths is
assigned to some person acting for or on behalf of the Borough other
than a parent or caregiver.
A. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the Chief will
notify the applicant and the president or head of the youth recreation
program of the affirmative or negative results of the applicable criminal
history background check. The Chief will base his or her determination
upon the standards stated in § 168-19B. The Chief will not disclose the
details of any criminal history background checks that result in a
§ 168-17 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-19
165:227
§ 168-20. Frequency of background checks.
negative determination by the State Police. These details are to be
made available to the applicant upon a formal request to the State
Bureau of Investigation.
B. An applicant whose criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses that negatively impact the health,
safety, and welfare of youths will not be qualified or permitted to
participate in any official capacity in any function of a youth recreation
program. These offenses include, but are not limited to:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes; and
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes, except N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10(a)(4).
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection B(1) of this section.
C. The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and is not to be construed as a limitation on
those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth recreation programs.
D. Any person refusing to submit to criminal history background checks
will immediately be dismissed from any youth recreation programs
requiring background checks.
A. All youth recreation programs that have persons subject to this chapter
will direct those persons to the Chief for background checks before the
person is permitted to participate at any youth recreation program.
Thereafter, every three years a new background check will be
submitted to the Chief.
B. Persons who are required to undergo background checks may be given
an interim approval for participation only after the Chief's submission
of the required request to the Division of State Police for a background
check. Interim approvals are valid for the period of time that it takes to
§ 168-19 NORWOOD CODE § 168-20
165:228
§ 168-21. Privacy.
The Chief will file and maintain all criminal background checks in a secure
and locked cabinet or room. The Chief will take appropriate steps to
safeguard these records, which will not be available to the public. The
Mayor and Council intends that these records will be exempt from public
disclosure under the common law and the New Jersey Open Public Records
Act.36 These records will only be retained for a period of time that is
necessary to serve the intent and purpose of this article, to the extent
permitted by law.
§ 168-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article will be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code.
receive background check results, but not exceeding 45 days. Only one
interim approval may be granted per person.
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 168-20 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 168-22
165:229
Chapter 172
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unregistered or junked vehicles — See Ch.
224.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Any person who goes from house to house or from place
to place, whether on foot or in a vehicle, purchasing or otherwise acquiring
or collecting old or secondhand metal, bottles, glassware, tinware, paper,
lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or inoperable automobiles,
dismantled or inoperable machinery or any other thing which is no longer
used or useable for its intended purpose but which has value because of the
parts or materials it contains.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — A group of persons, corporation or
association organized for philanthropic, charitable, religious, patriotic or
other public service purposes and not for private gain. Examples of
nonprofit organizations shall include volunteer fire departments and first
aid squads, veterans groups and organizations which assist the poor, the
aged, the sick, the physically handicapped or the mentally retarded, or
which aid victims of fire, flood or similar catastrophes. This enumeration is
intended to be typical only and shall not be construed as exclusive.
PEDDLER — A person who goes from home to home or from place to place,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, selling and delivering goods and services.
POLITICAL SOLICITOR — A person who goes from house to house or place
to place to advocate in favor of or against a candidate for public office or an
issue or activity of public interest.[Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17:13]
SOLICITOR — A person who goes from house to house or from place to
place selling merchandise by sample or by taking orders for future delivery
with or without accepting advance payments for the goods and regardless of
whether the solicitation is made by mail, telephone or personal contact. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to the person who comes in personal
contact with the buyer whether he obtains the order, delivers the goods or
accepts money in payment for them. Solicitors shall also mean any person
who goes from house to house or from place to place for the purpose
of obtaining alms, contributions or subscriptions, or who does research
analyses, makes surveys or opinion polls, obtains rating data or similar
information, or who engages in any similar work which involves a door-todoor
or place-to-place activity.
§ 168-22 NORWOOD CODE § 172-1
165:230
TRANSIENT VENDOR — A person in the business of selling personal
property or services who conducts his business from a fixed location, but
who does not intend to continue in business within the borough for at
least one year. A proprietor of a business which is seasonal in nature who
suspends business during the off season shall not for that reason alone be
considered a transient vendor.
§ 172-2. License required. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:05]
No person shall engage in business in the Borough as a peddler, transient
vendor, or junk dealer without first obtaining a license and paying the
required license fee in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
The license shall be in the form of a photo identification card issued by the
Norwood Police Department.
§ 172-3. Exceptions.
Section 172-2 shall not apply to any of the following persons:
§ 172-4. Special provisions for certain persons.
Veterans who hold a special state license issued under the laws of the
State of New Jersey, persons to whom a valid mercantile license has been
issued under the provisions of any law or ordinance other than this chapter,
physically handicapped persons who are residents of the borough and
persons selling products grown on their own farms shall not be required to
apply for or secure a license, to pay any processing or license fee or to file a
bond, but shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this Code and
shall be required to possess a special permit which shall be issued by the
Borough Clerk upon the presentation of proper identification and proof of
their status.
§ 172-5. Nonprofit organizations and political solicitors. [Amended
by Ord. No. 89-0-18; 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17:13]
A. Any person licensed by the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance or
the Real Estate Commission of the State of New Jersey.
B. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles.
C. Any sale required by statute or order of any court.
D. Any person engaged in delivering merchandise or other things in the
regular course of business to the premises of the person ordering or
entitled to receive it.
E. Any political solicitor soliciting votes for a bona fide candidate for
political office. [Amended 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17:13]
F. Exempt members of a volunteer fire department or first aid squad as
defined in the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
§ 172-1 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 172-5
165:231
§ 172-6. Application information.
A. Nonprofit organizations and political solicitors desiring to engage in
any of the activities for which a license otherwise would be required by
this chapter will not be required to apply for or secure a license, pay a
license fee, or post a bond, provided that there is filed with the Borough
Clerk a sworn statement containing the following information:
(1) The name and purpose of the person or organization.
(2) The names and addresses of the officers of the organization.
(3) The names and address of the persons, agents, or representatives
who will solicit, sell merchandise, or distribute literature in the
Borough on the organization's behalf.
B. Upon the filing of the statement referred to in Subsection A, the
Borough will provide the person filing same with a copy of the list of
excluded residences maintained pursuant to § 172-24. In lieu of the
usual investigation of applicants for a license provided for in this
chapter, the Chief of Police or a police officer designated by him or her
will conduct whatever inquiry he or she considers necessary to
determine that the organization in question is a bona fide nonprofit
organization.
C. Each person, representative, or agent of an organization will carry
proper identification indicating the name of the organization and his or
her own name and address and will be prepared to display this
documentation upon request.
D. Nonprofit organizations and political solicitors will comply with all
other applicable provisions of this Code, except that they are permitted
to carry on their activities on Sundays.
E. No political solicitor or representative of a nonprofit organization may
enter upon the property of any residences on the list of excluded
residences compiled pursuant to § 172-24 below.
A. Applications for a license under this chapter shall be sworn to and
contain the following information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant; if the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered
agent.
(2) A complete physical description of the applicant, if the applicant is
a natural person, together with three recent photographs
approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(3) If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the
address and a description of the premises.
§ 172-5 NORWOOD CODE § 172-6
165:232
§ 172-7. Investigation of applicants.
Each application shall be referred to the Chairman of the Police Committee
or a police officer designated by him, who shall immediately institute
whatever investigation of the applicant's business responsibility and moral
character he considers necessary for the protection of the public. He shall
communicate his findings, in writing, together with a recommendation that
the application be granted or denied, to the Mayor and Council within a
reasonable time but no more than three days after the application has been
(4) If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license
number.
(5) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of
the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
(6) The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the
licensed activity will be conducted.
(7) A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property
or services to be sold or supplied.
(8) A statement as to the location or source of supply of any
merchandise to be offered for sale and the method of delivery.
(9) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed.
(10) Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
B. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the Chief of Police determines
that fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint
records shall be immediately processed for classification and
identification.
C. At the time of filing the application, a fee of $2 shall be paid to the
Borough Clerk to cover the cost of an investigation of the facts stated in
the application.
D. All applications shall be on forms furnished by the borough.
Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all the information required by this section
relating to each employee or agent of the corporation who shall engage
in the licensed activity, and shall be signed by each such employee or
agent.
§ 172-6 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 172-7
165:233
filed. The Mayor and Council shall consider the application at their next
regular meeting after receiving the report of the investigation. If, based
upon the information contained in the application and the investigator's
report, the Mayor and Council decide that the applicant's character, ability
or business responsibility are unsatisfactory or that the products, services
or activities are not free from fraud, they shall disapprove the application
and refuse to issue the license and so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the
Mayor and Council shall approve the license, and the Borough Clerk shall
then issue the license immediately, provided that the required license fees
have been paid.
§ 172-8. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Mayor and Council shall prescribe by
resolution and shall contain the following information:
§ 172-9. License record.
The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the Mayor
and Council and shall contain the same in formation as is required by
§ 172-8 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of
the fee paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the
date of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license or
a renewal and any other information which the Mayor and Council may, by
resolution, require.
§ 172-10. Display of license. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:05]
All licensees shall wear and display the photo identification license required
by § 172-2 on their outermost garment at all times while working in the
Borough.
§ 172-11. Transferability.
Every license shall apply only to the person, location (where the activity is
to be conducted at a fixed location) and vehicle (where the activity is to be
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number of the license and the nature of the licensed activity.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on in a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Council may,
by resolution, require.
§ 172-7 NORWOOD CODE § 172-11
165:234
conducted from a vehicle) to whom or to which it was issued and shall not
be transferable without the consent of the Mayor and Council.
§ 172-12. Expiration date; renewal.
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00
midnight local time. Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made
not later than December 1 of the year of issue.
§ 172-13. License fee.
The fee for a license required by this chapter shall be $25. Where the
applicant is other than an individual, and where more than two agents,
employees or members of the applicant are to carry on the licensed activity,
there shall be an additional fee of $5 per person for each person in excess
of two who shall carry on the licensed activity. Where more than one vehicle
is to be used by the applicant to carry on the licensed activity, there shall
also be an additional charge of $5 for each additional vehicle.
§ 172-14. Hours of sale.
No person licensed under this chapter shall engage in business before 9:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on weekdays or at any time on Sundays. This section
shall not apply to licensees who are expressly invited by residents of the
borough to come to their homes at a different time.
§ 172-15. Sale of food and produce.
A. All licensees who sell or deliver or display for sale food and produce
from vehicles which are wholly or partly open on any side shall at all
times keep the food and produce completely screened or covered with
satisfactory materials in order to prevent flies or other insects from
alighting around or upon any merchandise.
B. All licensees selling, delivering or displaying for sale seafood, meats,
poultry or dairy products shall transport them only in refrigerated
vehicles. The products shall remain in the refrigerated portion of the
vehicle until the time of sale or delivery. The refrigerated portion of the
vehicle while in use shall be maintained at a temperature low enough to
completely safeguard all of the products from a health and sanitary
standpoint.
C. No licensee shall at any time permit any waste products, materials or
parts of produce or other merchandise to remain in or upon any street,
roadway, curb or walk, but shall remove any debris that may have fallen
from his vehicle and place it immediately in a leakproof metal container
with a tight-fitting cover.
D. All food or produce sold by any licensee shall at the time of delivery be
placed in bags or other suitable containers when it is handed to the
customer.
§ 172-11 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 172-16
165:235
§ 172-16. Conduct of licensees. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-0-18]
Every person licensed under this chapter shall conduct himself according to
the following rules and regulations:
§ 172-17. Use of vehicles.
A. He shall not enter or attempt to enter the house of any resident of the
borough without an express invitation from the occupant of the house.
B. He shall not conduct himself in a manner that is objectionable or
annoying to the occupant of any house.
C. No licensee or any person acting on his behalf shall shout, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any other sound-making or amplifying device on any
street, park or other public place or on any private premises so that
sounds are produced which can be plainly heard on streets, avenues,
parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to
the licensee or to the activities carried on by him.37
D. In general, all licensees and any vehicles used by them in the course of
the licensed activity shall fully comply with all of the provisions of this
Code or other applicable municipal ordinances and all applicable state
laws or regulations, particularly those which deal with the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare.
E. He shall not enter upon the property of any residences contained on the
list of excluded residences compiled, pursuant to § 172-24 below.
A. No licensee shall permit any debris, waste material, rotting produce or
similar matter to remain in or upon his vehicle unless it is contained in a
leakproof metal container provided with a tight-fitting metal cover.
B. No licensee shall transact business from his vehicle unless it is properly
parked immediately adjacent to the curb of a public street in a
permitted locality. No licensee shall at any time double park his vehicle
while transacting business nor transact business other than on the curb
side of his vehicle.
C. Licensees selling food and produce shall prohibit, to the extent
reasonably possible, the eating of any merchandise directly from their
vehicles.
D. Before a licensee selling food and produce uses any vehicle in
connection with his business, the vehicle shall be submitted to the
Borough Board of Health for inspection and approval relative to
compliance with this chapter. Whenever requested during the term of
the license, the licensee shall submit his vehicle for reasonable
reinspection. No vehicle shall be used by the licensee unless it has been
approved for use by the Board of Health. A certificate of written
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Noise.
§ 172-16 NORWOOD CODE § 172-17
165:236
§ 172-18. Location restrictions.
No licensee shall have an exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall he be permitted to a stationary location on the streets
or be permitted to operate in a congested area where his operations may
impede or inconvenience the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, if
reasonable and made in good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or traffic impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 172-19. Power to make additional rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provisions of this chapter or for the purpose
of administering the provisions of this chapter or making them more
effective. No regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any
provision of this chapter, and no regulation shall impose any requirement
which is in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly
or by implication imposed by any provision in this chapter.
§ 172-20. Revocation of license; causes.
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Mayor and Council after notice and a hearing for any of the following
causes:
approval shall remain in the vehicle at all times and shall be shown
by the operator to any member of the Police Department or any other
official of the borough who may request to see it.
E. Any vehicle used in connection with any activity licensed by this
chapter shall have the name of the licensee printed on the side of the
vehicle in letters at least two inches high.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
C. A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of this
Code or other ordinance of the borough applicable to the licensed
activity.
D. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself or his
agents or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or welfare.
§ 172-17 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 172-21
165:237
§ 172-21. Notice of hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Borough Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 172-22. Hearing; determination.
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his own expense. If such a record is made, two copies
shall be furnished to the borough without charge. The Mayor and Council
shall revoke or suspend the license if they are satisfied by a preponderance
of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 172-23. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
The Mayor and Council may issue another license to a person whose license
has been revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if, after a hearing,
they are satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led
to the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose
license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him, directly
or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
§ 172-24. Excluded residences. [Added by Ord. No. 89-O-18;
amended 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:16; 10-11-2017 by Ord. No.
17:13]
A. The owners or occupants of any residential property or dwelling unit
who prefer not to be solicited by peddlers, solicitors, transient vendors,
junk dealers, or political solicitors may notify the Borough Clerk of their
intention in writing or by e-mail at any time.
B. The Borough Clerk will maintain a list of the addresses of the properties
as to which owners or occupants have sent the notice permitted by
Subsection A. Each address will remain on the list unless the owners or
occupants of the listed property notify the Borough Clerk in writing or
by e-mail that they wish the property to be removed from the list. The
Borough Clerk will update the list at least monthly. The inclusion of an
address on the list will be deemed as the owner's or occupant's
revocation of any privilege or license of third-party vendors or solicitors
to enter or attempt to enter the property.
C. Owners or occupants who have requested that their property be listed
pursuant to Subsection A may post a notice for display on the premises
stating that the property is on the Norwood exclusion list. The notice
§ 172-21 NORWOOD CODE § 172-24
165:238
§ 172-25. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No.
16:16; amended 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17:13]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter will be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code and the revocation of any
license issued under this Chapter 172 of the Code.
Chapter 174
PENALTIES AND FINES
§ 174-1. Maximum fines and penalties. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 07:02]
also may indicate which peddlers and solicitors, if any, may contact the
owners or occupants, and the notice may read substantially as follows:
"These premises are listed on the Borough of Norwood's No-Knock List
(Norwood Code § 172-24). You may not enter or attempt to enter these
premises for the purpose of peddling or soliciting as defined by the
Norwood Code § 172-1. Nonprofit charitable, political, and religious
organizations and solicitors are included under this ordinance.
Violations of Norwood Code § 172-24 may result in the revocation of
any license issued for peddling and soliciting and a fine of up to $2,000
and/or up to 90 days of community service."
D. The Borough Clerk will provide the addresses of the properties on the
exclusion list, without the names of the occupants or owners, to those
obtaining licenses pursuant to § 172-2 of this Code and to nonprofit
organizations and political solicitors that have filed statements, or that
are required to file statements, under § 172-5 of this Code.
A. Any person who is convicted for a violation of any provision of this Code
or any other ordinance of the Borough for which no penalty is specified
shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$2,000, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, unless a different
penalty is stated in the Code chapter hereof or the ordinance.
B. Any person who is convicted for a violation of any housing or zoning
provision of this Code who shall be the subject of a fine in an amount
that is greater than $1,250 shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or
abate the condition within 30 days and shall be afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before the court for an independent determination
concerning the violation. After the thirty-day period, the court may
impose a fine greater than $1,250 if the court determines that the cure
or abatement of the violation has not been substantially completed.
§ 172-24 PENALTIES AND FINES § 174-2
174:239
§ 174-2. Separate violations.
A separate offense or violation shall be deemed to be committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 176
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS; SECONDHAND GOODS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 137. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 172.
§ 176-1. Purpose and findings.
This chapter is intended to regulate the trade in secondhand or preowned
precious metals, gems and jewelry, to prevent or reduce trafficking in stolen
goods, and to improve the likelihood that these items will be recovered
when they have been stolen or otherwise taken from the rightful owner
without permission. This chapter is intended to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and
other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification, reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in these goods.
Accordingly, no person may use, exercise or carry on the business, trade
or occupation of the buying, selling or pawning of precious metals or other
secondhand goods without complying with the requirements of this chapter
in the exact manner described herein.
§ 176-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued by
another state of the United States, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable United States government-issued identification, which will be
recorded on the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded
to the local police department on request.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough's Police
Department.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
§ 174-2 NORWOOD CODE § 176-2
174:240
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Borough.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — Mayor and Council of the Borough.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The Clerk of the Borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods, such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards, any
tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices, computers,
computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record or stereo
sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods, automotive
equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this chapter, secondhand goods does not include goods
transacted in the following manner:
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods, such as
precious metal, jewelry or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
A. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
B.
C. Auctions of real estate; and
The occasional sale, purchase or exchange of coins or stamps by a
person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase or exchange of such coins
or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign, handbill,
newspaper, magazine, radio, television or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
D.
§ 176-2 PENALTIES AND FINES § 176-2
174:241
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 176-3. License requirement for dealers.
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity may engage in the business of buying, selling or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods within the jurisdiction of the Borough
without having first obtained a license therefor from the Municipal Clerk.
The license will bear a number issued by the Municipal Clerk. The
application for a license to the Municipal Clerk will state the name, date of
birth, and address of the dealer, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the
United States, and whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of any
crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s),
and the date(s) thereof. Advertising in any print or electronic media or
by sign that any of those articles or secondhand goods referred to in
§ 176-2 above are being bought in any location within the municipality
will constitute engaging in business as a dealer of secondhand goods for
purposes of this chapter. No person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity may place or cause to be placed any
advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods without stating in
the advertising the license number issued to a person or entity by the
municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number will appear
in type no smaller than eight point in the lower right-hand corner of the
advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media, the license
number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the
license number is a violation of this chapter, and offenders, upon conviction,
are subject to the penalties established in § 176-9.
§ 176-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk will refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
will investigate the prospective licensee pursuant to this chapter for the
purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing. The
investigation will include, but will not be limited to the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 176-2 above,
although nothing in this section will be construed to warrant denial
of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which will be made among credible sources, which sources will be
disclosed to the applicant when any license application is denied;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant, including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
§ 176-2 NORWOOD CODE § 176-4
174:242
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section will not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 176-6C of this chapter will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 176-6A.
B. The Chief of Police will complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application, fully
completed by the applicant, to the Municipal Clerk. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police will, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
will grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police will be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of denial,
will state fully and specifically the reasons for said recommendation. If
the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation of the Chief of Police
to deny any license, the applicant will be notified in writing within 10
days of such denial, and the Clerk will forward to the applicant a
statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
§ 176-4 PENALTIES AND FINES § 176-4
174:243
§ 176-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer will:
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability
to satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 176-5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 176-6, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk will issue or
deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond as
required by § 176-7 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a license is denied, the applicant will be
entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council, at which the
applicant will be permitted to introduce evidence as may be deemed
relevant to the denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must
file a written notice of appeal with the Borough Clerk within 10 days of
receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a dealer of
secondhand goods.
F. No dealer may assign any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in § 176-2.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which will
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase.
(2) The name, address, date of birth and telephone number of the
seller or sellers.
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 176-2, in a format acceptable to the
Chief of Police.
§ 176-4 NORWOOD CODE § 176-5
174:244
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
to the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph.
(6) The receipt number.
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind.
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s).
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter,
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records are subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer will enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in Subsection C above.
E. If a database fails, or dealer's computer equipment malfunctions, all
transaction information is required to be submitted on paper forms
approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the date of
purchase. If paper forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all
transaction information set forth in Subsection C above into the
database as soon as possible upon the dealer's equipment being
repaired or replaced, or the database coming back into service. Dealers
failing to properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable
fashion or failing to replace faulty computer equipment may be cited for
§ 176-5 PENALTIES AND FINES § 176-5
174:245
§ 176-6. Retention of items; suspension or revocation of license.
a violation of this chapter and subsequently be subject to the penalties
for doing so, including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 176-6.
F. Every dealer, and every person in the dealer's employ, will to admit to
the premises during business hours any member of the Police
Department to examine any database, book, ledger, or any other record
on the premises relating to the reportable transactions of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as well as the articles purchased or
received and, where necessary, relinquish custody of those articles as
provided in § 176-6. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the address where these
records and articles will be stored.
A. All secondhand goods purchased, received for pawn, or received for
consignment as described above, are to be made available for
inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof at the designated
business address for a period of at least seven calendar days from the
date the transaction information is actually reported to the Chief of
Police in the approved manner described above in § 176-5, except for
precious metals and jewelry, which must be maintained for at least 10
business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A.
2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
received for pawn and will not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified
or melted by the dealer until the retention period has expired. Itinerant
businesses and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the
Chief of Police of the location where the purchased item(s) are being
held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
provided that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 176-5B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who will be considered the
victim of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
will seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer must
maintain, for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 176-5C.
§ 176-5 NORWOOD CODE § 176-6
174:246
D. No dealer may purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty will be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 176-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following are grounds for suspension:
violation of any provisions of this chapter, including failure to
comply with any training or fees associated with the electronic
database software system in use by the municipality; violation of
any other statute, regulation or local ordinance; or any other
illegal, improper or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof will issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk which will set forth the grounds for the suspension and notify
the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to Subsection G. A
temporary suspension shall issue immediately, pending the
outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must immediately
cease engaging in the business of purchasing for resale, receiving
for pawn and/or selling of precious metals and/or other secondhand
goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected or
appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed appropriate
by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of Police, upon
the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection G.
F. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
is in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur under
§ 176-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following are grounds for revocation: a
third violation under this chapter; a second violation under this
chapter less than one year after an earlier violation under this
chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or any
jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or local
ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
§ 176-6 PENALTIES AND FINES § 176-6
174:247
§ 176-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter will deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond will be subject to review and approval by the
Borough Attorney, and will be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for
the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions and
requirements of all ordinances of the municipality in force or which may
be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned also
that the bond will be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons
obtaining judgment against the dealer licensed under this chapter, which
damage is established by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. The
bond will contain the following language: "The obligation of this bond will,
in addition to the Borough, be and remain for the benefit of any person
obtaining a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee will so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension may immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Mayor, will review the stated grounds for revocation, and the panel
will issue an appropriate disposition of either suspension,
revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines that
revocation is the appropriate disposition, it will set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which will be provided to the dealer. The notice will
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it will provide the dealer
with a notice of suspension that will advise the dealer of the right to
appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish his or her
license and must immediately and indefinitely cease operating as a
dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods within the
municipality.
G. Appeal. Any dealer wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation will be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council, at
which the dealer will be permitted to introduce evidence as may be
deemed relevant to the suspension or revocation. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of revocation or suspension of
license.
H. A dealer will have the right to change the location of the licensed
business within the Borough, provided that he or she notifies the
Municipal Clerk, in writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 176-6 NORWOOD CODE § 176-7
174:248
will be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 176-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
chapter, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $300. These fees
are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation
to the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of
Police, as provided by § 176-5D of this chapter. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date it is issued.
§ 176-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer will, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of the
operating license as provided in § 176-6E and F above. Each and every
violation will be considered a separate violation. Each violation will result in
an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of violating
the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of a previous
violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be sentenced by
the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in addition, may be
subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 176-6F. The additional
fine imposed as a repeat offender will not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same will be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 176-10. Conformance with state law.
This chapter is not intended to be inconsistent with or replace any statutory
requirements governing pawnbrokers, in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 et seq., the sale
of precious metals, in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale of secondhand
jewelry in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 to 2C:21-41; or any other New Jersey statute or
regulation regarding any subject matter of this chapter.
Chapter 177
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 110.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Garbage and refuse disposal — See Ch. 198,
Art. I.
Unregistered or junked vehicles — See Ch.
224.
§ 176-7 PENALTIES AND FINES § 176-10
174:249
§ 177-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Norwood" and may be referred to in this chapter in the short
form as "this code."
§ 177-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the borough buildings
and premises used for residential and nonresidential purposes which are
or may become substandard with respect to structural integrity, equipment
or maintenance, and further, that such conditions, including but not limited
to structural deterioration, lack of exterior maintenance, infestation, lack
of minimal essential heating, plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment,
lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence
of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions
and overcrowding, constitute a menace to health, safety, welfare and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the borough. It is
further found and declared that there are certain problems endemic to
multiple dwellings, and certain greater protections are necessary.
§ 177-3. Purposes.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing standards governing the maintenance, condition and
occupancy of premises situated in the borough, used or intended to be
used or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for residential and
nonresidential purposes; to establish standards governing utilities, facilities
and other physical components and conditions essential to make such
premises fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators and distinct and
separate responsibilities upon occupants; to prevent blighting conditions;
to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of such premises;
to correct violations or to fix penalties for the violations of this code; to
provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs.
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public
interest, and it is intended that this code be liberally construed to effectuate
the purposes as stated herein.
§ 177-4. Applicability.
A. Buildings affected by this code. Every building and the premises on
which it is situated in the borough used, intended to be used or
designed to be used, in whole or in part, for residential and
nonresidential purposes as limited herein shall comply with the
provisions of this code, whether or not any such building shall have
been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of
this code, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have
§ 176-10 NORWOOD CODE § 177-4
174:250
§ 177-5. Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants.
been issued for the use or occupancy of any such building or premises
for the construction, alteration or repair of such building or for the
installation or repair of equipment or facilities therein or thereon prior
to the effective date of this code. This code establishes standards for the
maintenance of all such buildings and premises and does not replace,
modify or lessen standards otherwise established for the construction,
repair alteration or use of such buildings and premises, equipment or
facilities contained therein or thereon, except as provided in Subsection
B hereof. Where there is mixed occupancy of such buildings and
premises, the residential and nonresidential uses thereof shall be
regulated by and be subjected to the applicable provisions of both this
code and the building, zoning and other applicable ordinances of the
borough.
B. Higher standards to prevail in case of conflict with other ordinances or
laws. In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher
standard than that set forth in any other ordinance of the borough or
law of the State of New Jersey applicable thereto, then the standards as
set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this code impose a
lesser standard than such other ordinance of the borough or law of the
state, then the higher standard contained in such other ordinance or
law shall prevail.
C. Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. After the date of
enactment hereof, all licenses, permits and certificates of occupancy
relating to such buildings and premises which may be issued or
renewed pursuant to any other ordinance of the borough may be issued
or renewed only upon compliance with this code as well as compliance
with the ordinance under which such licenses and permits may be
granted or renewed.
D. Enforcement and compliance with other ordinances. Compliance with
this code shall not constitute a defense against the violation of any
provision of any other ordinance of the borough or law of New Jersey
applicable to any building or premises.
A. Owners and operators. Owners and operators shall have all the duties
and responsibilities as prescribed in this code and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, unless specifically set forth to the
contrary, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty
and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge or
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
B. Occupants. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this code and all the regulations promulgated in
connection therewith, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any
such duty or responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge
or violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator is
§ 177-4 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-5
174:251
§ 177-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — An unregistered motor vehicle or a
junked motor vehicle as defined by § 224-1 of this Code, which is exposed to
public view.[Amended 8-9-2017 by Ord. No. 17:10]
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space which contains one or more of the
following, i.e., bathtub, shower, water closet, lavatory, water closet
compartment, washbowl, sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any building in which there are one or more
independent rooms for sleeping, whether furnished or unfurnished,
available for occupancy by five or more persons for compensation and
where there are not individual eating facilities. Such buildings shall be
governed by the provisions applicable to multiple family dwellings.
BUILDING — A combination of materials intended to form a safe and stable
structure used for multiple dwelling residential purposes and including
any accessory buildings and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building, or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or
other evidence of physical decay, lacking structural maintenance, whether
interior or exterior.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit which includes or is intended to include living, sleeping, bathing, toilet
and cooking facilities.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any building or premises, or part thereof,
which may be lawfully viewed by the public, or any member thereof, from a
sidewalk, street, alleyway, parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring
premises.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are exposed
to public view or the elements and the open space of any premises not
occupied by any building.
also responsible therefor and in violation thereof. All parts of the
premises under control of an occupant shall be kept in a clean, sanitary
and safe condition by the occupant, and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any act which would render any part of the entire building
and premises unclean, unsanitary, unsafe or which would prevent the
owner or operator from performing any duty required hereunder.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this code, the respective obligations and responsibilities of
the owner and operator on one hand, and the occupant on the other,
shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and
between any of the aforesaid or between them and their parties.
§ 177-5 NORWOOD CODE § 177-6
174:252
GARBAGE — Animal, vegetable, and other organic waste, resulting from
handling, preparing, cooling and consumption of food or other products.38
(See also definitions of "refuse" and "rubbish" in this section.)
HABITABLE ROOM — A room occupied by one or more persons for living,
eating or sleeping, but not including bathrooms, laundries, serving and
storage pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, boiler and utility
rooms or spaces that are not used frequently or for an extended period of
time or areas that have less than 50 square feet of floor area.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
or within the premises.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing two or more dwelling
units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nonresidential uses.
The applicable provisions for residential and nonresidential buildings shall
control.
NONRESIDENTIAL — Refers only to the nondwelling use of a mixedoccupancy
building.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Person or persons, including the owner having actual
possession of, and using a building or any part thereof.
OPERATOR — Person who has charge, care or control of a building or
premises, or any part thereof, whether acting with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, administrator,
Any public nuisance known at common law or in law or equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey
or the ordinances of the borough.
A.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons, including but not limited to any inadequately protected well,
shaft, basement or excavation; abandoned motor vehicle; structurally
unsound fence, wall or building; lumber, trash, debris or vegetation,
such as poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac or ragweed; or other
condition which is detrimental to the safety or health of persons as well
as anything which might constitute an attractive nuisance to children.
B.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing or heating facilities in
violation of this code.
C.
D. Fire hazards.
E. Electrical hazards.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Solid Waste, Art. I, Garbage and Refuse Disposal.
§ 177-6 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-6
174:253
trustee, receiver or guardian of an estate or as a mortgagee in possession
regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a
lessee, sublessee or assignee of all or any part of the building shall be
deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility
over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by such lessee.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land and any buildings located thereon,
including but not limited to sidewalks, yards and parking areas.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including but not limited to brush, weeds, broken glass, debris of
any description, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned motor vehicles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RESIDENTIAL — Any use or improvement, in whole or in part, of any
premises for or as a dwelling unit or dwelling units, whether or not that use
or improvement is permitted by this Code in the zoning district in which the
premises are located.[Added 8-9-2017 by Ord. No. 17:10]
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, excluding
garbage but including liquid commercial and industrial waste.
WEATHERING — The deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure
to the elements.
§ 177-7. Maintenance of exterior premises.
A. All of the provisions contained in this section shall be applicable to both
residential and nonresidential premises.
B. Exterior of premises nuisances and hazards. The exterior of any
premises shall be kept free of refuse, nuisances and any hazards to the
safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the
premises and free of unsanitary conditions. It shall be the duty of the
owner or operator to keep the premises free of or remove, abate and
correct the premises against such conditions, which include, but are not
limited to the following:
(1) Defective chimneys and flue and vent attachments thereto.
Chimney and flue and vent attachments thereto, if used, shall be
maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained
as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were
designed and constructed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and other
draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop
the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally
safe, durable, smoketight and capable of withstanding the
temperature and action of flue gases.
(2) Unsafe exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire
escapes. In all buildings other than one family dwellings, exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and kept
structurally sound, in good repair, well painted or otherwise
§ 177-6 NORWOOD CODE § 177-7
174:254
provided with a protective treatment to prevent deterioration and
kept free from defects.
(3) Overhangings. Loose, overhanging and projection objects which by
reason of location above ground level constitute dangers to persons
in the vicinity thereof.
(4) Dangerous unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations, breaks,
projections, icy conditions, uncleared snow, obstructions and
excretion of pets or other animals on paths, sidewalks, driveways,
parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the exterior of the
premises which are accessible to and used by persons having
access to such premises.
(5) Recurring accumulation of storm waste. Adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained in accordance with applicable
borough ordinances to eliminate recurrent accumulations of
stormwater.
(6) Sources of infestation.
(7) Defective walls. Foundation walls and retaining walls shall be kept
structurally sound, free from defects and damage and capable of
sustaining imposed loads safely.
(8) Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its
accompanying structural members which extend over any street,
sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in
good repair and shall be so maintained as to not constitute a
nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event any such awning or
marquee is not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting members, be
removed forthwith. Where such awning or marquee is exposed to
public view, it shall be maintained in good condition and shall not
show evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment of an awning, marquee or its accompanying
structural members on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the
public domain.
(9) Sidewalks, driveways, etc. All, sidewalks, driveways, walkways and
entrance stairways shall be maintained in a safe condition, such as
will not constitute a hazard to persons using the premises.
(10)Waterways and brooks, etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage
ditches and swales, to the extent that the same are located on or
immediately adjacent to the premises, shall be maintained free of
obstructions which would impede the natural flow of water.
C. Repair and maintenance of exterior of premises. The exterior of every
building or accessory building (including fences) shall be maintained in
good repair. They shall be maintained free of conditions reflective of
§ 177-7 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-7
174:255
§ 177-8. General sanitation and safety.
extensive deterioration and subnormal maintenance characterized by
such conditions as numerous broken panes of glass; openings
unprotected by doors or windows; loose or missing siding or roof
coverings affecting 25% or more of the outside surface; numerous
instances of rotting wood or crumbling stones or bricks; defective
or inoperable leaders or gutters which permit water damage to the
property, to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety
and fire hazards eliminated and the general welfare of the
neighborhood protected.
D. Site plan. Whenever premises have been developed after application to
a board of the borough wherein a site plan application has been
approved, the owner shall be responsible for the continuing
maintenance of the premises, including but not limited to landscaping
and grading as per the approved site plan.
E. Removal of refuse. If the owner or operator of any lands or buildings in
the borough shall fail or neglect to remove refuse within 10 days after
notice to remove same, in the manner and within the time provided, the
public officer may, in addition to such other remedies provided herein,
cause same to be removed by the borough. In such cases, the public
officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Mayor and Council, which
shall examine the certificate and, if found correct and reasonable, shall
by resolution approve the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
said lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner as are taxes.
A. All residential and nonresidential buildings and premises. All parts of
all premises shall be kept free of nuisances or other conditions which
may constitute health, safety or fire hazards. The owner, operator or
occupant of every building and its premises shall, along with other
responsibilities necessary to attain these objectives:
(1) Maintain all parts of premises to prevent infestation.
(2) Not store on the premises flammable, combustible or explosive
materials unless they are of a type approved for storage by
municipal regulations and then only in such quantities and in such
fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the Fire
Marshal.
(3) Provide at least one twenty-gallon watertight receptacle with a
tight-fitting cover or equivalent in total gallonage for each dwelling
unit for the temporary storage of garbage. These containers shall
be placed or kept on the property not nearer to the street than the
§ 177-7 NORWOOD CODE § 177-8
174:256
§ 177-9. Mixed-occupancy buildings and premises.
In addition to the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter, which
standards and regulations are incorporated by reference in this section
as if set forth at length herein, the following additional standards and
regulations shall apply to mixed-occupancy buildings and premises:
building line, accessible for private or municipal collection.
Privately collected garbage shall be collected at least twice a week.
(4) Place rubbish and receptacles containing same in areas designated
by the public officer of the Department of Public Works for
collection. Rubbish shall not be placed in such designated areas
earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day prior to scheduled collections, and
the empty receptacles shall be removed to areas not exposed to
public view within 12 hours after the collection. Under unusual
circumstances, such as the need to move heavy items when
required personnel are available, certain items may be placed in
the designated area earlier than the time prescribed above. The
frequency and duration of such exceptions shall be kept to a
minimum, and repeated abuse of this exception will be considered
a violation.
B. No person, including any owner, occupant, visitor, licensee, social or
business guest, contractor, or trespasser, may park or store any motor
vehicle on any part of a residential premises that is not paved or
improved with gravel or pavers (except grass pavers) suitable for motor
vehicle parking areas, including all unimproved front, side, and rear
yards, driveways, or parking areas. [Added 8-9-2017 by Ord. No.
17:10]
A. Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location exposed to public view equipment and
materials relating to commercial or business uses.
B. Standards of maintenance. The exterior of mixed-occupancy buildings
and premises shall be maintained so that the appearance thereof shall
not constitute a blighting effect upon the neighboring properties nor an
element leading to a progressive deterioration and downgrading of
neighboring properties.
C. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by borough ordinance and regulated by the Sign
Ordinance39 or other regulations shall be maintained in good repair.
Any sign or billboard which has weathered excessively or faded or the
paint on which has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with its
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of good
repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning, for provisions on signs.
§ 177-8 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-9
174:257
§ 177-10. Certificates of occupancy; inspection certificates.
§ 177-11. Administration. [Amended by Ord. No. 96-0-22]
shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. All
campaign or garage sale signs shall be removed after the event or sale.
D. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of
marks and foreign substances. Except when used for display purposes,
no materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window areas
exposed to public view unless such areas are first screened by drapes,
venetian blinds or other means of making the windows opaque. All
screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and attractive
manner and in a good state of repair.
E. Repair and painting of exteriors of buildings. All storefronts and the
exteriors of all mixed-occupancy buildings shall be kept in good repair,
painted where required or otherwise provided with protective
treatment sufficient to prevent deterioration and shall not constitute a
safety hazard or nuisance.
A. Certificates. Certificates of occupancy and inspections in connection
therewith shall be governed by Section 98-5 of this Code.
B. Occupancy pending repairs.
(1) If in the opinion of the public officer, only minor violations are
found to exist after inspection, a new occupant may be permitted to
conditionally occupy the premises. Where a premises is occupied
prior to the issuance of an inspection certificate, the owner or
operator shall make required repairs within 15 days after certified
mailing or delivery of written notification from the public officer.
Such occupancy, however, shall at all times be subject to the
issuance of the inspection certificate.
(2) Where occupancy has been permitted under this provision, the
owner or operator shall obtain a signed statement from the
occupant acknowledging that such occupancy is subject to an
inspection certificate and granting permission to the public officer
to enter into the premises at a later date for the purpose of
reinspection.
A. Public officer. The Borough Council shall designate the public officer
who shall serve for a term of one year to exercise the powers prescribed
by this code and by the laws of the state. The public officer may appoint
or designate such other public officials or employees of the borough or
appropriate experts who have such background and training necessary
to perform such of his functions and powers under this code as he
deems necessary for its enforcement. The public officer may be the
Construction Official.
§ 177-9 NORWOOD CODE § 177-11
174:258
B. Inspections. All nonresidential premises within the borough covered by
this code shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the public
officer to determine the condition thereof in order that he may perform
his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the persons occupying
the same and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the public officer is hereby authorized to enter, with the
express consent of the occupant, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all such premises; provided, however, that entries are made in
such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession.
C. Search warrant. If the public officer is denied the right of inspection he
may, upon affidavit establishing good cause, apply to the Municipal
Court or such other court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant
to permit entry into the premises in question.
D. Notice and hearing where violation discovered.
(1) Where a violation of this code is found to exist or upon petition of at
least five borough residents and investigation by the public officer,
a written notice from the public officer shall be served on the
person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. Notice of
violations of property maintenance, building, or other property
codes for any property declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to
this chapter will be given to a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the
procedures of § 177-15 of this Code. [Amended 12-30-2015 by
Ord. No. 15:19]
(2) The notice shall specify the violation or violations committed, what
must be done to correct or abate same, a reasonable period of time
not to exceed 30 days to make such corrections, the right of the
person served to request a hearing and that the notice shall
become an order of the public officer 10 days after the service
unless a hearing is requested pursuant to this section. The thirtyday
time limit set forth herein shall not be effective where specific
times limits are set forth in other sections of this code.
(3) Notice may be served personally on an owner, operator or occupant
or agent for the owner or operator as set forth in § 177-6 of this
chapter. Service may also be made by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the person or by posting
the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the
owner or lessor cannot otherwise be served, pursuant to § 177-6.
Where the notice is directed to an occupant, service may also be
made by posting same on the door or entrance to the area he
occupies.
(4) Ten days from the date of service of a notice, the notice shall
constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice
requests a hearing thereon and serves a written request within the
ten-day period in person or by mail on the public officer. Such
§ 177-11 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-11
174:259
request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons
on which the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters
contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed at the
hearing. The public officer, upon receipt of the request, shall within
30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved
set the matter down for hearing.
(5) Hearing.
(a) At any hearing required hereunder the Municipal Court of
Norwood shall conduct and decide issues presented to it. Said
hearing shall be conducted by the Judge of the Municipal Court
of Norwood.
(b) The Municipal Court Judge shall be vested with all the powers
provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses and
parties in interest by issuance and service of a subpoena, to
require by subpoena the production of books, records or other
documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to
matters to be determined by it and to enforce any such
subpoena or secure any other for the enforcement of any such
subpoena as provided by law. A determination shall be made
within 10 days from the completion of the hearing. The Judge
of the Municipal Court shall issue an order either
incorporating the determinations and directions contained in
the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice.
(6) The Judge of the Municipal Court, where necessary, may extend the
time for correction or abatement of the violations for an additional
period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital
improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the
time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90
days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
(7) Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such
a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless
abated without delay, the public officer may either abate the
violation or condition immediately or order the owner, operator or
occupant to abate the violation or condition within a period of time
not to exceed three days, and upon failure to do so, the public
officer shall abate the condition immediately thereafter.
(8) Where abatement of any nuisance, as nuisance is defined herein,
correction of a defect in the premises or the maintenance of the
premises in a proper condition so as to comply with the
requirements of any municipal ordinances or state law applicable
thereto requires expending borough moneys therefor, the public
officer shall present a report of the work proposed to be done to
accomplish the foregoing, or in the event of an immediate threat to
life and limb as set forth in Subsection D(7) of this section, the work
to be done shall be presented to the Mayor and Council with the
§ 177-11 NORWOOD CODE § 177-11
174:260
§ 177-12. Additional remedies.
cost, or an estimate of the cost thereof, as the case may be, along
with a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the public officer
to secure compliance, including notices served upon the owners,
operators, lessors or agents, as the case may be, hearings and
order of the Municipal Court Judge with reference thereto. The
Mayor and Council may thereupon by resolution authorize the
abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work
necessary to place the premises in proper condition and in
compliance with ordinances of the borough and laws of the state.
The public officer may thereafter proceed to have the work
performed in accordance with said resolution at borough expense
not to exceed the amount specified in the resolution, and shall
upon completion thereof submit a report of moneys expended and
costs to the Mayor and Council. After review of the same, Mayor
and Council may approve said expenses and cost, and they shall
become a lien against said premises and shall be added to and
become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as are
taxes. A copy of the resolution approving said expenses and cost
shall be certified by the Mayor and Council and filed with the Tax
Collector, and a copy of this report and resolution shall be sent by
certified mail to the owner.
A. Public officer may act as custodian. In addition to other remedies
provided herein where the public officer has issued an order requiring
the abatement of the nuisance, correction of a defective condition or
the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition so as to conform
to the ordinances of the borough and laws of the state applicable
thereto, and the owner, operator, lessor or agent charged with the
premises has failed to comply therewith, the public officer may, for the
purposes of correcting any of the foregoing conditions, act as custodian
of any building or structure and may, as custodian, enter into and take
care of the premises and supervise the abatement of any nuisance,
correction or defect or placing of the premises in compliance with
municipal ordinances and state laws. For the performance of the duties
of custodian, the borough shall receive for the services from the owner,
operator and lessor of the premises compensation approved by the
Mayor and Council not exceeding $5 a day per dwelling unit or $30 a
week per dwelling unit in the premises, whichever is less, as costs and
expenses, the same to be certified and collected as provided § 177-11D
hereof.
B. Appointment of receiver. Where the owner, operator or lessor of the
building violates this code or any other municipal ordinance pertaining
to said structure or fails to abate any violation of this code, or violates
an order of the public officer with respect thereto, the Borough
Attorney, upon resolution duly approved by the Mayor and Council,
§ 177-11 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-12
174:261
§ 177-13. Certificate of necessity.
shall commence action in the Superior Court seeking appointment of
the public officer as receiver ex officio of the rents and income from
said property. Said rents and income shall be collected by the receiver
and shall be expended and allocated to secure compliance with the
ordinances of the borough and laws of the state, as set forth in the order
of the public officer; and be utilized to defray such costs and expenses
of the receivership as may be adjudged by the Superior Court; and be
applied towards payment to the borough of any fines or penalties with
costs which may have been imposed on the owner, operator or lessor
for violation of the ordinances of the borough and which have remained
unpaid.
C. Additional powers. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 177-11D hereof,
the public officer may, at his election, prosecute violations of any
section of this code, involving public health or safety, by filing a
complaint with the Municipal Court of the borough.
A. Who may apply. Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to
make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply
with this code without having right of access to the building or premises
through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or under his
control, and where right of access has been refused the owner, operator
or occupant, or where the owner or person responsible for granting
permission cannot be found or located, then upon filing an affidavit
setting forth the facts with the public officer, the public officer shall
serve a five-day written notice of hearing in accordance with the
provisions for service contained in this code upon the owner, operator
or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by the application.
B. Hearing. On the day fixed for hearing, the public officer shall provide
opportunity for the owner, operator or occupant of the adjoining
property or properties to state why access shall not be granted across
such adjoining properties.
C. Issuance; bonds. If the public officer determines that access is
necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or improvements
necessary for compliance with this code, then the public officer shall
issue a certificate of necessity setting forth therein the person or
persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be
necessary to protect the adjoining property, reasonable time limits
during which such certificate shall operate, precautions to be taken to
avoid damage and, where the public officer deems proper, that a bond
be procured at the expense, if any, of the person seeking access to
secure the adjoining property against damage to persons or property
arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed in
amount $25,000, and the amount set shall take into consideration the
extent, nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the
improvement on the premises affected and the potential risk of damage
thereto. The bond shall be filed with the public officer.
§ 177-12 NORWOOD CODE § 177-13
174:262
§ 177-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, plus any cost to the
borough for enforcement of this chapter, or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this code and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 177-15. Creditor responsibility for properties in foreclosure.
[Added 12-30-2015 by Ord. No. 15:19]
D. Procedure where access refused. Any refusal to comply with this
section or any interference with access to premises pursuant to a
certificate issued hereunder shall be a violation of this code and, in
addition to the penalties provided hereunder, the public officer may,
upon affidavit, apply to the Municipal Court Judge for a warrant under
the procedure set forth in the application section of this code
authorizing access to the premises under appropriate conditions and
circumstances as provided above.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Public Laws of 2014, Chapter 35,
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s, a creditor filing a summons and complaint to
foreclose a lien on a vacant and abandoned residential property in the
Borough will be responsible for the care, maintenance, security and
upkeep of the exterior of the residential property in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, whether the filing of the summons and
complaint is made before or after the determination that the property is
vacant and abandoned.
B. If the public officer or other authorized municipal official determines
that a creditor obligated to care for, maintain, secure and keep up a
vacant and abandoned property has failed to comply with the provisions
of § 177-15A, the public officer or other authorized municipal official
will issue a notice of violation to the creditor that has filed a summons
and complaint to foreclose the lien on the property in question. The
notice will require the creditor to correct the violation within 30 days of
receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the
violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The
issuance of this notice will constitute evidence that a property is vacant
and abandoned for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
C. An out-of-state creditor will include the full name and contact
information of its in-state representative or agent in the notice required
to be provided to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Paragraph (1) of
Subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
D. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity violating any provision of this
section will, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in § 177-14 of
this Code, except that:
§ 177-13 PENALTIES AND FINES § 177-15
174:263
Chapter 181
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 29.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 110.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177.
(1) A creditor responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and
upkeep of property under this section cited in a notice issued
pursuant to § 177-15B will be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each
day of the violation as found by a court of competent jurisdiction;
and
(2) An out-of-state creditor found by a court of competent jurisdiction
to have violated § 177-15C is subject to a fine of $2,500 for each
day of the violation commencing on the day after the ten-day period
set forth in Paragraph (1) of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 with respect to
notifying the Municipal Clerk that an action to foreclose the lien on
the property has been filed.
§ 177-15 NORWOOD CODE § 177-15
174:264
ARTICLE I
Registration and Inspection
§ 181-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the annual registration of
all nonowner-occupied single-family structures, multifamily structures and
rental units.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
These terms will have the following meanings when used in this chapter:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, rooms, suite, or portion thereof, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more
persons.
ILLEGAL DWELLING UNIT — A residential dwelling unit in a structure with
dwelling units in excess of the number permitted by the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law.
MULTIFAMILY STRUCTURE — Any structure with more than one dwelling
unit.
OWNER OCCUPIED — Property that is the principal residence of the
owner(s).
SINGLE-FAMILY STRUCTURE — A structure with one dwelling unit.
TWO-FAMILY STRUCTURE — A structure with two dwelling units.
§ 181-3. Registration.
§ 181-4. Inspection.
A. The owner(s) of all two-family structures and nonowner-occupied
single-family structures will register their structures annually with the
Borough Code Enforcement Bureau on forms specified by the Borough.
B. The owner(s) of all two-family structures and non-owner-occupied
single-family structures will register with the Borough Code
Enforcement Bureau whenever a change in occupancy occurs during
the annual registration period.
A. The owner(s) of all two-family structures and nonowner-occupied
single-family structures will submit to an annual inspection of the
structure by the Code Enforcement Official or his designee for
compliance with New Jersey State statutes and Borough ordinances.
B. The owner(s) of all two-family structures and nonowner-occupied
single-family structures will submit to an inspection by the Code
Enforcement Official or his designee whenever a change in occupancy
§ 181-1 PENALTIES AND FINES § 181-4
174:265
§ 181-5. Fees.
§ 181-6. Compliance.
The owner(s) of all two-family and nonowner-occupied single-family
structures will, no later than February 15 of each calendar year, submit
an annual registration with the Borough Code Enforcement Official or his
designee on form(s) specified by the Borough, and to schedule an annual
compliance inspection at that time, except for the calendar year 2013, when
the submission date is extended to July 31, 2013.
§ 181-7. Written notice.
occurs for compliance with New Jersey statutes and Borough
ordinances.
C. This section's provisions do not apply to any unit in a two-family
structure that is occupied by an owner of the property.
D. This section's provisions do not apply to owner(s) of any two-family
structures or nonowner-occupied single-family structures who receive
property tax deductions from the Borough for their status as senior
citizens and/or veterans.
A. The registration and reregistration fees are as follows:
(1) Nonowner-occupied residential structure: $50.
(2) Multifamily residential structure for each rental unit: $50.
B. The registration and reregistration fee will be waived for the calendar
year 2013 and in each following year for all senior citizens and veterans
who qualify for and have been approved for the New Jersey State Senior
Citizen's Property Tax Deduction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.43 or the
Veteran's Property Tax Deduction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.13.
C. After the calendar year 2013, any homeowner who would otherwise
qualify for waiver of the registration or reregistration fee under
Subsection B herein who fails to comply with the other requirements of
this chapter will forfeit the fee waiver permanently.
A. Any owner(s) who is not in compliance with this chapter will receive
written notice from the Borough Code Enforcement Official, or his
designee, to bring the property into compliance within 30 days of the
date of the notice.
B. Any owner(s) who fails to comply with the written notice of the Borough
Code Enforcement Official, or his designee, is subject to a municipal
summons and the penalties set forth in § 181-8 herein.
§ 181-4 NORWOOD CODE § 181-8
174:266
§ 181-8. Limitations.
Structures that are subject to registration under N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.
are exempt from compliance with this chapter.
§ 181-8 PENALTIES AND FINES § 181-8
174:267

ARTICLE II
Inspections and Penalties
§ 181-9. Inspections upon complaint.
Upon receiving a complaint pertaining to illegal housing at a structure
that has been registered under the provisions of this chapter, the Borough
Code Enforcement Official is authorized and permitted to again inspect the
property for violations.
§ 181-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter will be subject to a
fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $2,000 for the first
offense, unless the violation is addressed and corrected within 10 days
of the discovery of the violation, in which case the fine may be reduced
to $500 for the cost of the required inspection and reinspection, and
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days for each separate
violation.
B. In addition to the penalties in § 181-10A, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter will be liable to any displaced tenant or
occupant of an illegal dwelling unit for the costs of relocation up to an
amount equal to six times the monthly rental that would have been paid
by the displaced person pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g(a), and will be
liable for a fine to be paid to the municipality of up to an amount equal
to six times the monthly rental paid that would have been paid by the
displaced person, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g(c) or a minimum of
$1,500.
C. For second and subsequent violations for an illegal dwelling unit, the
court may impose a fine equal to three times the amount of the fine
assessed for the prior violation, in an amount not to exceed $2,000 per
day.
§ 181-9 PENALTIES AND FINES § 181-10
174:269
Chapter 185
SATELLITE ANTENNAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Satellite Antennas
Ordinance of the Borough of Norwood."
§ 185-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Norwood to provide rules, regulations, standards and procedures for the
construction, placement and operation of satellite antennas within the
Borough of Norwood, the regulation of which is necessary and essential to
promote the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics and to ensure the
ordinary development of the municipality.
§ 185-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the purpose
of sending or receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar
signals with the exception of conventional television, radio and amateur
radio antennas.
§ 185-4. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Construction
Code Official of the Borough of Norwood.
§ 185-5. Submission of plan.
A. Any property owner shall, prior to the placement of a satellite antenna,
submit to the Construction Code Official a plan showing the size of the
satellite antenna, the proposed location of the same on the subject
premises and such other information as may be required herein.
B. The Construction Code Official shall review said plan and render a
decision within 20 days of the submission of said plan or within such
further time as may be consented to by the property owner.
§ 181-10 NORWOOD CODE § 185-6
185:270
§ 185-6. Contents of plan.
The plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include and
show the following information:
§ 185-7. Design standards.
A. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name,
address and the title of the person preparing the plan and
accompanying data, the date of preparation and the dates of each
revision where applicable.
B. An appropriate place for the signature of the Construction Code
Official.
C. The lot and block numbers of the lots from the borough tax maps and
the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
D. The location, names and pavement and right-of-way widths of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the
property lines of all abutting properties, together with the names and
addresses as disclosed on the borough Tax Map and tax rolls as of the
date of the application, and the location of existing buildings within 200
feet of the site in question.
E. All existing buildings and structures and all necessary buildings or
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and
finished grade elevations at all corners.
F. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscaped areas and
trees of six-inch caliper on the site affected by the proposed apparatus.
G. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening for noise, glare
and aesthetics.
H. Any and all information necessary to meet any of the requirements of
this chapter not listed above.
A. Satellite dishes 30 inches or less in diameter:
(1) May be located in any zone.
(2) May be roof-mounted or ground-mounted.
(3) If roof-mounted, may not project above a peaked roof or more than
24 inches above a flat roof.
(4) If ground-mounted, may be located only in a rear yard and must
comply with all setback requirements for accessory buildings,
depending on zone and may not be located in any buffer area.
§ 185-6 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 185-7
185:271
(5) If ground-mounted, the antenna shall be located and screened to
minimize motor noise and visibility from street and adjacent
properties.
(6) The antenna shall be designed and shall be used only by residents
of the main building of the subject premises. Any connection,
electrical or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall be deemed a
violation of the yard and setback requirements of Chapter 233,
Zoning.
B. Satellite dishes more than 30 inches but less than eight feet in
diameter:
(1) May be located in all zones subject to site plan approval and
conditional use permit.
(2) May be ground-mounted only, in a pit or berm with screening.
(3) May be located only in a rear yard area and must meet setback
requirements for accessory buildings within the particular zone.
(4) May not be located in a buffer area and may not be located within
25 feet of the property line in any residential zone.
(5) The bottom of the satellite dish may not be higher than 13 inches
above the ground, where located.
(6) The antennas shall be designed and shall be used only by residents
of the main building of the subject premises. Any connection,
electrical or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall be deemed a
violation of the setback provisions hereof.
C. Satellite dishes eight feet to 23 feet in diameter:
(1) May be permitted in LI, LA or LA-5 zones only, subject to site plan
approval and conditional use permit.
(2) May be ground-mounted only, in pit or berm with screening.
(3) May be located only in a rear yard area and must meet setbacks for
accessory buildings in said zone and may not be located in a buffer
area.
(4) The bottom of the satellite dish may be no higher than 13 inches
from the ground, where located.
D. Any satellite dish in excess of 23 feet in diameter is prohibited.
E. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsections A through D shall not apply
to the following:
(1) Public law enforcement and public safety apparatus.
(2) Installations mounted within a fully enclosed building.
§ 185-7 NORWOOD CODE § 185-8
185:272
§ 185-8. Fee; deposit.
The application fee for a permit to install a satellite antenna shall be $50.
In addition, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $500 to cover the costs
of review services provided by the Construction Code Official, Borough
Engineer, Borough Attorney, Planning Board Attorney, Zoning Board
Attorney or other borough personnel. The Borough Clerk shall place the
deposit in a trust account in the name of the applicant and shall withdraw
from the account all disbursements for said review services. Any unused
portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the cost of review
services exceeds the amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds shall be
deposited before any permit shall be issued.
§ 185-9. Enforcement official.
The Construction Code Official of the Borough of Norwood is hereby
designated as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms
of this chapter. All complaints or alleged violation of any terms of this
chapter shall be submitted in writing to said Construction Code Official.
§ 185-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for each and
every violation thereof and for each and every day that said violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 per
violation or 90 days in jail, or both.
Chapter 189
SEWERS
§ 185-8 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 185-10
185:273

ARTICLE I
Agreement With Bergen County Sewer Authority
[Adopted as Sec. 14-1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 189-1. Findings of fact.
Pursuant to an Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey approved
April 23, 1946, constituting Chapter 123 of the Laws of 1946 (hereinafter
with the acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto referred to as the
"Act"40), a sewerage district (hereinafter referred to as the "Sewer District")
was established by resolution of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the
County of Bergen, New Jersey, adopted February 19, 1947. Pursuant to
the Act, the Bergen County Sewer Authority (hereinafter referred to as
the "Authority") was erected for the Sewer District and is a body politic
and corporate with perpetual succession as a government instrumentality.
Further, pursuant to the Act, an agreement with the Authority for the
construction by the Authority of the Northern Valley Extension and for the
disposal of sewage arising within or collected or caused by the Boroughs of
Closter, Demarest, Harrington Park, Haworth, Northvale and Norwood and
the Township of Riverdale, in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey
(hereinafter referred to as the "Northern Valley municipalities"), has been
submitted to the Northern Valley municipalities, which agreement is more
particularly set forth in § 189-3. It appears after due consideration that
it is in the best interest of the Borough of Norwood to enter into such
agreement.
§ 189-2. Determination of advantages of use.
The Mayor and Borough Council has ascertained and does hereby
determine that it is situate within the Sewer District of the Authority, that
upon completion of the Northern Valley Extension the Borough can thereby
advantageously use the facilities, existing and proposed, of the district
sewer system of the Authority and that it will be economically and in other
respects advantageous to have sewage and other wastes collected, treated
and disposed of by the Authority on and pursuant to the terms of the
agreement authorized by this article.
§ 189-3. Authorization to enter into agreement.
The Borough shall enter into an agreement with the Authority providing for
and relating to the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage and other
wastes and the cost and expense thereof and for the construction of the
Northern Valley Extension on the terms and conditions and substantially in
the forms set forth in this article, and the Mayor shall be and is authorized
and directed on behalf of the Borough to execute the agreement under the
Corporate Seal of the Borough which shall be affixed and attested by the
Borough Clerk and to deliver the same.
40.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1977, c. 384. See now N.J.S.A. 14B:1 et seq.
§ 189-1 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-4
185:275
§ 189-4. Form of agreements; terms and conditions.
The agreement shall be in substantially the following form, and the terms
and conditions thereof are hereby approved and specifically agreed to.41
41.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 189-4 NORWOOD CODE § 189-4
185:276
ARTICLE II
Sanitary Sewer System Rules and Regulations
[Adopted as Sec. 14-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 189-5. Purpose.
These rules and regulations are established to:
§ 189-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° centigrade, expressed in
mg/l (milligrams per liter) by weight.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Norwood.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine which must be added
to water or waste to produce a residual chlorine content of at least 0.1
milligrams per liter after a minimum contact time of 10 minutes.
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed Health Officer of the Borough or
his authorized deputy, inspector, agent or representative.
A. Require use of public sewers.
B. Prohibit the discharge of sewage and waste into the sewage system in
excess of its carrying capacity.
C. Prohibit or regulate the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes, which may cause maintenance and/or operating difficulties of
the sewers or other structures and equipment appurtenant to the
sewerage system.
D. Require the treatment before introduction to the sewage system of such
wastes as may otherwise impair the strength and/or the durability of
structures appurtenant to the system by direct or indirect chemical
action or which may adversely affect normal treatment processes at
sewage treatment plants.
E. Establish the characteristics of the sewage and industrial wastes that
are prohibited from discharge into the public sewers.
F. Establish the design standards, materials and methods of construction
for connecting to the public sewer.
G. Establish the fees for permit application and connection to the public
sewer.
§ 189-5 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-6
185:277
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITY — Includes any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or any other facility, located on the premises,
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
LICENSED PLUMBER — Either an individual, partnership or corporation to
whom the Board of Health of the Borough or the State of New Jersey has
issued a license to practice plumbing in the Borough during the period when
such license is valid.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter solution.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — A sanitary sewer system/works owned and/or
controlled by the Borough.
SEWAGE — Wastewater or water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. Sewage shall be
further classified as follows:
A. DOMESTIC OR SANITARY SEWAGE -- The solid and liquid waste from
toilet and lavatory fixtures, kitchens, laundries, bathtubs, shower baths
or equivalent plumbing fixtures as discharged from dwellings, business
and industrial buildings.
B. INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE OR WASTES -- Includes the water-carried
wastes or any industrial process as distinct from domestic or sanitary
sewage. All substances carried in industrial wastes, whether dissolved,
in suspension or mechanically carried by water shall be considered as
industrial wastes.
C. STORMWATER -- Includes the runoff or discharge of rain and melted
snow or other water from roofs, surfaces of public or private lands,
swimming pools or elsewhere. Stormwater also shall include subsoil
drainage as defined in Subsection D below.
D. SUBSOIL DRAINAGE -- Includes water from the soil percolating into
subsoil drains and through foundation walls, basement floors or
underground pipes.
E. COOLING WATER -- Includes the wastewater from air-conditioning,
industrial cooling, condensing and hyraulically powered equipment or
similar apparatus.
F. GARBAGE -- Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. "Properly
shredded garbage" shall mean garbage which has been shredded so
that no garbage particles will be greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
SEWER — The pipe or conduit, together with manholes and other
structures or equipment appurtenant thereto, provided to carry sewage
and waste liquids. Sewers shall be further classified as follows:
§ 189-6 NORWOOD CODE § 189-6
185:278
§ 189-7. General requirements for disposal of community wastes.
G. PUBLIC SEWER -- A trunk, main or lateral sewer up to and including
the Y-branch or tee provided for connection thereto, and to which all
owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled
by a public authority. The public sewer shall include the house
connection but does not include the property owner's connection.
H. SANITARY SEWER -- A sewer which carries only sanitary sewage and to
which stormwater, subsoil drainage and cooling water are not
intentionally admitted.
I. STORM SEWER OR DRAIN -- A pipeline carrying stormwater or subsoil
drainage.
J. BUILDING DRAIN -- That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building sanitary sewer system that receives the discharge from the
sanitary waste pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the property owner's connection, beginning five feet outside the inner
face of the building wall.
K. PROPERTY OWNER'S CONNECTION -- The extension from the building
drain to the house connection.
L. HOUSE CONNECTION -- The pipe laid incidental to the original
construction of a public sewer from said public sewer up to two feet
inside the curbline of the street, highway or similar location, and there
capped, having been provided and intended for extension and for use at
some time thereafter as part of a property owner's connection.
M. BUILDING SEWER (house sewer) -- That part of the horizontal piping of
a building drainage system extending from the building drain to its
connection with the public sewer and includes the property owner's
connection and the house connection.
SEWER INSPECTOR — The Borough Engineer or such other person,
authorized by the Borough to inspect sewer connections, as may be
designated by the governing body of the Borough to issue permits and
to review and approve the construction and installation of sewers and
sewer connections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article, the current Plumbing Code, and all pertinent ordinances of the
Borough or the Board of Health of the Borough.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste, American Public
Health Association.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 189-6 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-7
185:279
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
Borough or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Borough any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste, except in
approved sanitary landfill areas as licensed by the state and municipal
health departments.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet or storm sewer
within the Borough or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Borough
any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters.
C. Connection to the public system required.
(1) The owner of any house, building or other property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated
within the Borough and abutting on or having easement access or
right-of-way to any street, easement, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer shall be required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with
the public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this
article within one year after the date of official notice to do so from
the Mayor and Council of the Borough, provided that said public
sewer is within 300 feet of such owner's property line. If a public
health nuisance exists, the Norwood Board of Health shall issue a
notice to any property owner along the line of any sewer, that said
property owner shall connect his house within 60 days of said
notice. Any owner who fails to comply with said notice shall be
subject to a fine of $25, and an additional fine of $10 for each day of
delay after the expiration of the 60 days in which provisions of the
order or notice are not complied with. Such notice may be served
upon the owner personally, or by leaving it at his usual place of
abode with a member of his family above the age of 14 years, and in
the event of a corporate owner, by mailing a copy to the registered
agent of said corporation by certified mail. Said fine shall be
imposed, after hearing, by the Judge of the Municipal Court upon
the complaint of the Norwood Board of Health or its authorized
agent.
(2) If, after the expiration of said one year from the date of official
notification, or in the event of a finding by the Board of Health that
a public health nuisance exists, at the expiration of 60 days from
such notification, the owner has failed to install such toilet facilities
or to make such connections as set forth by the provisions of this
article, and after said owner has received official notice as provided
in Subsection C(1) above, the Borough or the Board of Health may
cause such installation or connection to be made under the
direction and supervision of the Sewer Inspector, and the Borough
may award one or more contracts for the making of such
improvements by a contractor selected by the Borough in
accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law. Before proceeding
§ 189-7 NORWOOD CODE § 189-7
185:280
§ 189-8. Individual sewage disposal facility.
to make any such installation or connection, the Borough or the
Board of Health shall notify the owner of such contemplated
installation or connection, which notice shall be served in the
manner provided in Subsection C(1) above. That notice shall
contain a description of the property affected as well as a
description of the required installation or connection and notice
that unless the installation or connection is completed in 30 days
after service thereof, the Borough will proceed to make such
installation or connection, or cause the same to be done pursuant
to the authority of this subsection. When any such toilet installation
or sewer connection shall be made by the Borough, a true and
accurate account of the cost of said installation or connection shall
be kept and apportioned to the property or properties affected,
and a true statement of such costs attested to by the Board of
Health or the Sewer Inspector shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk; and the Mayor and Council shall examine such statement
and if properly made shall confirm it and file it with the Tax
Collector of the Borough who shall record the installation of the
sewer connection in the same book in which he records sidewalk
or other assessments. Every such installation or sewer connection
which shall bear interest and penalties from the same time and
at the same rate as assessments for local improvements in the
Borough and from the time of confirmation shall be a first and
paramount lien against the respective property or properties so
connected with the sewer to the same extent as assessments for
local improvements and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner. In the event that such installation or sewer connection
is made following a finding by the Board of Health of a public
health nuisance and a sixty-day notice, the charges, interest and
penalties for such installations and connection shall be imposed
and collected independent of any penalties imposed under
Subsection C(1) above.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm drains or storm
sewers or to a natural outlet provided by the Borough Engineer.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged upon approval of the Board of Health and the Borough
Engineer to a storm drain or natural outlet.
A. Where a public or private sanitary sewer system is not available under
the provisions of § 189-7C, the building sewer shall be connected to a
septic tank or other individual sewage disposal facility complying with
the provisions of the current Plumbing Code of the Borough.
§ 189-7 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-8
185:281
§ 189-9. Acceptable and nonacceptable wastes.
B. At such time as a public or private sewer system becomes available to a
property served by an individual sewage disposal facility as provided in
§ 189-7C, a direct connection shall be made to the public or private
sewer system in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar individual sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
A. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into any public
sewer of the Borough any waste, substance or waters other than such
kinds or types of waters or water-carried wastes for the conveyance of
which the particular public sewer be intended, designed or provided,
including any overflow, effluent or cleanings from septic tank, cesspool,
subsurface drainage trench, bed or filter or other receptacles storing
organic waste.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°
Fahrenheit.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, paint and lacquers, alcohol, tar,
fuel oil, lubricating oils and greases or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solid, gas or vapor.
(4) Any garbage except properly shredded garbage.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, stones, sand, abrasives, mud, straw, shavings
or sawdust, metal, sticks, coarse rubbish, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, waste, rubber, animal guts or tissues, entrails, blood, hair,
hides, wood, paunch manure or any other substance likely to
damage, destroy or cause an obstruction to the flow in any sewer or
which may interfere with the proper operation of the sewage
works.
(6) Any water, sewage or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive or detrimental property
capable of causing damage or hazard to the sewage works
personnel.
§ 189-8 NORWOOD CODE § 189-9
185:282
(7) Waste shall contain no solids in solution which will precipitate
greater than 1,000 parts per million upon acidification (pH below
5.5), alkalization (pH above 8.5), oxidation or reduction.
(8) Color shall not exceed an intensity of 500 parts per million.
Samples shall be diluted with distilled water to bring the range
within 10 to 50 parts per million and judged on a basis of intensity
or transmission of light rather than true color (Platinum Cobalt
Standard).
(9) Solid or viscous substances which are capable of causing
obstruction in sewers or interference with the proper functioning
of the treatment processes.
(10)Wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those
normal to domestic sewage.
(11) All wastes containing corrosive matters or toxic or poisonous
substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the
sewage treatment process or create any hazard to sewers,
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works; and
specifically the following chemicals: arsenic and arsenicals; copper
and copper salts; mercury and mercurials; silver and silver
compounds; zinc; toxic dyes (organic or mineral); sulfanimides;
phenols and their derivatives; cresols; alcohols; aldehydes;
chlorinated hydrocarbons; chlorine in excess of 100 parts per
million; iodine; fluorine; bromine; all strong oxidizing agents, such
as peroxides, chromates, dichromates, permanganate, etc.;
compounds producing hydrogen sulphide or any other toxic,
inflammable or explosive gases, either upon acidification,
alkalization, reduction or oxidation; strong reducing agents, such
as nitrates, sulphites, sulphids, strong acids or strong alkalis.
(12)Radioactive wastes or materials may be discharged into a public
sewer if Conditions I and II below are met and if either Condition III
or IV is also met, provided that such discharges have also been
approved by any and all local, state and federal regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction.
(a) Condition I. Such wastes must be readily soluble or dispersible
in water.
(b) Condition II. The gross quantity of all radioactive materials so
discharged must not exceed one curie per year.
(c) Condition III. The daily quantity of radioactive material, if
diluted by the average daily volume of sewage discharge into
the system from the installation, must not exceed the maximum
concentrations allowed by regulations of the United States
Atomic Energy Commission.
§ 189-9 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-9
185:283
(d) Condition IV. Daily quantities of radioactive materials up to the
maximum permitted by the United States Atomic Energy
Commission may be so discharged, provided that the total
monthly quantities, if diluted by the average monthly volume of
sewage discharged from the installation, do not exceed the
concentrations permissible under Condition III above.
(13) Any noxious or malodorous gas, vapor or substance capable of
creating a public or private nuisance.
D. The admission in the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 350 milligrams per
liter by weight, or containing more than 350 milligrams per liter by
weight of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances
having the characteristics described in Subsection C, or having a
chlorine demand of more than 15 milligrams per liter by weight, or
having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily flow
of the Borough shall be subject to the review and approval of the Mayor
and Council or Board of Health. Where necessary, in the opinion of the
Mayor and Council or Board of Health, the owner shall provide at his
expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter, the suspended
solids to 350 milligrams per liter by weight, or reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided
for in Subsection C, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters and wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the approval of the Mayor and Council or Board of
Health and of any or all state regulatory agencies having jurisdiction,
and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing.
E. Pretreatment facilities.
(1) At all premises where wastes or substances specified to be
excluded from public sewers by these regulations are present and
liable to be discharged directly or indirectly into said sewers,
suitable and sufficient piping layouts, oil, grease, sand and
flammable waste traps or separators, screens, settling tanks,
diluting devices, storage or regulating chambers, treatment
cooling or other equipment and devices shall be provided. These
shall be maintained and properly operated by the owner of the
premises or his agent at his expense to ensure that no waste or
substance is discharged in violation of the requirements of these
regulations.
(2) Such facilities for pretreatment of wastes or waters discharged to
public sewers shall be approved by the Mayor and Council or the
Board of Health and by any or all state regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction. The Mayor and Council or the Board of Health or state
agencies may require of any owner installing pretreatment
§ 189-9 NORWOOD CODE § 189-9
185:284
facilities plans, specifications and a description of the facilities
which are proposed.
(3) On premises where any of the waste or substances as described in
this subsection are present, the Mayor and Council or the Board of
Health may require the owner to provide, operate and maintain, at
his (the owner's) expense, a sampling well or wells, flow-measuring
devices, manholes or other appurtenances, all readily accessible,
on the building sewer from said premises near the point where said
sewer connects to the public sewer. By means of sampling well or
wells, flow-measuring devices or other appurtenances, the owner,
occupants of said premises, Health Officer or any public officer
having legal jurisdiction may secure samples of or examine the
wastes being discharged into the public sewer for the purpose of
determining compliance or noncompliance with the requirements
of these regulations.
(4) The Mayor and Council or the Board of Health or their duly
authorized representatives shall have the right to enter and inspect
any part of the premises served by public sewers upon which there
may be reason to believe that violations of the requirements of
these regulations have occurred or are likely to occur for the
purpose of ascertaining the facts as to such violation or suspected
violation or of obtaining samples of wastes or of inspecting flowmeasuring
devices or treatment facilities provided to prevent
prohibited discharges.
F. Determination of wastewater characteristics.
(1) When required by the Mayor and Council or Board of Health, the
owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Mayor and Council or the
Board of Health. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(2) All measurement tests and analysis of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Public Health Association, Inc., a copy of which is hereby adopted,
is annexed hereto and made a part hereof and incorporated herein
as fully as if set forth at length.
(3) Two copies of said Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater have been placed on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk and the Secretary of the Board of Health of the
§ 189-9 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-9
185:285
§ 189-10. Persons authorized to work in or on public sewers.
§ 189-11. Sewer owner's connection permits.
Borough, and said copies shall remain on file in said offices so long
as this section is in effect, for the use and examination of the public.
(4) All such measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole
provided for herein, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
A. Connections to, alterations to or repairs to any public sewer or the
manholes or other appurtenances of said sewer system in the Borough
shall not be made by any person without a permit issued by the Borough
or its duly authorized agent. However, a sewer connection permit shall
be issued to any person described by the provisions of § 189-11 below,
and in no event shall the issuance of such a permit be conditioned on
obtaining a plumbing license from the Board of Health of the Borough
or the State of New Jersey, and laying pipe inside property lines and the
work involved in connecting to an existing lateral sewer is hereby
declared to be work not requiring a licensed plumber.
B. No unauthorized person shall open the cover of, enter or alter any
manhole or other appurtenance of any public sewer, place or insert in
any public sewer or its appurtenances any foreign material which said
sewer or its appurtenances was not intended to receive, nor shall any
person damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper in any way with any
public sewer or its appurtenances. Any person violating this provision
of these regulations shall be subject to arrest under a charge of
disorderly conduct.
A. Application for sewer connection permits shall be made on forms
prescribed by the governing body and signed by the owner of the
property or his agent. Signing said application shall signify assent to all
of the rules and regulations and fee requirements for examination and
inspection by the Sewer Inspector. The prescribed forms shall be
obtained from the Sewer Inspector or by writing to the Borough Clerk.
B. The application shall state the location and character of the work to be
performed, the person who is to perform such work, the time limit for
completion of the work, the general character of the wastes which are
to be discharged into the sewer by the applicant and such other
information or specifications as may be deemed pertinent by the
governing body.
C. Sewer connection permits shall be issued by the Sewer Inspector or the
Borough Clerk upon the satisfactory completion of the application as
§ 189-9 NORWOOD CODE § 189-11
185:286
§ 189-12. Materials and workmanship for building sewers,
connections and appurtenances.
aforesaid and upon the payment of a connection inspection and
examination fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) For Class A permits (domestic or sanitary sewage as defined in
§ 189-6 herein):
(a) Four-inch diameter sewer: $10.
(b) Five-inch diameter sewer: $15.
(c) Six-inch diameter sewer: $20.
(d) Eight-inch diameter sewer: $40.
(e) Ten-inch diameter sewer: $60.
(2) For Class B permits (industrial sewage or wastes as defined in
§ 189-6 herein), for the additional mandatory review of the
application plans and specifications and inspection of the sewer
connection by the Borough Engineer, a deposit fee of $200 shall be
paid with the application to cover costs of such review and
inspection, any amount in excess of such costs to be refunded to the
applicant upon completion of final inspection.
D. Any permit may be suspended or terminated by the governing body on
written notice to the permittee for violation of the conditions of said
permit or for violation of the provisions of this article.
A. Old building sewers may be used and connected to a public sewer, when
serving new buildings, only when they are found on examination or test
by the Sewer Inspector to meet all requirements of this article. The
Sewer Inspector may require, where indicated, the uncovering of old
sewers for inspection. All property owner's connections shall be
installed and connected to the proper house connections as provided
for incidental to the original construction of a public sewer from said
public sewer up to two inches inside the curbline of the street, highway
or similar location. The location of said house connections is on record
with the Borough for use on making the property owner's connections.
B. A separate and independent connection shall be provided for every
building or premises, except that where one building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining courtyard, rightof-
way, easement or driveway, the connection from the front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
connection; provided, however, each building, premises or user shall
bear and be charged at its annual service charge.
C. Soil vent pipes.
§ 189-11 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-12
185:287
(1) No building shall be connected to a public sewer unless the
plumbing system of said building has a soil vent pipe extended to a
point above the roof.
(2) No running trap, main house trap or other device which might
prevent the free flow of air throughout the whole course of the
building sanitary system, building drain and said soil vent pipes will
be allowed.
D. The property owner's connection shall be cast-iron soil pipe or
asbestos-cement pipe. All pipe materials shall conform with the latest
standard specifications of the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM). Any part of the property owner's connection that is
located within 10 feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of
cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints
may be required by the Sewer Inspector where property owner's
connection is exposed to damage by tree roots, but in any case the pipe
shall be protected against damage by roots. If installed in filled or
unstable ground, the property owner's connection shall be of cast-iron
soil pipe, except that asbestos-cement pipe may be accepted if laid in a
suitable concrete encasement as approved by the Sewer Inspector. No
property owner's connection shall be located within five feet of a cellar
drain or ground drain unless pipe is of cast iron with leaded joints.
When a building connection or a building sewer lateral is installed in a
separate trench from the water service pipe and if said trench does not
traverse any driveway, filled area or other area that may be subject to
traffic settlement, jarring or other factors that may jeopardize the pipe
or its function, medium-weight cast-iron pipe shall be used. In all other
cases where cast-iron pipe is used, it must be extra-heavy weight.
Asbestos-cement pipe may be used, except where specifically
prohibited, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The pipe shall be installed upon a bed of gravel at least six inches in
depth, size of gravel not to exceed 3/4 inch.
(2) Said pipe when used at a depth of less than two feet or under
driveways at a depth of less than four feet must be encased in a sixinch
sheath of concrete.
(3) A flexible connection must be used when hooked up to a rigid end.
(4) Maximum length of pipe shall be 10 feet.
(5) All pipe must be properly braced every five feet.
(6) Joints shall be approved rubber O-ring seats.
(7) The pipe shall have a minimum length of five feet and be rated at a
crushing strength of 2,400 pounds.
E. The size and slope of the property owner's connection shall be subject
to the approval of the Mayor and Council or the Board of Health, but in
§ 189-12 NORWOOD CODE § 189-12
185:288
no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of all
pipe shall be not less than 1/4 inch per foot.
F. In all buildings where the building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sewage or its wastewaters carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
property owner's connection through a cast-iron force main. All
building drains whether force mains or gravity lines shall be of cast-iron
soil pipe from the inner face of the building wall to the point of
connection with the property owner's connection. All joints, including
that with the property owner's connection, shall be made gastight and
watertight by a method approved by the Sewer Inspector.
G. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Sewer Inspector.
Whenever possible, the property owner's connection shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. All property
owner's connections shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and fittings. The property owner's connection
shall be laid on firm, undisturbed soil or a suitable foundation; they
shall be located at a sufficient distance from other parallel pipes to
permit alterations or repairs to any such pipes or the sewer pipe
without disturbing the others; they shall be well cleaned inside after
laying, and they shall conform to all reasonable requirements for good
construction. Backfill placed over the property owner's connection shall
be done with hand tools to a depth of at least one foot over the pipe,
using fine earth free from stones and rubbish. Backfill shall be well and
carefully tamped over the sewer. The open ends of the property owner's
connections and building drains shall be kept closed or protected
during construction and during periods when work is suspended in
order to exclude from the public sewer all water or debris which might
obstruct, damage or otherwise be detrimental to the public sewer or
sewage works. Abandoned property owner's connections or drains shall
be likewise promptly closed and sealed off from any public sewer at the
expense of the owner of the property. Sewer lateral trenches shall not
be backfilled until inspected and approved by the Sewer Inspector. Said
approval for backfilling is not to be considered a guaranty by the Board
of Health or the Mayor and Council of the Borough that said house
connection will function satisfactorily. All pipe shall be so installed that
the legend cast thereon indicating the weight of the pipe may be seen
from above. The contractor or homeowner shall make every effort to
protect pavements, curbs, walks, trees, etc., from damage. In the event
of damage it shall be the responsibility and obligation of the
homeowner or contractor to repair same at his cost and in accordance
with Borough specifications.
H. All joints and connections for or between property owner's connections,
building drains shall be made gastight and watertight, to wit:
§ 189-12 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-12
185:289
(1) Cast-iron pipe lead joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp and filled with molten lead. Federal Specifications QQ-L-156,
not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and
caulking tight. No paint, varnish or rothe coating shall be permitted
on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and
approved.
(2) Sewer joints of cast-iron pipe or asbestos-cement pipe or other
approved pipe, or between such pipes and metals, may be made
with rubber or similar gaskets conforming to the latest ASTM
specifications.
(3) Any jointing materials, other than those described in Subsection
H(1) and (2), may be used only upon approval by the Mayor and
Council or the Board of Health.
I. When the property owner's connection trench has been excavated and
the property owner's connection repaired, altered or constructed and is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer, the Sewer
Inspector shall be notified during regular working hours not less than
24 hours in advance of the time when the connection to the public
sewer is planned. The connection of the property owner's connection to
the public sewer shall be made under the supervision of the Sewer
Inspector, and a record of all said connections shall be kept by him. A
written clearance to backfill shall be given the drain layer at this time. If
any person constructs, installs, alters or repairs any property owner's
connection or drain connecting with a public sewer in the Borough in
violation of any section of these regulations or fails to give adequate
notice to the Sewer Inspector for an inspection of the work, said Sewer
Inspector may order all or any portion of the work to be uncovered for
inspection and approval.
J. Cleanouts shall be provided at a maximum of not more than 60 feet
apart in length of the house connection. Cleanouts shall be the same
size as the house connection and brought up to the ground level and
fitted with a brass or lead ferrule. Cleanouts shall also be installed at
each change in horizontal direction of the building sewer greater than a
forty-five-degree angle.
K. All excavations for sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
L. The house connections shall be maintained by the Borough. The
property owner's connection shall be maintained by the property owner.
M. The installation of a public sewer system in any street, lane, road, etc.,
by the Borough or by other shall not imply Borough ownership or
acceptance of such streets, lanes, roads,. etc., unless and until they
otherwise comply with Borough requirements for acceptance,
ownership and maintenance.
§ 189-12 NORWOOD CODE § 189-12
185:290
§ 189-13. Enforcement.
The Sewer Inspector or any member of the Board of Health shall have
the right, upon identifying himself or themselves, to enter in and upon
any premises, at any reasonable hour of the day or night, to make any
reasonable examination or inspection required by this article to determine
whether any nuisance exists therein or thereon, or to determine whether
the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations thereunder are
being followed or obeyed.
§ 189-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 189-15. Relationship to Plumbing Code.
This article and ordinances supplementary thereto and amendatory thereof
shall be considered part of the Plumbing Code of the Board of Health of the
Borough and is annexed thereto and made a part thereof and incorporated
therein as fully as if set forth at length. All rules and regulations set forth in
the Plumbing Code, but not specifically set forth herein, shall be construed
as to be part of this article and shall regulate that which is not regulated
specifically herein. However, all parts of the Plumbing Code inconsistent
with this article shall be considered not applicable for the specific purposes
as set forth herein.
N. If any person, after proper order or direction from the Health Officer or
Sewer Inspector, fails to remedy any violation of this section or of any
other section of these regulations, the Mayor and Council or the Board
of Health may disconnect the property owner's connection on the
property where the violation exists from the public sewer and may
collect the cost of making such disconnection from any person or
persons responsible for, or willfully concerned in, or who profited by
such violation of the requirements of these regulations.
A. Any person who, either as owner, occupant, tenant, plumber or
otherwise, shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
article or the Plumbing Code shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 in the discretion of the Municipal Judge or other magistrate
before whom such conviction may be had, and in default of the payment
of such fine, any person, either as owner, occupant, tenant, plumber or
otherwise, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days in the discretion of the Municipal Judge or other
magistrate before whom such conviction may be had.
B. In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, the governing body
may in its discretion revoke, for any period not exceeding one year, the
license of any offender who shall be convicted of a second offense of
violating any of the provisions of this article.
§ 189-12 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-15
185:291

ARTICLE III
Treatment of Discharges by Restaurants
[Adopted 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97:18]
§ 189-16. Addition of bacterial culture formulation in sewer line.
§ 189-17. Records.
§ 189-18. Additional remedies.
In addition such other remedies, such as the general penalty provided by
this article, as may be provided by law for violation of this article, the
Borough may add such formulations to the sanitary sewer system servicing
the facilities regulated hereunder and charge the cost thereof as a sewer
user charge to any person violating this article.
A. The owner operator of all retail food establishment, catering
establishments, commercial food preparation facilities, meal processing
facilities and such other uses as may be designed by the Department of
Health which may result in the accumulation of oils, fats, cellulose,
starch, protein, grease and similar substances in the sanitary sewer
system of the Borough of Norwood shall add into each sanitary sewer
line servicing such use, a bacterial culture formulation approved by the
Health Department to control and treat such discharges.
B. The application of such bacteriological culture formulation shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications therefor unless
otherwise directed by the Health Department.
C. The Department of Health shall provide a list of approved
bacteriological culture formations upon request of the owner/operator
of any of the facilities requiring the use of such formulation. The owners
or operators of such facilities may submit additional formulations to the
Health Department for approval.
A. The owner or operator of such facilities shall maintain accurate records
of each application of such formulation, including the brand name,
specific type and manufacturer of such formulation, the dates of
application and the quantities applied. In addition, such persons shall
retain all invoices, bills of sale, receipts or other suitable evidence for
the purchase of such formulations. Such persons shall retain all such
records for three years.
B. All records required to be maintained hereunder shall be available for
inspection by the Health Department or its designee, upon request. In
addition, the Health Department may require the owner or operator
regulated by the provisions of this article to periodically submit such
records to the office of the Health Department.
§ 189-16 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-18
185:293

ARTICLE IV
Sump Pumps
[Adopted 7-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12:09]
§ 189-19. Intent and purpose.
The implementation of this article will aid the Borough by limiting and
reducing the inflow of water into the sanitary sewer systems. By prohibiting
the discharge of water from any roof, surface ground, sump pump,
swimming pool, and other sources of inflow into the Borough's sanitary
sewer system, the Borough is seeking to reduce costs as well as protect
against other damaging effects. The Borough's sanitary sewer system will
and has on occasions in the past been overloaded and flooded thereby
creating the potential to cause significant damage or threat to private
property as well as the system. Further, all water that enters the system
must be treated at the sewage treatment plant. Therefore, by reducing and
eliminating this inflow of "clean water" into the sanitary sewer system and
the subsequent unnecessary treatment, the expenses to the Borough and
the taxpayers will be reduced and will assist in protecting the health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 189-20. Prohibited discharges; amnesty; disconnection.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person or entity may discharge or cause to
be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, yard drainage,
yard fountain, swimming pool, pond overflow, or any other substance
other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer collection system,
whether by direct connection or by use of a sump pump. No person,
business or other entity may discharge or cause to be discharged any
hazardous substances into any public sewers.
B. Amnesty period for disconnection.
(1) On or before December 31, 2012, any person, business, or other
entity with a connection described above may voluntarily report the
connection to the Borough, so that the connection may be
remedied, with all permit, connection and inspection fees waived
by the Borough. This waiver of fees applies only to Borough fees,
and does not include the actual cost of remediation.
(2) After December 31, 2012, any person, business, or other entity with
a connection described above, failing to voluntarily report the
connection by December 31, 2012, will be liable for all permit fees,
inspection fees, and connection fees as required by the Borough, to
remedy the connection.
C. Manner of disconnection.
(1) Any property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a
property interest with a connection in violation of this § 189-20A, or
without a waiver pursuant to § 189-25, will immediately remove the
§ 189-19 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-20
185:295
§ 189-21. Inspections.
§ 189-22. Surcharge.
connection. If the connection is not removed within 120 calendar
days after receipt of a notice of violation, which has been
personally delivered or delivered via certified mail, the Borough
may impose a surcharge in the amount provided for in § 189-22.
(2) All disconnections of connections will be accomplished by a
complete and permanent method and performed in a competent
manner and approved and inspected by the Borough Building
Inspector, any Borough subcode inspector, Borough Fire Code
official and/or Borough Engineer. Any disconnection, plugging,
capping, rerouting, altering, or modifying must be done in
accordance with all applicable state and municipal buildings codes.
(3) Upon issuance of the surcharge pursuant to § 189-22, if the
property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property
interest remedies the connection, the property owner, tenant,
landlord, or other person with a property interest will call the
Borough's Building Department for an inspection of the connection
by the Borough's Building Inspector, a Borough subcode inspector,
Borough Fire Code official or Borough Engineer, and upon
certification that the connection has been remedied, the surcharge
shall be lifted, beginning the month following the inspection and
certification. If, however, on a subsequent and periodic inspection
for which a property was subject to the surcharge, a connection in
violation of this article exists, the surcharge amount as provided for
in § 189-22 will be calculated from the previous inspection date.
A. The Building Inspector, Borough Engineer, Borough Fire Code official,
and/or a Borough subcode inspector, as long as they display the proper
credentials and identification, are permitted to request entrance to any
property for the purpose of inspecting, observing, testing, and sampling
to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge
into the sanitary sewer system in accordance with this article.
B. Any owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest
who refuses entrance to the Building Inspector, Borough Engineer,
Borough Fire Code official, or Borough subcode inspector, will
immediately become subject to the monthly surcharge noted in
§ 189-22 of this article. The property will remain subject to the monthly
surcharge until an inspection is permitted to confirm compliance with
all terms of this article.
A. A surcharge of $50 per month is imposed upon every sewer utility bill to
property owners, tenants, landlords, or other persons with a property
interest for the following conditions:
(1) Connections not in compliance with this article; and
§ 189-20 NORWOOD CODE § 189-22
185:296
§ 189-23. Appeal of surcharge.
Any property owner who is assessed a surcharge pursuant to this article
may file an appeal to the Mayor and Council for the purposes of proving
compliance with this article.
§ 189-24. Municipal assistance.
The Borough may assist and provide guidance to any property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest in remedying any
alleged violation of this article as it involves a matter of public concern to
the resident's health, safety, and welfare of the community in remedying
the illicit connection. Except as specifically set forth in this article, all costs
associated with this article will be paid by the property owner, tenant,
landlord, or other person with a property interest.
§ 189-25. Waiver.
Any person, business, or other entity, who by inspections or voluntary
reporting is determined to be in violation of any section of this article,
may file with the Construction Code Official an application for a waiver
of the surcharge requirement of § 189-22, if they can prove that they
have exhausted all possible remedial measures. Remedial measures include,
but are not limited to, the installation of a dry well, the connection to
a storm sewer, and/or use of one's own property for discharge of the
water so long as such discharge does not adversely affect any neighboring
property owner. Upon certification of the Building Inspector and/or Borough
Engineer, the person, business, or other entity shall be granted such waiver,
but only for such time as to when a remedy becomes available. If such
remedy is made available by the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
person, business, or other entity that he/she/it shall comply with this article
within 120 days of receiving said notice. Failure to comply will result in the
imposition of a surcharge as per § 189-22.
§ 189-26. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Any person convicted of violating a prohibition of this article will be liable
for the penalties in Chapter 174. The Norwood Police and Building
Departments will enforce this article.
(2) Refusal to permit property inspection pursuant to § 189-21 of this
article.
B. If the surcharge is not paid and received by the Borough, a lien will be
imposed upon the property as per N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42.
C. The surcharge will remain a lien on the property and a charge under the
sewer utility bill until the Borough Building Inspector or Borough
Engineer certifies that the property owner, tenant, landlord, or other
person with a property interest is in full compliance with this article.
§ 189-22 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 189-26
185:297
Chapter 194
(RESERVED)
Chapter 198
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177.
§ 189-26 NORWOOD CODE § 189-26
185:298
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Disposal
[Adopted as Secs. 11-1, 11-2 and 11-3 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULKY WASTE — Type 13 waste, as defined by the current applicable New
Jersey statutes and/or regulations.[Added 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:03]
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Yard trimmings, rags, waste wood or cardboard
and other combustible waste solids of a nonvolatile or nonexplosive nature.
GARBAGE — Animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All solid waste material which will not burn.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Magazines and newspapers, corrugated
cardboard, glass, ferrous scrap, mixed paper, and aluminum scrap.[Added
3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:03]
REFUSE — Garbage and noncombustible or combustible waste solids.
SOLID WASTE — Solid waste types 10, 23, 25, and 27, as defined by
the current applicable New Jersey statutes and/or regulations. Solid waste
shall not consist of recyclable materials, hazardous waste, or solid animal
and vegetable wastes collected by swine producers licensed by the State
Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such waste to swine
on their own farms.[Added 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:03]
SUFFICIENT — As applied to refuse receptacles, at least one receptacle for
each family unit or other occupant of the premises for which the receptacles
are provided, and at least two receptacles for each restaurant, market, store
or similar business establishment where refuse accumulates.
SUITABLE — As applied to refuse receptacles, a watertight metal or plastic
receptacle with a tight-fitting cover which is so constructed as to prevent
the spilling or leaking of its contents.
§ 198-2. Enforcing authority.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Health of the Borough or its
duly authorized agent.
§ 198-3. Municipal collection procedures. [Amended 3-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 06:03]
A. All owners, operators, or occupants of all premises, except those
exempted by § 198-4, shall place at the curb along public streets and
roads all solid waste and recyclable material generated on the premises
in suitable containers that do not exceed 50 pounds when full and all
§ 198-1 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-3
185:299
§ 198-4. Owners and occupants required to provide private removal
and disposal. [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. 06:03]
§ 198-5. Frequency of removal. [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No.
06:03]
All owners, operators, or occupants required to remove or provide for the
removal of garbage under § 198-4 shall arrange for garbage and recycling
pickups of sufficient frequency to avoid the creation of any nuisance or
unsafe condition, provided that at least two garbage pickups per week shall
be the minimum frequency.
§ 198-6. Preparation of refuse for collection.
bulky waste on the days designated for pickup at or after the time
designated by the Mayor and Council in its rules and regulations that
may be adopted from time to time by resolution. All loose items are to
be securely tied in bundles not exceeding three feet in length nor 60
pounds in weight, which shall be place at the curb in accordance with
this section.
B. The Borough is not obligated to pick up solid waste, bulky waste, or
recyclable materials from any containers not placed at the curb along
public streets or roads or from any dumpsters or similar large
containers other than suitable containers weighing less than 50 pounds
each when full. It shall be the duty of all owners, operators, and
occupants of all premises to remove and dispose of, at their own
expense, all material deposited in dumpsters or other similar large
containers exceeding the weight limit set forth herein.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator, or occupant of all business,
industrial, and commercial premises, and all residential uses as to
which the owner does not comply with § 198-3, other than residential
dwellings located on Borough-owned property that is leased to
nonprofit corporations operating low- and moderate-income or agerestricted
housing, to remove all solid waste, bulky waste, and
recyclable material generated at the expense of the owners, operators,
or occupants of the premises.
B. Owners, operators, or occupants of residential, business, industrial, or
commercial premises shall not deposit solid waste, bulky waste, or
recyclable material accumulated on or in the premises in Borough litter
and/or Borough garbage containers located anywhere in the Borough.
A. Garbage shall be completely drained of all liquid, wrapped securely in
paper and placed in receptacles as provided in the preceding
subsection.
B. Papers shall be secured and properly tied into bundles of other
packages in a manner that will prevent them from being scattered while
§ 198-3 NORWOOD CODE § 198-6
185:300
§ 198-7. Business establishments.
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises on which
a business or industry is conducted shall arrange for the daily removal
of refuse from the premises unless sufficient and suitable facilities are
provided for the storage of refuse until it is removed.
§ 198-8. Vehicles.
awaiting or during collection. Bundles or packages shall be of a size and
weight to permit easy handling by one man.
C. All other waste shall also be placed in a receptacle, except that waste
which is of such a nature that it cannot be deposited in a receptacle
shall be securely tied into bundles or packages to prevent spilling or
scattering. Bundles or packages shall be of a size to permit easy
handling by one man.
D. Refuse prepared for collection shall be packaged or otherwise
assembled in quantities weighing not more than 75 pounds.
A. Inspection. Each vehicle to be used by the scavenger shall be approved
by the Secretary of the Board of Health as to type and construction.
B. Construction. Vehicle bodies shall be totally enclosed, welded steel,
rear dumping, and constructed, maintained and operated so that once
garbage, refuse, ashes or other waste has been loaded, none of it may
be handled or removed from the body, except by dumping the load or
partial load.
C. Loading. Vehicles shall be loaded only through the rear end of the
totally enclosed vehicle body, except that the body may have side doors
at the forward end for loading refuse which cannot be loaded through
the rear opening.
D. Equipment and maintenance. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a
broom and a shovel, and all scattered litter shall be cleaned up at the
loading point. All vehicles shall be regularly washed and cleaned on
both the inside and outside, kept free at all times from dirt and offensive
odors.
§ 198-6 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-8
185:301

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted by Ord. No. 94-0-20 (Sec. 11-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 198-9. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to comply with the New Jersey Statewide
Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act (P.L. 1987, c. 102),42 the
New Jersey Recycling Act of 1981 (P.L. 1981, c. 278),43 the Mandate of the
Bergen County Utilities Authority, and the Bergen County Long-Term Solid
Waste Management Plan Amendment.
§ 198-10. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-11]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Beverage containers made of a lightweight, silverwhite
metallic element.
BATTERIES — Nonrechargeable alkaline batteries; common cells of the
alkaline, zinc and lithium types in sizes D, C, AA, AAA, 9-volt and lantern
sizes; rechargeable alkaline or nickel-cadmium batteries commonly built
into rechargeable appliances in sizes AA, C, D and 9-volt; button cell
batteries made of silver oxide, mercuric oxide, lithium, zinc air and alkaline
manganese. The term batteries shall not include any lead-acid batteries of
the type or similar to the type used in cars, motorcycles or marine uses.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Structural material shaped in parallel
furrows and ridges for rigidity used to make packing and shipping
containers.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Source-separated
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of structures within
Bergen County. This material shall include concrete, bricks, block, ferrous
and nonferrous scrap, asphalt, asphalt shingles, recyclable wood scrap and
any and all other material generated from the construction, alteration,
repair, maintenance and/or demolition of a structure or structures within
Bergen County that a municipality may deem recyclable.
FERROUS SCRAP — All metal scrap containing steel and/or cast iron.
FOOD WASTE — Any edible waste material resulting from handling,
preparation, processing, cooking or consumption of food.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone
which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or bottling
of various matter and all materials commonly known as "glass"; excluding,
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq.
§ 198-9 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-10
185:303
however, blue and flat glass commonly known as "window glass" or "plate
glass."
GRASS — Green herbage sending up spikelike shoots or blades.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white
notepad paper, copier paper, carbonless computer printout paper, manila
tab cards and file folders.
LEAVES — Those materials naturally formed from trees and bushes that are
suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MIXED PAPER — Source-separated mixture of all types of paper, including
but not limited to corrugated, high-grade paper, newspaper, magazines,
telephone directories, wrapping paper, boxboard, books, grocery bags and
junk mail.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded, however, are all magazines
or other periodicals as well as all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — All plastic bottles, such as those used to hold milk,
detergent and bleach, etc., as specified by the recycling market.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER — A carter which holds a tariff from the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities or a license from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
TYPE 1 PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Polyethylene terephthalate containers,
such as soft drink bottles, and salad dressing, peanut butter, and popcorn
containers.[Added 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:08]
TYPE 2 PLASTIC CONTAINERS — High-density polyethylene containers,
such as milk jugs, and water, detergent, bleach, and other cleaning agent
bottles.[Added 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:08]
WHITE GOODS — Used appliances, such as refrigerators, washers, dryers
and stoves.
§ 198-11. Recycling Coordinator.
A. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
with the Borough of Norwood.
B. The Recycling Coordinator, subject to the approval of the governing
body, shall establish and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations
as to the manner, days and times for the collection, storage,
transportation, sale and/or marketing of said recyclable materials in
order to encourage the preservation of material resources while
minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the Borough of
Norwood. The Recycling Coordinator may, in his reasonable discretion,
from time to time, relax the requirements of this article.
§ 198-10 NORWOOD CODE § 198-11
185:304
§ 198-12. Separation and collection requirements for residential
users. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-11]
C. The Recycling Coordinator shall annually submit a recycling tonnage
report to the New Jersey Office of Recycling and other such reports
required by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
A. Effective immediately, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are
property owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to
separate and recycle for collection/deposit and the ultimate recycling of
said material all of the mandatory recyclable material set forth
hereinafter in Subsection B.
B. Designation of recyclable materials.
(1) Mandatory. The following are identified as mandatory materials:
(a) Aluminum cans.
(b) Glass containers.
(c) Leaves.
(d) Newspaper/magazines.
(e) Ferrous scrap.
(f) Plastic bottles.
(g) Bimetal (tin) cans.
(h) Grass.
(i) White goods.
(j) Batteries.
(k) Construction and demolition debris. [Added 8-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 09:08]
(l) Corrugated cardboard. [Added 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:08]
(m) Mixed paper. [Added 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09:08]
(n) Type 1 and Type 2 plastic containers. [Added 8-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 09:08]
(2) Voluntary. The following are identified as voluntary recyclable
materials:
(a) Automotive waste oil.
C. Separation, collection and disposal methods of designated recyclable
materials.
(1) Containment.
§ 198-11 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-12
185:305
(a) All newspapers/magazines shall be bundled with twine or other
secure arrangements to ensure that they will not be capable of
being windblown or distributed on the public streets; and
provided, further, that the maximum weight of any bundle does
not exceed 30 pounds, approximately 12 inches high, and shall
not be contained in plastic bags.
(b) Glass and plastic shall be contained in suitable occupant- or
owner-supplied containers, except plastic bags and those made
of paper or cardboard materials. Glass jars, tin cans and
bottles must be rinsed clean. Lids, caps and plastic spouts on
bottles and jars must be removed and the labels removed and
free of food residue.
(c) Aluminum shall be rinsed clean and contained in a suitable
occupant- or owner-supplied container.
(d) Leaves and grass. During the period from September 1
through December 31 only, leaves and grass shall be placed in
piles along the curbline of the street. Loose piles shall not
exceed five feet in width from the curbline.
(e) Ferrous scrap and white metals shall be separated at curbside
for collection after special arrangements have been first made
with the Department of Sanitation and/or the Recycling
Coordinator.
(f) Batteries. Effective immediately, it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of properties to dispose of all
batteries in receptacles provided by the Borough of Norwood
and marked for such purpose at such location or locations,
located in the Borough of Norwood, and at such times as may
be designated, from time to time, by the Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Place and method of pickup.
(a) All recyclable material shall be placed by the owner, lessee or
occupant at the curb on the days designated for such purposes
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood. A
schedule of said days is to be published in the official
newspaper of the Borough of Norwood at various intervals
during each calendar year. Placement of recyclable materials
at the curb shall not be made prior to 18 hours before pickup.
(b) Multiple units. In the case of multiple-unit buildings, such as
apartment houses and office buildings, the owners or manager
of said building shall ensure that a special place is designated
for the storage of recyclable material, and all occupants of said
units should be required to separate such items and place
same in said designated place. The owner or manager of the
building shall notify the Department of Public Works
Superintendent of the location of said area. Said location is to
§ 198-12 NORWOOD CODE § 198-12
185:306
§ 198-13. Separation and collection requirements for commercial
users. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-11]
be subject to the approval of the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, the Borough Fire Inspector and
the Board of Health.
(c) Procedure upon refusal to collect. Any solid waste placed for
collection by a residential user not in accordance with this
section will be refused by the municipal collector, and it shall
be the responsibility of the residential user to remove said solid
waste from the curbline by 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection
and have it properly containerized, packaged and secured for
purposes of collection on the next scheduled date.
A. Effective immediately, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and
occupants of businesses and/or commercial properties to separate and
recycle all of the recyclable materials set forth hereinafter in
Subsection B for collection/deposit and the ultimate recycling of said
material.
B. Designation of recyclable materials. The following are identified as
mandatory recyclable materials:
(1) Corrugated cardboard.
(2) Glass, color-separated.
(3) Ferrous scrap.
(4) Food waste.
(5) High-grade office paper.
(6) Leaves.
(7) Mixed paper.
(8) Construction and demolition debris.
(9) Aluminum.
(10) Newspapers.
(11) White goods.
(12) Batteries.
(13) Type 1 and Type 2 plastic containers. [Added 8-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 09:08]
C. Separation, collection and disposal methods of designated recyclable
materials.
§ 198-12 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-13
185:307
§ 198-14. Ownership of recyclables.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owners,
lessees or occupants for collection by the Borough of Norwood, such
recyclable materials shall become the property of the Borough. It shall be
a violation of this article for any person unauthorized to collect or pick up
or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials for
any purpose whatsoever once the same have been placed at the curb. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more premises
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 198-15. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator, the Health Officer, the Zoning Officer and the
Department of Police, Public Works and Sanitation, including specifically,
but without limitation, any sanitation and/or recycling inspectors hired
by the Borough from time to time. The responsibility of monitoring the
program for the adequacy of the collection and all other terms of the
established rules and regulations is that of the Recycling Coordinator.
(1) Aluminum shall be separated, rinsed clean and disposed of in
appropriate containers.
(2) Corrugated cardboard shall be separated and disposed of by a
private scavenger.
(3) Ferrous scrap and white goods shall be separated and disposed of
by a private scavenger.
(4) Food waste shall be separated and disposed of by a private
scavenger.
(5) Glass, color-separated, shall be disposed of by a private scavenger.
(6) High-grade office paper and mixed paper shall be separated and
disposed of by a private scavenger.
(7) Leaves and grass shall be separated and disposed of by a private
scavenger.
(8) Newspapers/magazines shall be separated and disposed of by a
private scavenger.
(9) Batteries. Effective immediately, it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of properties to dispose of all
batteries in receptacles provided by the Borough of Norwood and
marked for such purpose at such location or locations, located in
the Borough of Norwood, and at such times as may be designated,
from time to time, by the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 198-13 NORWOOD CODE § 198-16
185:308
§ 198-16. Notification of pickup.
Under emergency conditions, the time and place for pickup as otherwise
prescribed by this article may be varied by resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Norwood with notice to the residents given in the
official newspaper of the Borough of Norwood or, where necessary, by radio,
television or any other means of communication.
§ 198-17. Collection.
Collection from curbside of such recyclable materials shall be made by the
current garbage scavenger or by contract for outside services as directed
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood with primary
administrative supervision being under the control of the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works of the Borough of Norwood subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood.
§ 198-18. Private disposal; exemption.
§ 198-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No.
06:03]
A. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any residential
owner, lessee or occupant from disposing of recyclable materials
privately through sale or gift of the person concerned; provided,
however, that in no event shall such recyclable materials be left at the
curb for any private pickup, and further provided that in no event shall
any recyclable material be disposed of as part of the solid waste pickup
by the Borough of Norwood in accordance with the normal pickup by
the Borough of Norwood.
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood may exempt persons
occupying commercial premises within its municipal boundaries from
the requirements of this article, provided that such persons shall have
otherwise provided for the recycling of the recyclable materials from
solid waste generated at those premises. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this subsection, a commercial solid waste generator
annually shall provide written documentation to the municipality of the
total number of tons recycled.
A. Any person who violates any provision of Chapter 198 shall, upon a
conviction, be liable for a penalty as follows:
(1) First offense, written warning, plus court costs.
(2) Second offense, fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, plus court costs.
(3) Third and all subsequent offenses, fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $2,000, plus court costs.
§ 198-16 SATELLITE ANTENNAS § 198-19
185:309
B. Each day that any violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. In addition to the penalties referred to in Subsections A and B, any
person convicted of violating the provisions of Chapter 198 on a third
offense shall be obligated to provide for the removal of the solid waste,
bulky waste, and recyclable material generated on the premises in
accordance, and, if applicable, shall forfeit the right to municipal
collection and disposal.
§ 198-19 NORWOOD CODE § 198-19
185:310
Chapter 199
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 189.
Soil removal — See Ch. 197.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 230.
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 199-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
developments, as defined in § 199-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Norwood
§ 198-19 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-1
199:311
§ 199-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designate by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATE CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
D. Compability with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and does
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 199-1 NORWOOD CODE § 199-2
199:312
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agriculture lands, development means:
any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Norwood, or political subdivision of this state
§ 199-2 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-2
199:313
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — That lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin) or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater or to eliminate illicit or
illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
§ 199-2 NORWOOD CODE § 199-2
199:314
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Enterprise Urban
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly know as hydrolytic vegetation.
§ 199-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes:
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 199-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
§ 199-2 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-3
199:315
§ 199-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to
new major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 199-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 199-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 199-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 199-4F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
§ 199-3 NORWOOD CODE § 199-4
199:316
(3) The applicant demonstrates that in order to meet the requirements
of § 199-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 199-4F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 199-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 199-4E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point on the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
§ 199-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-4
199:317
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 199-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 199-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 199-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grate subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridge),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin
floors.
§ 199-4 NORWOOD CODE § 199-4
199:318
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 199-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 199-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 199-4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 199-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
§ 199-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-4
199:319
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major developments.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performances standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 199-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater that "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills or toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 199-4 NORWOOD CODE § 199-4
199:320
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to: raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potentional adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewerage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 199-5, complete on the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that, for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do no exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there in no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events and that the increased volume or
change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts or existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinance in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80%,
§ 199-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-4
199:321
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 199-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purpose of this section,
"agricultural development" means land uses normally associated
with the production of food, fiber, and livestock for sale. Such uses
do no include the development of land for the processing or sale of
food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 199-4 NORWOOD CODE § 199-4
199:322
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purpose of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 199-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 199-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R=A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
§ 199-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-4
199:323
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rates
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 199-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of this site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 199-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 199-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measure shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
§ 199-4 NORWOOD CODE § 199-4
199:324
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follow:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway.
§ 199-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-4
199:325
§ 199-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 199-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measure perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following.
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 199-4 NORWOOD CODE § 199-5
199:326
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 199-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 199-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of previous and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 199-5 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-5
199:327
§ 199-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSP-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual: at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 199-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4 and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 199-8.
§ 199-5 NORWOOD CODE § 199-6
199:328
§ 199-7. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 199-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 199-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, previous paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540.
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Services, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained form the State Soil Conservation
§ 199-6 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-7
199:329
§ 199-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square feet.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square feet.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 199-7 NORWOOD CODE § 199-8
199:330
§ 199-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 199-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 199-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 199-9C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
§ 199-8 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-9
199:331
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures; roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 199-3
through 199-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
§ 199-9 NORWOOD CODE § 199-9
199:332
§ 199-10. Maintenance and repair.
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 199-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site borings logs or soil pits profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 199-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 199-9C(1) through C(6) of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain, and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in § 199-1C of this chapter shall
comply with the requirements of § 199-10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
§ 199-9 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-10
199:333
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility
for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and B(7)
above.
§ 199-10 NORWOOD CODE § 199-10
199:334
§ 199-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 200
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 85.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Sewers — See Ch. 189.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Any person who is convicted for violating any of the provision of the
chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $2,000, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days,
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. A separate offense or violation shall be deemed to be committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continue.
§ 199-10 STORMWATER CONTROL § 199-11
199:335

ARTICLE I
Pet Waste
§ 200-1. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations, shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house, or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container that is regularly
emptied by the Borough or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 200-2. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 200-3. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 200-1 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-3
199:337

ARTICLE II
Litter Control
§ 200-4. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material that
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap, or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming, or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 200-5. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this chapter.
§ 200-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-5
199:339

ARTICLE III
Improper Disposal Waste
§ 200-6. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 200-7. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Norwood is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 200-8. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition include:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges, and diverted stream flows.
§ 200-6 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-8
199:341
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway, and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 200-8 NORWOOD CODE § 200-8
199:342
ARTICLE IV
Wildlife Feeding
§ 200-9. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 200-10. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Norwood, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks, or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 200-9 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-10
199:343

ARTICLE V
Yard Waste Collection Program
§ 200-11. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 200-12. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing, or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and it shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this chapter. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
§ 200-11 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-12
199:345

ARTICLE VI
Illicit Collections
§ 200-13. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Norwood, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Norwood or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
§ 200-13 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-13
199:347
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 200-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Norwood any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 200-13 NORWOOD CODE § 200-14
199:348
ARTICLE VII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Added 7-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17:0844]
§ 200-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets that are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough, so as to protect public health, safety,
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 200-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff, and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 200-17. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing,
44.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Art. VII, Fines, Penalties and
Enforcement, consisting of former §§ 200-15 through 200-17, was renumbered as Art. IX,
consisting of §§ 200-23 through 200-25.
§ 200-15 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-17
199:349
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 200-18. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 200-17 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 200-18C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 200-18 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicyclesafe
grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including
bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 200-17 NORWOOD CODE § 200-18
199:350
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 200-18 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-18
199:351

ARTICLE VIII
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Added 7-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17:08]
§ 200-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times, and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or other discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids, or solids from containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety, and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 200-20. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 200-21. Prohibited conduct.
Any person who controls a refuse container or dumpster must ensure
that such container, or dumpster (whether owned, leased, or operated)
§ 200-19 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-21
199:353
is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does
not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids, or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough.
§ 200-22. Exceptions to prohibition.
The prohibitions in § 200-21 do not apply to:
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers;
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit; and
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 200-21 NORWOOD CODE § 200-22
199:354
ARTICLE IX
Fines, Penalties and Enforcement
§ 200-23. Maximum fines and penalties.
Any person who is convicted for violating any of the provisions of the
chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,250, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, and/or
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, unless a different
penalty is stated in the Code section or ordinance.
§ 200-24. Separate violations.
A separate offense or violation shall be deemed to be committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
§ 200-25. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the employees, officers,
and agents of the Police Department, the Department of Public Works, and
the Board of Health of the Borough of Norwood.
§ 200-23 STORMWATER CONTROL § 200-25
199:355
Chapter 202
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 120. Filming — See Ch. 122.
§ 200-25 NORWOOD CODE § 200-25
199:356
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted as Sec. 10-5 of the Revised General Ordinances; amended
in its entirety 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15:06]
§ 202-1. Definitions.
When used in this article the terms listed below are defined as follows:
BUSINESS DISTRICTS — All properties on Livingston Street between
Broadway and Rockland Avenue and on Broad Street from Broadway to
Tappan Road.
OWNERS — The owners of record, tenants, and occupants of any land
abutting any public streets, roads or highways in the Borough of Norwood.
§ 202-2. Duty of owners.
§ 202-3. Failure of owners to comply; penalties.
A. The owners of land abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks of the
public streets, roads and highways in the Borough will remove or cause
to be removed from the sidewalks in front of or bordering on their lands
all snow or ice within 24 hours of daylight after snow fall ends or ice is
formed thereon.
B. In addition to the requirements of § 202-2A, the owners of land in the
Business Districts that is abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks of
the public streets, roads and highways in the Borough will remove snow
and ice to keep the sidewalks free of ice and snow during business
hours. All snowfalls or ice accumulations beginning after 6:00 p.m. will
be removed no later than 9:00 a.m. the following morning, Sundays and
holidays included. The cleared area will be a minimum of five feet wide
or the full width of the sidewalk.
A. If the owner of any land abutting or bordering upon any public street,
road or highway in the Borough neglects or refuses to remove the snow
or ice within the time and in the manner required by this article, it will
then be the duty of the Police Department to patrol the Borough and
report all such violations. The report will give the name and address of
the owner and location of the property. It will then be the duty of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the officer having charge of the
public highways, streets and roads in the Borough to remove the snow
or ice or cause it to be removed.
B. In addition to the costs imposed by § 202-4, any owner convicted for the
violation of the requirements of this article will be punishable by a fine
of $50 for the first day of any offense, $100 for the second day of any
offense, and $150 for the third or any subsequent day of any offense.
The continuation of any violation will be a separate offense for each day.
§ 202-1 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-4
199:357
§ 202-4. Cost of removal by Borough; lien.
The Borough's cost for removing snow and ice from any sidewalk under
this article will be certified by the Superintendent of Public Works to
the Council, which will examine the certificate and cause the cost to be
charged against the lands abutting or bordering the sidewalk. The amount
so charged will become a lien upon the lands and will be added to the
taxes to be assessed and levied on the lands and be collected and enforced
according to law. The owner may also be charged with a violation of this
article, and a penalty may be imposed against the owner in accordance
with § 202-3. This section applies only to the owner of real property on
which there has been constructed a multiple dwelling housing development
containing three or more units of dwelling space which are occupied or are
intended to be occupied by three or more persons living independently of
each other.
§ 202-4.1. Crosswalks.
The Superintendent of Public Works will cause snow and ice to be cleared
from all crosswalks in the Borough.
§ 202-4 NORWOOD CODE § 202-4.1
199:358
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
[Adopted as Sec. 3-5 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 202-5. Obstruction prohibited.
No person shall place in any street or sidewalk in the Borough any article
which would tend to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles
along the streets or sidewalks. The following are examples of items which
tend to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles, but this
enumeration is intended to be typical only and shall not be construed to
be exclusive: merchandise, signs, showcases, crates and barrels and other
materials or equipment used in connection with the operation of a trade or
business.
§ 202-6. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the following:
A. Obstructions, caused by the loading or unloading of merchandise or
equipment to and from vehicles, provided that this is done in a manner
which reduces the obstruction to the absolute minimum which is
necessary or unavoidable.
B. Receptacles for garbage, ashes or refuse lawfully placed on a sidewalk
for collection.
C. The space within three feet of the front line of any dwelling house, shop
or other building if that space is appropriated and used by the occupant
or owner.
D. Materials placed on a street or sidewalk in accordance with permission
granted by any other provision of this Code.
§ 202-5 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-6
199:359

ARTICLE III
Fences and Hedges45
[Adopted as Sec. 3-6 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 202-7. Height and location restrictions. [Amended 3-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 05:03]
No person shall erect or maintain on property owned or controlled by him
and where buildings or structures are otherwise prohibited by Chapter
233, Zoning, any hedge, wall or fence that is higher than three feet above
curb level nor any obstruction to vision other than a post not exceeding
one square foot in cross section, within 10 feet of any street or within
a triangular area on the property, located on the corner of intersecting
streets, measured by the side of the intersecting streets and the projection
of a line joining points 25 feet from the corner along each of the intersecting
streets.
§ 202-8. Notice to remove.
Any fence or hedge erected in violation of § 202-7 shall be removed by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which it is located within 10 days
after receiving notice to do so from the Construction Official. Notice may
be served by delivering a copy personally to any occupant of the premises
above the age of 14 years, to whom the contents shall be made known, or by
sending a copy, via registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner
of the property at his last known address.
§ 202-9. Removal by Borough.
In the event that the owner of the property upon which the fence or hedge
is erected or maintained fails to remove, relocate or reduce it in height
within 10 days after being served with notice to do so, the Construction
Official may cause the fence or hedge to be removed, relocated or reduced
in height so that it complies with the provisions of § 202-7. In the event
that such action by the Construction Official is necessary, the cost of doing
the work shall be certified to the Mayor and Council, who shall examine
the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost of doing the work
to be charged against the land upon which the work was performed. The
amount charged shall become a lien upon the land and shall be added to
and become a part of the taxes next assessed upon the land upon which the
work was performed and shall bear interest and be collected and enforced
in the same manner as taxes. The removal, relocation or reduction in height
by the Construction Official of any fence or hedge shall be in addition to any
penalty imposed for the violation of this article.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 120, Fences.
§ 202-7 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-9
199:361

ARTICLE IV
Shade Trees
[Adopted by Ord. No. 96-0-25 (Sec. 10-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 202-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Every person, firm, association, partnership and corporation or
combination thereof. This term may be construed to designate the plural as
well as the singular.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utility companies shall
mean poles, wires, cables, subsurface conduits, pipes, manholes and
appurtenant facilities of such companies installed in a street.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Refers to a public utility as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
STREET —
TREE — Any tree, shrub or plant or any root, branch, flower or other part
thereof located in or upon any street, park or other Borough land. Small
trees are designated as those attaining a mature height of 25 feet. Medium
trees are designated as those attaining a mature height of 25 feet to 45 feet.
Large trees are designated as those attaining a mature height of 45 feet or
more.
§ 202-11. Permit required.
A. Any public street accepted and maintained by the Borough.
B. Borough parks, parkways and other public places.
County accepted and maintained highways, streets and roads, including
right-of-way easements to the extent permitted by law.
C.
New Jersey state highways upon approval of the New Jersey State
Highway Department.
D.
Any road, avenue, street or highway dedicated to the public use for
street purpose, regardless of whether it has been formally accepted
by the Borough of Norwood. A street shall be deemed to include all
portions lying between the dedicated and established right-of-way lines
and/or planting easement thereof, said lines being identical with the
front property lines of lands abutting the street.
E.
A. No person shall do to any tree on any street within the Borough any of
the following acts without having first obtained a permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works:
(1) Cut, prune, trim, break, damage, kill or remove any tree.
§ 202-10 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-11
199:363
§ 202-12. Prohibited acts.
No person shall do any of the following acts to any tree on any street in the
Borough.
(2) Cut, unduly disturb or interfere in any way with any root of a tree.
(3) Spray any tree with any chemical.
(4) Fasten any rope, wire sign or other device to a tree or to any guard
above such tree.
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree.
(6) Place or maintain upon the ground in any street stone or other
material or substance in such manner as may obstruct the free
access of air and water to the roots of any tree.
(7) Lay any sidewalk along or open, construct, curb or pave any street
or do any like act so as to interfere with or do injury to any tree or
the roots thereof.
(8) Excavate within six feet of any tree.
(9) Attach or fasten any wire, insulation or other device for holding any
wire to any tree.
(10) Plant or set out any shade tree in or on any street.
(11) Erect, alter, repair or remove a building or structure in a manner
that will endanger nearby trees, whether through the placement of
materials hazardous to trees or otherwise.
(12) Climb a shade tree on any street by the use of spurs or other
instruments which perforate or injure the bark of the tree.
B. Public utility companies.
(1) Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the
Superintendent of Public Works may grant to public entity
companies a blanket permit for tree pruning for line clearance and
for the installation and maintenance of subsurface and
aboveground plant construction if there is interference with or
endangerment to street trees. Public utility companies may, during
period of emergency, without specific prior permit, install
temporary attachments to trees and make emergency subsurface
repairs.
(2) Each public utility company shall exercise reasonable diligence in
the maintenance of its plant construction so as to avoid damage to
trees.
§ 202-11 NORWOOD CODE § 202-12
199:364
§ 202-13. Public utilities.
§ 202-14. Fees.
The fee for any permit required by this article, except for a permit to
a public utility, shall be $1 for each tree affected by work or act to be
performed.
§ 202-15. Planting restrictions and species selection.
A. Cause or permit gas or other substances deleterious to tree life to come
in contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree in any street in
a manner that will injure, kill or destroy the tree.
B. Cause or permit brine, salt, oil, liquid dye or any other substance
deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow, drip or in any other
manner whatever enter the soil around the base of a tree in any street.
C. Build a fire or station a tar kettle, road roller or other device in any
street in a manner that will result in the heat, vapors or fumes
therefrom injuring any tree.
D. Use or operate shovels, machines, equipment, tools or other implement
in such a manner as to damage, injure or destroy a tree.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works may grant to public utility
companies a blanket permit for the installation and maintenance of
subsurface and aboveground plant construction.
B. Public utility companies may, during periods of emergency, without
specific permit, install temporary attachments to trees and make
subsurface emergency repairs.
C. Each public utility company shall maintain its plant construction so as
not to damage or kill trees.
A. The spacing for planting street trees shall be as follows, in accordance
with the three size classes listed in § 202-10, definition of "tree."
(1) Space small trees 30 feet from the adjacent trees.
(2) Space medium trees 40 feet from the adjacent trees.
(3) Space large trees 50 feet from the adjacent trees.
B. Exceptions for special plantings must be approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
C. When practicable, the planting distance from the curbs or curblines and
sidewalks shall be in accordance with the three tree size classes as
follows: for a small tree, two feet; medium tree, three feet; and large
tree, four feet.
§ 202-12 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-15
199:365
§ 202-16. Liability.
Nothing in this article contained shall be construed to make the Borough
of Norwood or the Superintendent of Public Works or any member thereof
responsible for the death or injury of any person or for any injury to any
property or highway tree or shrub.
§ 202-17. Violations and penalties.
D. No street trees other than those species classified as small trees may be
planted closer than 15 feet to the vertical plane of an existing power
line, excluding service wires, or within 7 1/2 lateral feet of any
underground waterline, sewer line or other utility.
A. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article
or who fails to comply with the terms and provisions of any permit
issued pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $200 and not to exceed $1,500 at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Restitution. In addition to the penalties authorized by Subsection A of
this section, the Judge of the Municipal Court may require a person who
removes or otherwise destroys a tree in violation of a municipal
ordinance to pay a replacement assessment to the municipality. The
replacement assessment shall be the value of the tree as determined by
the appraisal of a trained forester or certified tree expert retained by
the Superintendent of Public Works for that purpose.
§ 202-15 NORWOOD CODE § 202-17
199:366
ARTICLE V
Street Excavations
[Adopted 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 97:11]
§ 202-18. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Streets Ordinance of
the Borough of Norwood."
§ 202-19. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person filing an application pursuant to the provisions
of this article or performing any work which is regulated by the provisions
hereof and his agents, employees and/or servants.
APPROPRIATE BOROUGH OFFICIAL — For a major street opening, the
Borough Engineer; for a minor street opening, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Norwood.
EMERGENCY — Such combination of circumstances as may constitute a
threat to life, health or property and which shall be determined as such by
the Mayor or appropriate Borough official or their designees.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — Such legal holidays as may be established from time to
time by the State of New Jersey.
MAJOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which is not a minor
street opening.
MINOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which extends less
than 30 linear feet and is less than six feet in depth.
PERSON — Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation.
ROAD OR STREET —
§ 202-20. Permit required.
Any road, street, curb, sidewalk or other public place dedicated to,
designed or accepted by the Borough or any portion thereof.
A.
The paved area of the public right-of-way, including the sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, catch basins and manholes.
B.
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit issued through the office of the
Borough Clerk following classification of the street opening (major or
minor) by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and
approval of said classification by the appropriate Borough official.
§ 202-18 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-20
199:367
§ 202-21. Application for permit.
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit when an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to commence work
immediately; provided, however, that prior to such commencement the
application for a permit shall have been filed with the Borough Clerk,
together with an estimate of the requisite fees and of the performance
guaranty; provided further, however, that the filing of such application
and estimates may be deferred until the next business day following the
commencement of work when the emergency arises after closing of the
office of the Borough Clerk. The permit, when issued, shall be
retroactive to the date on which the work commenced.
C. Such permit shall remain in effect for 30 days, provided that such time
may be extended, upon application made to the Borough Clerk within
said thirty-day period, for an additional 30 days upon good cause being
demonstrated to the appropriate Borough official for the noncompletion
of the work within the initial time period.
A. All applications for street opening permits shall be made through and
filed with the office of the Borough Clerk on forms provided by such
office and shall recite the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the party to be reached in
the event of an emergency.
(3) Street address of premises adjacent to the proposed opening.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of properties abutting and
lying adjacent to that portion of the street to be opened.
(5) Name, address and the telephone number of the property owner for
whose benefit the opening is to be performed.
(6) Classification of the street opening, i.e., major or minor.
(7) Character and purpose of the proposed work.
(8) Estimated time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
(9) Plans and specifications, in quadruplicate, showing exact locations
and dimensions with respect to major street openings only.
(10) Name, address and telephone number of the person who is to
perform the work.
(11) An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at his
own cost and expense, the street, curb, gutter, bike path, sidewalk,
catch basins, manholes and all other disturbed areas, so as to
restore said area to such state and condition as complies with
Borough standards, within 90 days of the street opening; provided,
§ 202-20 NORWOOD CODE § 202-21
199:368
§ 202-22. Fees; exceptions.
§ 202-23. Bond requirement.
however, that within 24 hours of such opening the area shall be
temporarily restored by the placement of a stabilized base course
and maintained as determined in the reasonable judgment of the
appropriate Borough official until the final surface has been laid.
The final surface shall not be installed between November 15 and
April 15 unless otherwise permitted by a written authorization
signed by the Mayor.
(12) A certification by the applicant that he has followed the mark-out
procedure for determining the locations of utilities and
obstructions within the area of the proposed work and submission
of a mark-out reference number.
B. Application hereunder shall be filed not less than two days in advance of
any excavation, except that in the case of an emergency, the application
shall be filed pursuant to § 202-20 herein.
A. Each applicant for a permit shall, before its issuance, pay to the
Borough Clerk a fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) The fee for a minor street opening shall be $200.
(2) The fee for a major street opening shall be $400.
B. In the event that a public utility company shall be exempted by statute
from payment of the fees required by the preceding subsection, the
utility company shall nevertheless file annually with the Borough Clerk
a surety bond, approved as to form by the Borough Attorney, in the sum
of not less than $25,000, conditioned upon the complete restoration of
the disturbed surface to such condition as complies with Borough
standards.
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed with the Borough
Clerk a cash bond in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated cost of
closing the road in a manner as is herein provided and completing any
work incidental thereto as estimated by the appropriate Borough
official. The Borough Council may, in its discretion upon appropriate
application by a public utility, require the posting of a surety bond or
waive the bond requirement of this section upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that the utility is capable of meeting any claim
against it arising out of the work anticipated to be performed. Such
bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety
company in good standing and licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless from all losses, damages, claims
and including expenses incurred in the defense of any litigation
§ 202-21 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-23
199:369
§ 202-24. Inspection and engineering fees.
Each applicant shall deposit in trust with the Borough Clerk an amount
as determined by the appropriate Borough official which is an estimate of
all anticipated inspection and engineering costs and fees. In the event that
such actual costs and fees are less than the amount deposited in trust, then
the Borough shall refund the difference between the amount deposited in
trust and the actual costs and fees charged to the applicant. In the event
that such actual costs and fees exceed the amount deposited in trust, then
the difference between the actual costs and fees and the amount deposited
in trust shall be payable from the bond required by the terms of § 202-23
herein.
§ 202-25. Release of bond.
arising out of an injury to a person or property resulting from any
work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the Borough for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this article.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damages to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course of
any work under the permit.
(4) The bond shall also secure the Borough against damage to, removal
of or interference with Borough property.
(5) Upon the applicant's restoring the surface and foundation of the
street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the
appropriate Borough official.
(6) The bond shall also secure the Borough for the costs of engineering
and inspection fees.
B. A single bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period of 12 months after
the date the last work is performed to guarantee the integrity of the
street closing.
C. A bond may be waived by the appropriate Borough official if it is already
provided for in a subdivision or developer's agreement.
A. No bond shall be released unless the surface and foundations of the
road or street shall have been satisfactorily restored in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Any determination as to whether or not
such road or street shall have been so restored shall be made solely by
the Borough Council after receiving the advice and recommendation of
appropriate Borough officials, and the determination of the Borough
Council shall be final and conclusive.
§ 202-23 NORWOOD CODE § 202-25
199:370
§ 202-26. Limitations.
Except in the case of an emergency, the following limitations shall be
applicable to all roads and streets within the Borough:
§ 202-27. Barricades.
During the course of any work for which application is required pursuant
to the provisions of this article, the applicant shall at all times provide
and maintain suitable and sufficient barricades with warning lights, danger
signals and signs. Barricades with warning signs shall be placed at all roads
or streets closed to traffic. Warnings and detour signs shall be placed at
all closures, intersections and along detour routes such as to clearly mark
same. All barricades and warning lights shall he illuminated from sunset
until sunrise. Wherever necessary for adequate protection of the public, a
watchman and/or flagman will be provided by the applicant, as determined
by the Chief of Police.
§ 202-28. Insurance.
Each applicant shall furnish proof at the time of application that it maintains
sufficient public liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to
transact business in the State of New Jersey in an amount of not less than
$500,000 for injuries or death to any one person, not less than $1,000,000
for injuries or death in any occurrence and $500,000 for property damage in
any one occurrence. Said policy of insurance shall specifically designate the
Borough and its employees and agents as a named insured and shall require
B. Upon written notification to the applicant by the appropriate Borough
official that Borough property has been damaged, removed or
interfered with, the applicant shall correct such condition within a
reasonable time thereafter as determined by the appropriate Borough
official or the cost of such correction shall be payable from such bond.
The bond shall also secure the Borough for the costs of engineering and
inspection fees, as specified in § 202-24.
A. No excavation or backfilling shall be undertaken from November 15
through March 31, and no restoration or pavement construction shall
be undertaken prior to April 15, except upon special written approval
signed by the Mayor, upon written advice of the appropriate Borough
official. Such special approval may be granted if weather conditions
permit and suitable materials are available; provided, however, that no
such special approval will be granted if ambient temperatures below
40° F. are anticipated during the course of the work or where frozen
subgrade exists. No such special approval shall relieve the applicant
from compliance with all of the other provisions of this article.
B. No street or road which has been paved with macadam or bituminous
concrete surface shall be excavated or otherwise opened for a period of
three years from the date of completion thereof except upon prior
approval granted by the Mayor.
§ 202-25 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-28
199:371
10 days' written notice to the Borough prior to termination thereof. Policies
shall also provide motor vehicle liability coverage in the same amounts as
specified above.
§ 202-29. Entry upon private property.
No applicant shall enter upon or make use of any private property without
the written permission of the owner thereof.
§ 202-30. Limitation of hours.
Except in the case of an emergency, no work for which application is
required pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be performed or
undertaken on Sundays or legal holidays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
§ 202-31. Time limit for completion.
Notice of commencement of work for which application is required pursuant
to the provisions of this article shall be given to the appropriate Borough
official not less than two days in advance thereof, which work shall be
completed within the time limits specified hereinafter. Thereafter, the
Borough may cause such work to be completed, and the costs thereof shall
be payable from the applicant's bond.
§ 202-32. Specifications and procedures for excavations and
trenches.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
excavations and trenches:
A. The applicant shall determine the exact location of all underground
structures, known or unknown, and shall take appropriate measures for
protection of adjacent piping or utilities. The applicant shall be
responsible for any damage to pipelines or utilities and shall give notice
to any utility concerned prior to repair or backfill.
B. The pavement shall be cut by saw or pavement cutters in straight lines.
Trenches shall be dug so that pipe can be laid to the alignment and
depth required. Minimum depth of cover from the surface of the ground
to the top of the pipe barrel shall be as shown on the drawings.
Trenches shall be braced and drained so that the workers may work
safely and efficiently; the applicant shall comply with the requirements
of the State Construction Code46 and the Federal Occupational Safety
and Health Act.
C. Discharge from trench dewatering pumps, free of soil materials, shall
be conducted to natural drainage channels or drains.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction.
§ 202-28 NORWOOD CODE § 202-32
199:372
§ 202-33. Specification and procedures for backfilling.
Trenches and excavations above pipe grade shall be backfilled within 24
hours after subsurface work is completed, unless written approval is
obtained from the appropriate Borough official. Backfill shall consist of
approved granular material, free of organic matter, clay, silts, cinders or
other deleterious materials. Backfill shall be placed in maximum nine-inch
layers and mechanically tamped after placement of each layer in order to
achieve proper compaction.
§ 202-34. Specifications and procedures for pavement.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
pavement on roads and streets:
D. Trenches shall be excavated to a depth required to provide a uniform
and continuous bearing and support for pipe on solid and undisturbed
ground. Any portion of a trench excavated below specified grade shall
be corrected with approved material and thoroughly compacted. Where
the bottom of the trench at subgrade is unstable and includes ashes,
cinders, refuse, vegetable or fragments of inorganic material, the
applicant shall excavate and remove such unsuitable material.
E. Hand methods of excavations shall be employed in locations designated
on the drawings. Otherwise, the applicant may utilize trench digging
machinery or hand methods of excavation.
A. For openings of less than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper 7 1/
2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with graded one-andone-
half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 2, of State Specification,
with dust, compacted by a five-ton roller. After 24 hours of traffic, or
other period as stipulated by the appropriate Borough official, the
edges of the trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line
and six inches outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper
3 1/2 inches of stone shall be removed and final pavement shall be
constructed. After 30 days and after six months, the applicant shall
place fine aggregate bituminous concrete in depressed areas to form a
smooth, even street surface.
B. For openings of greater than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper
7 1/2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with five inches of
graded one-and-one-half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 20, of
State Specification, with dust, and 1 1/2 inches of stabilized base
material equal to Division 3, Section 2A, of State Specification,
compacted by a ten-ton roller. The surface shall be maintained by the
applicant for not less than 30 days and, at the discretion of the
appropriate Borough official, to a maximum of 90 days, such that
maximum surface depression is one inch. Thereafter, the edges of the
trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line and six inches
outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper 3 1/2 inches of
material shall be removed and final pavement shall be constructed.
§ 202-32 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-34
199:373
§ 202-35. New streets and roads.
Pavement in new streets or roads shall be in accordance with specification
and procedures specified in § 202-34D above.
§ 202-36. Specifications and procedures for curbs.
Curbs damaged by excavations shall be restored, and curbs in new streets
and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following specifications
and procedures:
After six months, the applicant shall place fine aggregate bituminous
concrete in depressed areas to form a smooth, even street surface.
C. For emergency openings from November 15 through March 31, the
procedure shall be as for openings greater than 100 square feet, except
that temporary paving material may consist of approved cold-patching
compound.
D. Final pavement, in all cases, shall be four inches of graded one-and-onehalf-
inch stone, equal to Division 3, Section 2A, of State Specification,
1 1/2 inches of fine aggregate bituminous concrete equal to Division 3,
Section 12, Type SM-1, of State Specification, feathered over a twelveinch
width of tack coat, to meet adjacent surfaces. All thickness shall be
as measured after compaction by a ten-ton roller.
E. Where a trench exceeds 100 feet in length, a one-and-one-half-inch
surface course shall be placed from curb to street center line on deadend
streets and from curb to curb on through streets. Where a trench
exceeds six feet in width, is skewed to street center line or is connected
to spur trenches, a one-and-one-half-inch surface course shall be placed
from curb to curb. In all cases, the surface shall be cleaned and tack
coat placed before application of surface course, which shall be
feathered toward each curb.
F. Upon prior approval of the appropriate Borough official, subgrade stone
may be replaced with an equivalent thickness of stabilized base
material.
A. Curbs shall be six inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at the bottom
and 20 inches deep, of which six inches shall extend above finished
grade at the gutter.
B. Foundations under curbs shall he undisturbed, compacted, nonorganic
material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular, nonorganic
and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Curbs shall be poured in approved forms, using four-thousand-poundsper-
square-inch concrete with maximum slump of four inches. Forms
shall be inspected before pouring, and concrete shall be thoroughly
vibrated and cured as approved. No concrete shall be poured, except in
dry weather, at ambient temperatures between 50° F. and 90° F.
§ 202-34 NORWOOD CODE § 202-36
199:374
§ 202-37. Specifications and procedures for sidewalks.
Sidewalks damaged by excavations shall be restored, and sidewalks on
new streets and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following
specifications and procedures:
§ 202-38. Noncompliance; right of Borough to remedy.
If the applicant does not satisfactorily comply with the provisions of
§§ 202-33, 202-34, 202-35, 202-36 and/or 202-37 herein, then the Borough
may give notice to the applicant that the applicant must comply with
the specified provisions within 48 hours, weather permitting. Satisfactory
compliance is to be determined by the appropriate Borough official. If the
applicant fails to satisfactorily comply within the forty-eight-hour period,
then the Borough may remedy said noncompliance without further notice to
the applicant at the sole cost of the applicant. Such cost shall be charged
against the bond as specified in § 202-23 herein.
§ 202-39. Cleanup procedures.
The applicant shall, at all times, maintain the excavated street or road in
a clean condition. All dirt, rubbish and excess materials shall be regularly
removed by the applicant, and backfill shall be mounded within the limits
of excavation. All tools and temporary structures shall be removed by the
applicant upon completion of work.
D. Curb sections shall not exceed 10 feet in length and shall be separated
by contraction joint material.
E. Depressed curb sections shall be poured at driveways and barrier-free
ramps. Breaking of full curbs to create depressed curbs is prohibited.
A. Sidewalks shall be 48 inches wide and four inches thick, set to approved
grades.
B. Foundations under sidewalks shall be undisturbed, compacted,
nonorganic material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular,
nonorganic and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Sidewalks shall be poured in approved forms, using three-thousandpounds-
per-square-inch concrete with maximum slump of four inches.
No concrete shall be poured, except in dry weather, at ambient
temperatures between 50° F. and 90° F. and shall be cured in approved
fashion.
D. Sidewalk sections shall be separated by contraction joints at four-foot
intervals and by construction joints at twelve-foot intervals. Surfaces
shall be troweled to approved finish.
§ 202-36 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-40
199:375
§ 202-40. Approvals and special procedures.
All materials and subcontractors shall be subject to the approval of
appropriate Borough officials who shall be authorized to order such special
maintenance, pavement procedures and safety requirements as
circumstances may require.
§ 202-41. Special conditions.
§ 202-42. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Engineer may make any reasonable rules and regulations
which he considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of
this article, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any
provision of this article or impose any requirement which is in addition to
those expressly or by implication imposed by this article. No regulation shall
be effective unless it shall have been approved by resolution of the Borough
Council. Copies of all current rules and regulations shall be furnished to
each permittee at the time of the issuance of the permit.
§ 202-43. Utility companies.
§ 202-44. Waiver of provisions.
In the event of an emergency as hereinabove defined, application for waiver
of specific provisions of this article may be made to the Mayor or to the
appropriate Borough official who is authorized in such cases to permit
waiver of requirements and impose additional conditions as required to
protect the public interest and Borough property.
A. The Borough Council may impose such conditions in any case it deems
necessary and appropriate.
B. Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this article, the Borough
Engineer shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee and, after an
evaluation, set a fee commensurate with the circumstances in the
exercise of his reasonable judgment.
A. Utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas,
water and electric lines, shall report to the Department of Public Works,
quarterly, their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring
future street openings in the community, for the purpose of
coordinating such activity with pavement projects anticipated by the
Borough.
B. Except in the case of emergency, the Borough shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, in furtherance of
which purpose the Borough shall provide to the utilities a schedule of
expected street construction and resurfacing.
§ 202-40 NORWOOD CODE § 202-44
199:376
ARTICLE VI
Newly Paved Streets
[Adopted as Sec. 10-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 202-45. Notice of improvement.
Before any street is improved or paved, the Borough Clerk shall give notice
to all persons owning property abutting on the street, and to all public
utilities and authorities operating in the Borough, that the street is about
to be paved or improved. All connections and repairs to utilities in the
street and all other work which requires excavation of the street shall
be completed within 30 days from the receipt of notice. The time for the
completion of the work maybe extended in writing by the Superintendent
of Public Works upon application by the person performing the work. This
section shall not excuse any person from the requirement of obtaining a
permit as provided in Article V, Street Excavations.
§ 202-46. Restrictions on excavations.
A. No person to whom notice was given as provided in § 202-45 shall be
issued a permit to excavate the street to which the notice related unless
its issuance is approved by the Borough Council.
B. Subsection A shall not apply to any case where the excavation is made
necessary by the occurrence of some event which could not have been
foreseen at the time that notice was given, or where the public health or
safety requires the performance of the work in question.
§ 202-45 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-46
199:377

ARTICLE VII
Construction and Repair of Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted as Sec. 10-3 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 202-47. Duty of owner.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any property abutting any public street
in the Borough upon which a curb or sidewalk now exists or is hereafter
constructed to maintain the curb, driveway entrances and sidewalks in front
of his property in good condition and at proper grade by reconstructing,
repairing or improving them in accordance with the provisions of this article
and the plans, specifications and grades supplied by the Borough Engineer.
§ 202-48. Notice to construct or repair.
Where the property owner fails to improve, maintain or repair the
sidewalks, curbs and driveway entrances abutting his property as required
by § 202-47, the Mayor and Council may cause a notice to be served on
the owner requiring him to undertake the necessary construction or repairs
within 30 days from the date of service of the notice.
§ 202-49. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain a description of the property affected sufficient
to identify it, a description of the repairs or improvements necessary to
comply with this article, and a statement that, unless the owner completes
the repairs or improvements within 30 days after the service of the notice,
the Borough will make the improvements at the expense of the owner.
§ 202-50. Service of notice.
Notice under this article may be served personally or by leaving a copy at
the owner's usual place of residence with a member of his family above
the age of 14 years. In the case of infants, notice shall be served on their
guardians. When real estate is held by joint tenants, tenants in common,
or tenants by the entirety, service upon any one tenant shall be service
upon all. If the owner of the real estate is not a resident of the Borough,
notice may be served upon him personally or upon his agent in charge of
the property, or mailed to the nonresident owner at his last known address.
if the owner is unknown or for any reason service cannot be made in the
manner provided herein, the notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper circulating in the Borough not less than 30 days before the
improvements are made by the Borough. Notice to the owners of several
parcels of real estate may be inserted in the same publication.
§ 202-51. Improvement by Borough.
Where the property owner, after being served with notice, neglects to
make the required repairs or improvements within 30 days, the Mayor and
Council may cause the improvements to be made under the supervision of
§ 202-47 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-51
199:379
the appropriate Borough officer or may award a contract for the making of
it. The Borough officer in charge of the improvement shall keep accurate
account of the costs. The Mayor and Council shall examine the report and,
if properly made, confirm it and file it with the officer charged with the
collection of assessments who shall record it in the book in which other
assessments of the Borough are recorded. Before confirming the report,
the Mayor and Council shall give notice to the owner of the property of
the time and place fixed for examination of the report. The notice shall be
served in the manner provided in § 202-50, but failure to give notice shall
not invalidate any assessment. Where several properties are benefited by
repairs or improvements made in accordance with this section, the cost
shall be assessed against the properties benefited in proportion to their
frontage upon the street or sidewalk.
§ 202-52. Permit required.
No person shall perform any work of constructing, improving or
maintaining any sidewalk or curb or break up the surface or make any
excavation in any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 202-53. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Superintendent of Public
Works upon forms provided by him and shall contain the name and address
of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk where the work is to be
performed, the name and address of the person who is to perform the work,
the nature of the work to be performed, and such other information as the
Superintendent may appropriately require.
§ 202-54. Term of permit; fees.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall determine the time limit during
which the permit shall be valid, and the work to be performed shall be
performed within the limit unless the same is extended in writing by the
Superintendent of Public Works. The fee for a permit under this article shall
be $10 which shall be used to defray the cost of inspections provided for in
§ 202-55.
§ 202-55. Inspections.
Work performed under a permit required by this article shall be inspected
by the Superintendent of Public Works or his authorized agent at least
once a day and at its completion. It shall be the duty of the permittee
to notify the Superintendent 24 hours before the commencement of the
work and immediately upon the work being completed. In the event that
the Superintendent or his agent discover that the work or any part of it
is not being performed in accordance with the provisions of this article
or the plans and specifications on file in the Superintendent's office, he
shall so notify the permittee or his agent. Work shall immediately cease
§ 202-51 NORWOOD CODE § 202-55
199:380
and shall not be resumed until the violation is corrected. If the permittee
fails or refuses to correct the violation within a reasonable time, the
Superintendent may correct it or cause it to be corrected. In that event, the
cost of correcting the violation shall be a municipal lien against the property
abutting the sidewalk and shall be collected in the manner provided in
§ 202-51.
§ 202-55 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-55
199:381

ARTICLE VIII
Regulations Governing the Use of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
§ 202-56. Bridging.
No person shall place any bridging over any gutter or any pipe or other
obstruction in any gutter without first obtaining permission in writing from
the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 202-57. Awnings.
No person shall place or maintain any drop awning extending over any
sidewalk which, when lowered, shall be left at seven feet above the
sidewalk.
§ 202-58. Temporary awnings.
Temporary awnings may be erected across the sidewalk and permitted to
remain for a period not exceeding 24 hours, provided that they are securely
fastened and so arranged as to permit travel along the sidewalk.
§ 202-59. Driveways.
No person shall cut through or lower the curb or change the grade of a
sidewalk for the purpose of making a driveway without obtaining a permit
from the Superintendent of Public Works. The fee for such a permit, the
manner of obtaining it, and the manner of conducting the work shall be
the same as provided in Article VII, Construction and Repair of Curbs and
Sidewalks, for the construction of sidewalks.
§ 202-56 STORMWATER CONTROL § 202-59
199:383
Chapter 207
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 207-1. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Construction
Official of the borough and shall be enforced by the Construction Official
with the cooperation of the Board of Health and its officers, as indicated
herein, and all other persons required to enforce the ordinances of the
borough.
§ 207-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMANENT SWIMMING POOL — Any pool and appurtenances, whether
located indoors or outdoors, used by any person for recreational swimming
or bathing and having a depth of 12 inches below the level of surrounding
land, a deck area of 10 square feet or more and a capacity of 25,000 gallons
or more.
PORTABLE POOL — Any above-surface type of swimming pool constructed
of canvas, rubber, plastic or other material or materials, not designed or
intended to be stationary or permanently fixed, but designed or intended to
be moved, removed and stored.
WADING POOL — Any shallow pool, with less than a twelve-inch depth
capacity, not included under the definitions of permanent or portable
swimming pool.
§ 207-3. Permits. (Ord. #84-0-18, S 1)
A. Application for permits for the construction and maintenance of any
permanent swimming pool, as defined in § 207-2 hereof, shall be made
to the Construction Official by the owner of the property upon which it
is to be constructed or by the contractor who will construct the same.
The application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans,
specifications and a plot plan, certified by an engineer licensed by the
State of New Jersey, which plan shall indicate prior and proposed
elevations; pool lines; the location, height and type of all existing
fencing or walks on the boundary lines of the property; and the type and
height of fencing or enclosure as may be required by this chapter. The
applicant shall also submit information as to the plumbing and filtration
systems.
§ 202-59 NORWOOD CODE § 207-3
207:384
§ 207-4. Construction.
§ 207-5. Water supply.
B. Applicants shall pay a fee to the borough for a permit to erect a
permanent swimming pool as defined in this chapter, which permit fee
shall be inclusive of the permit fee required for the erection of any
accessory structure or structures to be used in connection with such
swimming pool and which shall be at the same rate as is provided for
other improvements in the borough. The permit fee will be $9 per
$1,000 of estimated cost of work, provided that a minimum of $50 be
paid.
C. No permit for a permanent swimming pool shall be issued by the
Construction Official until the plans, specifications and plot plan have
been approved by the Plumbing Inspector, Sanitary Inspector and the
Board of Health. Such approval must be directly obtained by the
applicant. No permit shall be issued unless and until approvals of
Underwriter Laboratories, the Board of Health and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter are all presented to the Construction Official.
D. The Board of Health shall review all plans and specifications assuring
that the appropriate sanitary systems and safeguards are to be
included. The Board shall forward the recommendations to the
Construction Official for consideration prior to the making of the final
determination. The Board of Health may establish a reasonable fee for
its functions as provided for in this section.
A. All materials used in the construction of portable swimming pools,
permanent swimming pools and wading pools, whether built in the
ground or above the ground, shall be constructed of such materials as
shall be waterproof and so designed and constructed as to facilitate the
emptying and cleaning thereof. All pools shall be maintained and
operated in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at any time when
such pool is in use or at such times as the same shall be subjected to or
available for use.
B. It shall be unlawful to use any temporary electrical connections in or
about any portable swimming pool, private pool or wading pool or
within 12 feet thereof. All electrical connections shall be of a
waterproof type and shall bear the seal of approval of the Underwriters'
Laboratories and shall be adequately and effectively grounded in
accordance with all electrical codes. Underwater pool lighting fixtures
shall be approved by the Construction Official as to design and
installation prior to use. The Construction Official may require
inspection by the Underwriters' Laboratories as further evidence of
proper installation of electrical equipment.
A. There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply system and any swimming pool, wading pool or
portable pool below the maximum waterline of the pool or to a
§ 207-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-5
207:385
§ 207-6. Discharge system.
All permanent swimming pools or portable pools, now constructed,
installed, established or maintained, or hereafter constructed, installed,
established or maintained, within the borough shall be provided with the
necessary equipment to completely pump out or empty said pool or shall
be emptied by providing one drainage outlet to be installed at the lowest
point of said pool not in excess of three inches in diameter, extending
from said pool to either a storm sewer catch basin, lawn watering system,
adequate dry well or sand filtering pit on the premises on which said private
pool is located. The discharge of water from pools into storm sewers shall
be permitted only where the capacity is adequate as determined by the
Borough Engineer. No permanent pool drain, wading pool drain or portable
pool drain shall be connected into the sanitary sewer system. The discharge
of said waters shall in no case cause or create a nuisance to the abutting
property, and the discharge of waters, either directly or indirectly, upon
the property of others shall be deemed a nuisance under the terms of this
chapter.
§ 207-7. Disinfection of pools.
The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of pool water shall comply
with the latest recommendations made by the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, published jointly
by the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
No water shall be used for swimming purposes which, when tested, shall
show coliforms contained therein. For the purposes of this chapter, the use
of disinfecting agents approved by the National Swimming Pool Institute, or
such disinfecting agents as shall meet the same or higher standards, shall
be deemed compliance.
§ 207-8. Fencing of pools.
recirculating or heating system of said pool. The piping system shall be
designed to circulate pool water through filtering equipment, and all
water used shall be potable as is established by standards set by the
State of New Jersey for potable water and shall be subject to inspection
by the Health Department of the borough. The installation, repair and
control of all plumbing facilities used to service any pool shall comply
with the borough Building and Plumbing Codes47 and Chapter 233,
Zoning.
B. All circulating units shall have sufficient capacity to recirculate the
entire contents of a pool within 24 hours or less.
C. Any pool having a capacity in excess of 750 gallons shall have pumps for
recirculating, including filters and disinfecting equipment.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction.
§ 207-5 NORWOOD CODE § 207-8
207:386
§ 207-9. Location of permanent swimming pools.
A. All permanent swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained shall be completely and
continuously surrounded by a permanent durable wall, fence or barrier
which shall be no more than six feet nor less than four feet in height
above grade, and shall be so constructed as to have no opening, mesh,
hole or gap larger than two inches in any dimension, except for doors
and gates; provided, however, that if a picket fence is erected or
maintained, the horizontal dimension of any gap or opening shall not
exceed 21/2 inches. All fences shall be constructed in accordance with
other borough ordinances regulating fences. No fence of any kind or
material shall be constructed or maintained which shall contain
projections of any kind at any point on the outer surface of said fence. A
dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such
enclosure. All gates used in conjunction with any of the above-described
enclosures shall conform to the specifications required above as to
height and dimensions of openings, mesh, holes or gaps in the case of
fences, and all gates and doors shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all
times when not in actual use. Gates and doors shall be locked when the
pool is not in use or is unguarded or unattended; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the
construction of an additional wall, fence or barrier where, in lieu
thereof, the entire premises or a part thereof wherein the pool is
contained shall be fully enclosed by a wall, fence or barrier which meets
the specifications set forth herein.
B. Every portable pool shall be enclosed by a durable wall, barrier or fence
as described in the preceding subsection, unless such portable pool be:
(1) Emptied when not in use or unattended; or
(2) Covered with a suitable, strong, protective covering fastened or
locked in place when not in use or unattended. A cover shall be
considered to be of sufficient strength and securely fastened or
locked in place if, when fastened or locked in place, it will support a
minimum dead weight of 200 pounds.
C. All pools considered as aboveground type having a height above the
ground level of not less than four feet (48 inches) shall be exempt from
perimeter fencing only when the pool is provided with a retractable or
swing-up ladder or steps or having additional fencing above the fortyeight-
inch or four-foot minimum and be supplied with a gate and lock to
deny access when a pool is not in use.
A. All permanent swimming pools shall be placed so to comply with the
following:
(1) Fifteen feet from side yard in R-22 and R-40 Zones.
§ 207-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-9
207:387
§ 207-10. Closing of pools.
§ 207-11. Lighting, noise and nuisances.
§ 207-12. Enforcement.
(2) Ten feet from side yard in R-75 and R-10 Zones.
(3) Ten feet from rear yard in all zones.
(4) Ten feet from foundation of residence.
B. Portable pools. All newly erected portable pools shall comply with the
setback requirements set forth in Subsection A above, except that
portable pools may be placed no less than five feet from the foundation
of any residence.
A. All pools supplied by a public or quasi-public water supply system and
not equipped with facilities for recirculation and reuse of pool water
shall be subjected to closure by order of the Mayor of the borough
during any period of emergency water shortage declared by a duly
authorized public official.
B. Whenever any pool is a hazard to the health of the public, the Sanitary
Officer of the borough or any Borough Health Official is authorized to
summarily close such pool. Upon failure of the owner or the person in
charge thereof to abate such hazard to the public health within 12
hours following receipt of notice, written or oral, to keep such pool
closed unless retested by such official and approved for use, the owner
or person in charge of the pool shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the official to the Board of Health of the borough. However,
such appeal shall not stay the action of the Sanitary or Health Officer.
C. In the case of unused, abandoned pools of any type when the
Construction Official, Health Officer or Sanitary Officer determines that
said pool is a hazard to public health or safety, said officer is authorized
by this chapter to drain or cover said pool, or both, at the expense of the
owner.
A. No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
a permanent swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool in such a
manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance to neighboring properties.
Such lighting shall not shine directly upon any abutting property. No
unshielded lights shall be permitted.
B. No excessive noise or other nuisance which annoys or disturbs the
comfort of anyone on neighboring properties shall be permitted in
connection with the operation or maintenance of any private pool,
wading pool or portable pool.
A. Every permanent swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool
constructed, installed, established or maintained in the borough shall at
§ 207-9 NORWOOD CODE § 207-12
207:388
§ 207-13. Variances.
Where literal enforcement of any provision of this chapter would cause
undue hardship to the owner of any premises, such owner may apply in
writing to the Mayor and Council for a variance excepting said owner
from conforming with the requirements of such provision. The Mayor and
Council shall hold a public hearing on applications, to afford interested
parties an opportunity to express their views thereon, and may thereafter
grant or deny such applications, subject to any additional requirements
which it deems necessary to preserve public health and safety and prevent
nuisances. The Mayor and Council may require applicants for variances
to submit a fee with their applications in order to cover borough costs
in considering such applications, which fee will not be refundable if an
application is denied.
§ 207-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 211
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Limousine and livery services — See Ch. 149. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
all times comply with the requirements of the local Board of Health.
Any nuisance or hazard to health, which may exist or develop in, or in
consequence of, or in connection with any such permanent swimming
pool, wading pool or portable pool, shall be forthwith abated and
removed by the owner, lessee or occupant upon receipt of notice from
the Board of Health of the borough.
B. It shall be the duty of the Sanitary and Health Officer and/or the
Construction Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
C. The owner or operator of any pool within the borough shall allow said
Sanitary and Health Officer and/or Construction Official access to any
permanent swimming pool or wading pool or portable pool and
appurtenances thereto for the purpose of inspecting to ascertain
compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent borough
ordinances, at all reasonable times.
§ 207-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 211-1
207:389
§ 211-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab along a public street at a slow
rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Consists of transporting in a taxicab one
or more persons for hire. Accepting a passenger to be transported for
hire from a point of departure within the Borough to a destination within
or without the Borough or discharging a passenger transported for hire
from a point outside of the Borough to a point within the Borough shall
be considered operation of a taxicab within the Borough. The operation of
a taxicab by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner as well as by the person actually driving the taxi. The transportation
of any person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing a
sign using the words taxi, taxicab or hack shall be presumed, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, to be operation of a taxicab.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered
with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or who appears in the
Department's records as a conditional vendee or lessee or has any other
proprietary interest in a taxicab.
TAXICAB OR TAXI — A motor vehicle used to transport passengers for hire
which does not operate over a fixed route and is not hired by the day or
hour.
§ 211-2. License required.
No person shall operate a taxicab within the Borough unless both the
taxicab and the driver are licensed in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 211-3. Classes of licenses.
There shall be two classes of licenses: a taxicab driver's license and a
taxicab owner's license. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person
licensed to operate within the Borough any taxicab duly licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A taxicab owner's license
shall entitle the taxicab so licensed to be operated in the Borough by any
person licensed as a taxi driver.
§ 211-4. Transferability; expiration date.
Both classes of licenses designated in § 211-3 shall apply only to the person
or taxicab to whom or to which they are issued and shall not be transferable.
Both classes of licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue at
12:00 midnight local time, and applications for the renewal of both classes
of licenses shall be made before December 1 of the year of issue.
§ 211-1 NORWOOD CODE § 211-5
207:390
§ 211-5. Number of licenses.
The number of taxicab owners' licenses shall not exceed that number which
the Mayor and Council, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, determine
to be the maximum number which can be issued without undue congestion
in the public streets, including areas adjacent to bus or railroad stations
or other locations at which taxicabs frequently pick up or discharge
passengers. The number of taxicab drivers' licenses shall be unlimited.
§ 211-6. Application information.
A. Application for a license of either class shall be made to the Borough
Clerk upon a form provided by him and shall contain the following
information:
(1) License of either class.
(a) The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a
corporation, its name, the address of its principal place of
business and the name and address of its registered agent.
(b) A statement as to whether the applicant, in the case of a
corporation, its officers, directors and principal stockholders,
has ever been convicted of violating any criminal or quasicriminal
statute, including traffic laws and municipal
ordinances; if the applicant has been so convicted a statement
as to the date of the conviction, the nature of the offense and
the punishment imposed.
(c) A list of all the places where the applicant has ever applied for
or been granted a license of either class required by this
chapter, regardless of by what name such license was called,
together with the date of the application, a statement as to
whether the application was granted or denied and a statement
as to whether the license was subsequently suspended or
revoked or a renewal of the license refused; in the event that
the applicant has ever had an application for the issuance or
renewal of a taxicab owner's or taxicab driver's license denied
or has had such a license revoked or suspended, a statement as
to the date and place of such denial, refusal, revocation or
suspension and the reasons for it.
(d) Sufficient appropriate evidence as to the applicant's good
character and business responsibility so that an investigator
may properly evaluate it.
(2) Taxicab driver's license.
(a) In addition to the information required by Subsection A, an
applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall supply the
following information:
§ 211-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 211-6
207:391
§ 211-7. Investigation.
The application shall be referred by the Borough Clerk to the Chairman
of the Police Committee or a police officer designated by him who shall,
as soon as practicable, institute an investigation of the facts stated in the
application. If the investigating officer decides that the applicant is not a
responsible person of good character or cannot be relied upon to render
safe and reasonably prompt, efficient and convenient taxicab service or
cannot be relied upon to safely drive or operate, as the case may be, a
taxicab in the Borough, he shall disapprove the application. Otherwise, he
shall approve the application and recommend the issuance of a license.
§ 211-8. Report of investigation; hearing; issuance of license.
The report of the investigation shall be transmitted to the Mayor and
Council who shall, within a reasonable time after the application has been
[1] The number of the applicant's New Jersey motor vehicle
operator's license.
[2] The names and addresses of all persons by whom the
applicant has been employed for the past five years, the
position held and the nature of the work performed.
[3] Two photographs at least 31/2 inches in size showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
(b) If the Mayor and Council consider it necessary for the proper
identification or investigation of the applicant, the applicant
shall be fingerprinted and the fingerprints immediately
processed for classification and identification.
(3) Taxicab owner's license. In addition to the information required by
Subsection A, an applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall
supply the following information:
(a) The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the
applicant and the location of any proposed depots or terminals.
(b) Appropriate evidence that the applicant is insured as required
by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et seq.
(c) Any other appropriate information which the Mayor or Council
may, by resolution, require.
B. Applications shall be verified by oath or affirmation. Applications by a
partnership shall give the information required by this section for each
partner and shall be verified for all partners. Applications by
corporations shall give the information required for and be verified by
all officers, directors and principal stockholders of the corporation as
well as by the corporation itself.
§ 211-6 NORWOOD CODE § 211-8
207:392
filed, consider the same. The Mayor and Council may then proceed to grant
the application or, if they are not satisfied that the applicant is entitled to a
license, they may determine to hold a hearing on the matter. In that event,
the applicant and any other person having a special interest in the matter
shall be given at least five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing,
which shall be conducted in the same manner as the hearing provided in
Chapter 172, Peddling and Soliciting. After the hearing, the Mayor and
Council shall, by resolution, grant or deny the license.
§ 211-9. Term of license; fees. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
10:12]
The fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be $50 per year, and the fee for a
taxicab owner's license shall be $50 per year for each taxicab, except that
an owner and operator will not pay a fee in excess of $50 for the right to
operate each taxicab. Fees shall not be prorated.
§ 211-10. Regulations.
A. Solicitation and acceptance of passengers.
(1) No taxicab shall engage in cruising as defined in § 211-1.
(2) No person other than a licensed taxicab driver with a vehicle at his
immediate disposal shall solicit passengers.
B. Display of licenses. Every person licensed as a taxicab driver under this
chapter shall be issued a license card in a form approved by the
Borough Council and signed by the Borough Clerk. The license card
shall at all times be prominently displayed in the interior of the taxicab
in such a manner that it can be easily seen by all persons riding in the
cab as passengers. No license shall be displayed in a taxicab which does
not belong to the person actually driving it at the time.
C. Identification of taxicab. Every taxicab shall prominently display a sign
bearing the owner's name and the word "taxi," "taxicab" or "cab." No
taxicab owner shall attempt to mislead the public by imitating the name
or color scheme of another taxicab owner. The person first using a
particular name and color scheme shall have the prior right to it.
D. Inspection. Every vehicle operated under a taxicab license issued by the
Borough shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by any
police officer of the Borough.
E. Service.
(1) Every taxicab shall have in it a card displayed within view of all
passengers stating its maximum seating capacity. This capacity
shall be determined by the Mayor and Council based upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police at the time that the vehicle is
initially licensed. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried
§ 211-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 211-10
207:393
§ 211-11. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Any application for the issuance or renewal of a license required by this
chapter may be denied, and any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the Borough Council after notice of a hearing in
the manner provided in Chapter 172, Peddling and Soliciting, for any of the
following reasons:
in his taxicab as passengers than the number stated as the
maximum permissible seating capacity.
(2) No driver shall refuse to carry any orderly person to any
destination within the Borough unless unable or forbidden by the
provisions of this chapter to do so.
(3) No driver of a taxicab shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming that person as to the time or place of the
arrival or departure of any train or bus, or as to the location of any
public place or private residence within the Borough, or as to the
distance between any two points; nor shall any driver convey a
passenger to any other place or over any other route than that
which the passenger may have instructed him to take. Unless
otherwise ordered, a passenger shall be conveyed only over the
most direct, practical route to his destination.
F. Lost property. Every taxicab driver, at the beginning and at the end of
his tour of duty, shall carefully search his cab for any property lost or
left in it. Any lost property not claimed by or delivered to the owner
within 24 hours shall be reported in writing to the Chief of Police by the
driver or owner of the taxicab. The report shall give brief particulars
and a description of the property.
G. Telephone. Every taxicab owner shall have a regular business office and
shall have a telephone installed in it. The number of the telephone shall
be listed in the telephone directory under the same name as that under
which the taxicab is operated.
A. License of either class.
(1) Conviction of the licensee of any felony or high misdemeanor or any
misdemeanor or disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude.
(2) Violation of any provision of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes or any ordinance of the Borough dealing with the
regulation of traffic, provided that such violation is of such a nature
as to show a disregard by the applicant or license for the safety of
others. In addition, there shall be grounds to refuse to issue or
renew or to revoke or suspend a license if the applicant has been
guilty of repeated violations of Title 39 or of the ordinances of the
Borough relating to traffic, regardless of the nature of the violation.
§ 211-10 NORWOOD CODE § 211-11
207:394
Chapter 215
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking on snow-covered roads — See Ch.
222, § 222-10.
§ 215-1. Purpose.
In order to protect the property of and persons who operate a motor vehicle
in the Borough of Norwood as well as to further promote the free flow of
(3) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
(4) The existence of a judgment unsatisfied of record against the
applicant or licensee arising out of an automobile accident.
(5) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for the issuance or
renewal of a license.
(6) Failure to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxicab
service.
B. Taxicab driver's license. In addition to the causes for denial, revocation
or suspension of a license specified in Subsection A, a taxicab driver's
license may be denied, suspended or revoked for the following reasons:
(1) Negligence by the licensee or applicant in the operation of a motor
vehicle resulting in damage to property or injuries to persons. Such
denial, revocation or suspension may be made regardless of
whether or not there has been a criminal conviction or a finding of
civil liability against the applicant or licensee for such negligence.
(2) Contraction by the applicant or licensee of a communicable or
contagious disease.
C. Taxicab owner's license. In addition to the causes specified in
Subsection A, a taxicab owner's license may be denied, revoked or
suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) If by reason of unsafe or unsanitary conditions, the motor vehicle
licensed or to be licensed is dangerous to the safety or health of the
occupants or others.
(2) If the policy of insurance or bond or power of attorney required by
N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et seq. has not been furnished or kept in force.
(3) Violation of any applicable law of the State of New Jersey or
ordinance of the Borough relating to the operation of taxicabs.
§ 211-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 215-1
207:395
traffic in the Borough, it is desirable and necessary to adopt this chapter
to ensure proper licensing, availability and other controls over persons and
firms providing wrecker services at police request.
§ 215-2. License required.
No person may engage in municipal towing at police request without first
obtaining a license therefor as provided by this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall apply to persons who operate a wrecker or tow truck that
picks up disabled vehicles outside the Borough limits and are in the course
of taking such vehicles to a garage or other location, either within or
without the Borough, nor to wreckers or tow trucks whose services are
specifically requested by the driver or owner of a disabled vehicle.
§ 215-3. Contents of application for permit.
Any person, corporation or business firm with its place of business within
the Borough who desires to perform towing work at police request shall
submit an application for a towing license on forms furnished by the
Borough Clerk to the Chief of Police. The application shall state:
§ 215-4. Investigation.
After receiving a letter of application for a towing license, the Chief of
Police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation to determine
the truth and accuracy of all the information contained in the application,
whether the applicant and all employees are fit and proper persons to
conduct the proposed business, whether the applicant has demonstrated,
by his equipment capacity, the location of the business and the location to
which requests will be directed during on-call hours, the ability to respond
A. The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is made
for a corporation, it shall state the corporation's registered office and
its registered agent.
B. The year, make and type of each wrecker used in said business, its
serial number, registration number and registered owner.
C. The address where the wrecker or tow truck shall be regularly garaged,
the telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hour per day basis
and the names of all operators, their addresses and their New Jersey
motor vehicle license numbers.
D. The location, size and security features of the storage lot on which
towed vehicles will be stored.
E. The name and address of the insurance carriers and agents and the
policy numbers of garage keepers and garage liability insurance
policies.
F. A statement of willingness to be available 24 hours a day, each day of
the year, and to abide by the fees set forth herein.
§ 215-1 NORWOOD CODE § 215-4
207:396
to calls 24 hours a day and whether such ability to respond is sufficient to
provide a response to any location within the Borough of Norwood within
15 minutes of request made by the Police Department of the Borough of
Norwood. Upon completion of his investigation, the Chief of Police shall
forward a copy of the letter of application for a towing license to the
Borough Council, along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval
of the license and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. Upon receipt of
the application, the Borough Council shall determine whether or not the
applicant has complied with all the necessary standards and criteria, and
if it shall so find, the license shall be issued to the applicant, and the
applicants name shall be placed at the end of the towing list.
§ 215-5. Issuance of license; fee. [Amended 12-5-2000 by Ord. No.
00:17]
The Borough Clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the approval
of his application and shall issue the license. The license shall contain
the following information: name and address of the licensee, number of
the license and amount of fee paid, date of issuance of the license and
expiration date, the signature of the Borough Clerk and the Seal of the
Borough. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. The
Borough Clerk shall keep a copy of the license for filing and maintain a
permanent record of all licenses issued. The license fee for the license
issued under this chapter shall be $50 per year.
§ 215-6. Revocation of license; transferability. [Amended by Ord.
No. 91-0-14]
A. The Borough Council may terminate a license under the following
circumstances:
(1) When it is found that the license was secured by fraud or the
concealment of a material fact by the applicant, which fact, if
known, would have caused the refusal to issue the license.
(2) When it is found that the applicant has violated any of the
requirements or regulations established by the Chief of Police or
any of his employees.
(3) When the Borough is not satisfied with the general services of the
owner and/or employees or with the cooperation it has received in
rendering service.
B. A license issued to a person or business firm under this chapter shall
not be transferable.
C. The Borough Council shall notify the licensee in writing that it intends
to revoke the license. This written notice shall be served by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and shall specify the reasons why the
Borough Council intends to revoke the license. The licensee may
request a hearing on the charges by requesting same in writing within
§ 215-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 215-6
207:397
§ 215-7. Certificate of liability.
No towing license shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant has
provided the following:
seven days of its receipt of the notice of revocation. Thereafter, the
Borough Council shall conduct a hearing not later than 21 days after it
receives the licensee's request for said hearing. The Borough Council
can continue the hearing from time to time to hear additional evidence.
Upon the close of the hearing, the Borough Council shall notify the
licensee of its final decision as to revocation of the license.
A. Garage-keeper's policy. A certificate of full garage-keeper's legal
liability coverage, including fire, theft, collision and comprehensive,
including vandalism and malicious mischief in the minimum amount of
$50,000 with each vehicle damaged deemed a separate claim.
B. Garage liability policy.
(1) A certificate of liability and property damage insurance covering
the operation of the applicant's business, equipment or other
vehicles shall be in the minimum amount of $500,000 single-limit
coverage and an additional $100,000 for all damage arising from
injury to or destruction of property.
(2) Every policy required under this chapter must contain an
endorsement by the insurance carrier providing 30 days' notice to
both the Borough of Norwood and the licensee in the event of any
change of coverage under the policy or cancellation thereof.
(3) In the event the policy is changed so that it fails to conform with
any of the above requirements or if the policy of any licensee is
canceled for any reason, the Chief of Police shall notify the person
responsible for the policy, and it shall be corrected or reinstated or
replaced with a conforming policy within 10 days after notice is
received and before the date of cancellation, and in no event will
any license be valid after cancellation of such policy. If the policy or
certificate is not corrected, reinstated or replaced within the
required time, the Chief of Police shall immediately suspend the
towing license and immediately remove the name of the licensed
wrecker from the towing list.
C. The owner or applicant shall assume all liability and shall indemnify and
save the Borough, its subdivisions, departments, agents and employees
harmless from damages sustained by vehicles while being towed or
stored and from all personal injuries occurring to any of the firms'
employees or any other persons as a result of towing and storage or
activities related to the towing and storage under this chapter.
D. A hold harmless agreement executed on behalf of the applicant.
[Amended 10-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04:16]
§ 215-6 NORWOOD CODE § 215-8
207:398
§ 215-8. Equipment. [Amended 4-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03:03]
Each wrecker or tow truck must meet all of the requirements of N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq. and must have a lifting capacity of at least four tons. In
addition, each wrecker must have the following equipment:
§ 215-9. Maintenance of list; choice of tower.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a monthly revolving list of licensed
wreckers to provide service where needed and shall instruct all officers
to utilize said list. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to
prevent any owner or operator of a motor vehicle from calling any tower
or wrecker of his own choice. It is specifically permitted for the Chief of
Police or his designee to call a wrecker out of sequence or seek the services
of a nonlicensed wrecker if the nature of the wreck requires specialized
equipment or if the proximity to the wreck or estimated response time
makes it practical to do so. No wrecker or person shall respond to the scene
of an accident, except upon notification by the Police Department or upon
the request of the driver or owner of the disabled vehicle. In the event that
the firm that is on call fails to respond within 15 minutes of notification or is
for any reason unavailable, the next service in line on the towing list shall be
called upon. An unexcused failure to respond shall be grounds for removal
from the towing list.
§ 215-10. Storage of towed vehicles.
All vehicles towed at the request of the Police Department must be removed
to a place within the Borough or a mile radius outside the Borough unless
the owner or operator of the vehicle specifically requests that it be towed
to a place outside the Borough limits or to a location approved by the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Norwood. The towing firm must provide a safe
area for the storage of towed vehicles. This area shall be screened and
protected by a fence no less than six feet in height and no greater than
eight feet high, having a gate with padlock assembly. The fenced-in area
used for the storage of towed vehicles shall be illuminated. The fencing and
A. One large broom and shovel.
B. At least one set of dolly wheels.
C. Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
D. Tow sling type tow bar to prevent any part of crane metal from touching
towed vehicles.
E. Emergency warning lights.
F. Portable safety lights to be installed on rear of towed vehicle, if
necessary.
G. Safety flares for night work.
§ 215-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 215-10
207:399
illumination measures are to provide adequate security for the towed and
stored vehicles and to prevent unsightliness.
§ 215-11. Responsibilities of licensee.
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such employment, the person or firm agrees
to:
§ 215-12. Towing and storage rates. [Amended by Ord. No. 91-0-14;
4-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03:03; 10-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04:16]
A. Provide a prompt response to each call.
B. Clean all debris at the accident site emanating from the accident.
C. Provide the Police Department with the following information on
vehicles unclaimed for over 30 days:
(1) Year, make, color and vehicle identification number.
(2) Owner's name and address, if available.
D. Maintain a ledger of all towing or wrecking jobs handled, the name of
the owner or operator, if known, the charges made for the service and
the date and amount of payment.
E. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this chapter.
F. Comply with all motor vehicle rules and regulations found in N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq.
A. The following fees may be charged by authorized contractors:
(1) Towing, flatbed or regular tow to garage, passenger cars, small
vans and pickups: $110. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
12:11]
(2) Towing, flatbed or regular tow to garage, motorcycles, mopeds and
trail bikes: $110. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12:11]
(3) Service calls during regular business hours, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.:
$50. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12:11]
(4) Service calls after hours, Sundays and holidays: $75. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12:11]
(5) Service call (flat tires, remove tire and replace with serviceable
spare) add to above rates: $15.
(6) Vehicle storage, inside or outside per day: $40. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12:11]
(a) No storage charge for the first day of towing.
§ 215-10 NORWOOD CODE § 215-12
207:400
(b) No charge for storage of mopeds and trail bikes for the first
two days.
(7) Additional charges may be added at the rate of $70 per hour due to
unreasonable delays or unusual difficulties encountered at the
scene.
(8) Vehicles will be released during normal business hours only.
B. Fees for all other types of vehicles shall be determined in accordance
with this subsection:
NOTE: Class 1 vehicles are all vehicles 6,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight to 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; Class 2 vehicles are all
vehicles 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight to 80,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight.
(1) The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
(a) Days.
Service Class 1 Class 2
Standard tow $100.00 $150.00
Wheel lift $125.00 $175.00
Flatbed $150.00 $200.00
(b) Nights.
Service Class 1 Class 2
Standard tow $125.00 $175.00
Wheel lift $150.00 $200.00
Flatbed $175.00 $225.00
(2) The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
(a) Inside building.
Storage Facility
Capacity
Class 1 Class 2
21 or more spaces $25.00 $50.00
10-20 spaces $25.00 $50.00
(b) Outside building.
Storage Facility
Capacity
Class 1 Class 2
21 or more spaces $25.00 $50.00
10-20 spaces $25.00 $50.00
§ 215-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 215-12
207:401
Chapter 218
TRAILERS AND BOATS
§ 218-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER OR CAMP CAR — Any vehicle, whether self-propelled or
otherwise, including commercial tractor-trailers having no permanent
foundation which may be used as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or
more persons, or for a place of business, or for the storage of materials of
any kind.
§ 218-2. Parking of trailers and boats prohibited.
No person shall park a trailer, camp car or boat on any street or private
premises in the borough for any purpose, except repairs or storage.
§ 218-3. Restrictions on storage.
No person shall store or permit to be stored on any premises owned by him
or under his control more than one trailer, camp car or boat. Any trailer,
camp car or boat undergoing repairs or being stored shall not, during the
period of storage or repair, be used by any person as a dwelling or sleeping
place.
(3) The fees for nonpassenger vehicles in this section are the maximum
charges that shall apply for basic towing services. The official
towers, however, shall be allowed for winching and wrecking
services over and above the basic towing services an additional
$50.00 per hour for light-duty wrecker, $100 per hour for mediumduty
wrecker and $150 per hour for heavy-duty wrecker. There
shall be no additional charges for any other services, including but
not limited to waiting time, cleanup costs and additional labor
when only basic towing services, as defined, are provided.
C. The fees set forth in Subsections A and B of this section for towing rates
are the maximum charges that shall apply to basic towing services.
There shall be no additional charges other than those provided herein,
including, but not limited to, flatbedding, waiting time, winching,
cleanup cost and additional labor when only basic towing services as
defined are provided. The official towers, however, shall be allowed to
charge for services other than basic towing services, as defined in this
section, the sum of $25 per hour for any additional winching services
required over and above the basic towing services when removing a
vehicle from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being
impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm.
§ 215-12 NORWOOD CODE § 218-4
218:402
§ 218-4. Manner of storage. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-02]
Any trailer, camp car or boat stored pursuant to this chapter may be parked
or stored on private residential property in the Borough of Norwood subject
to the following conditions: If the trailer, camp car, or boat is parked or
stored outside of a garage or building, it shall be parked or stored to the
rear of the front building line of the lot or within the side yard or within
the rear yard of the premises formed by the extension of the side building
line to the rear lot line, so long as the vehicle does not protrude into the
side yard requirements as set forth in any applicable ordinance within the
Borough of Norwood.
Chapter 221
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Contractor licensing — See Ch. 107.
Landscapers — See Ch. 148.
Outdoor sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 164.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202..
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A261.
§ 218-4 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 218-4
218:403

ARTICLE I
Clear Cutting
[Adopted 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16:05]
§ 221-1. Purpose and findings.
This chapter's purpose is to regulate the practice of clear cutting trees
on private property to better protect and advance the health, safety, and
welfare of Norwood's residents and businesses. The practice of
indiscriminate clear cutting of trees increases the Borough's costs to control
drainage and causes soil erosion, decreased soil fertility, and the
deterioration of the Borough's residential character, thus reducing property
values.
§ 221-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter will have the following
meanings:
CLEAR CUTTING — The removal in any calendar year of more than three
trees or 20% of the trees on any lot in the Borough as depicted on the
Borough's tax map or on or in any approved subdivision plat or deed,
whichever lot is smaller in size.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietor, corporation, partnership,
limited-liability company, or any other business.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant with a trunk having a diameter of
at least eight inches when measured at a point that is four feet six inches
above the level of the existing grade, or, for a multiple trunked tree, with
the trunk with the largest diameter that, when multiplied by 1.5, is at least
eight inches.
§ 221-3. Clear cutting prohibited.
No person may clear cut any lot in the Borough without obtaining a permit
from the Borough.
§ 221-4. Application for clear cutting.
Applications for permission to clear cut a lot are to be filed with the Borough
Clerk's office and will state the information requested on the application,
including:
A. The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
B. The address, block and lot number, and location of the property.
C. A site plan or survey of the property showing the location of the trees
proposed to be cut.
§ 221-1 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 221-4
218:405
§ 221-5. Application fee.
The applicant will pay a fee of $25 to the Borough upon the filing of an
application under this chapter.
§ 221-6. Review of applications.
Any application for clear cutting will be reviewed by the Mayor and Council
and will be granted or denied at a public meeting to be held on written
notice sent to the applicant at the address stated in the application. The
Mayor and Council may request comment on the application from the
Norwood Environmental Commission, the Norwood Planning Board, the
Norwood Zoning Board of Adjustment, Borough employees, and the public.
§ 221-7. Time for decision.
The Mayor and Council will grant or deny any application filed under this
Chapter within 60 days of the receipt of the application and fee, unless the
applicant consents to an extension. If no action is taken by the Mayor and
Council within this time period, then the application will be deemed denied.
§ 221-8. Enforcement.
The Borough's Construction Code Official will enforce this chapter.
§ 221-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the terms of this chapter will be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code. Each tree that is cut
in violation of this chapter will be considered a separate violation.
D. The applicant also will use visible weatherproof markings on the trees
proposed to be cut, provided that no paint or chemicals that are harmful
to the trees are used.
§ 221-4 NORWOOD CODE § 221-9
218:406
ARTICLE II
Tree Experts and Tree Care Operators
[Adopted 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16:0748]
§ 221-10. Purpose and findings.
This chapter's purpose is to regulate tree experts and tree care operators in
a manner that is consistent with the Tree Expert and Tree Care Operator's
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 46:15C-11 et seq.
§ 221-11. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter will have the following
meanings:
ACT — The Tree Experts and Tree Care Operators Licensing Act, N.J.S.A.
46:15C-11 et seq.
LICENSED TREE CARE OPERATOR — A person licensed to provide tree
care operator services in the state pursuant to the Act.
LICENSED TREE EXPERT — A person licensed to provide tree expert
services in this state pursuant to the Act.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietor, corporation, partnership,
limited-liability company, or any other business.
TREE CARE OPERATOR SERVICES — Includes tree pruning, repairing,
brush cutting or removal, tree removal, and stump grinding or removal.
TREE CARE SERVICES — Tree care operator services and tree expert
service as established by this chapter.
TREE EXPERT SERVICES — Includes tree pruning, repairing, brush cutting
or removal, tree removal, stump grinding or removal, tree establishment,
fertilization, cabling and bracing, lightning protection, consulting,
diagnosis, and treatment of tree problems or diseases, tree management
during site planning and development, tree assessment and risk
management, and application of pesticides or any other form of tree
maintenance.
§ 221-12. Registration required.
No person may provide tree care services to another person in the Borough
without filing a registration application with the Borough Clerk's Office and
obtaining a permit confirming this registration. Property owners are not
required to register to provide tree care services on their own property in
the Borough.
§ 221-13. Application for registration.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 220, but was renumbered to maintain
the organization of the Code.
§ 221-10 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 221-13
218:407
§ 221-14. Registration fee.
The registration fee is $25 per calendar year. No part of this fee will be
prorated for any part of the year.
§ 221-15. Applicant's responsibilities.
A. All applications for registration will be in writing on forms furnished by
the Borough Clerk, signed by the applicant or the authorized agent of
the applicant, and presented to the Borough Clerk. The application will
state the applicant's name, the business name and address, telephone
number and email addresses, and other information the Borough Clerk
deems necessary for registration, including proof of any current
licenses issued to the applicant under the Act and proof of liability
insurance covering the work to be provided, as required by the Act.
B. If the applicant presents proof that it is licensed under the Act, and has
the required liability insurance, then the Borough Clerk will issue a
registration certificate permit with a copy of the Borough's ordinances
relating to trees upon the payment of the registration fee.
C. If the applicant is not licensed by the state under the Act to perform the
tree care services, then the applicant will provide any other information
requested by the Borough Clerk that is necessary to confirm that the
applicant is qualified to perform the tree care services and has
adequate liability insurance covering the work to be performed. The
Borough Clerk will, after appropriate investigation, present the
application to the Mayor and Council, which may grant or refuse the
application. If the application is approved, the Mayor and Council will
authorize and direct the Borough Clerk to issue the registration
provided that the applicant has paid the fee as hereinafter provided.
D. All registrations expire on December 31 of each year.
A. No person may provide tree care services in the Borough before
obtaining a current registration.
B. The person providing tree care services is responsible for the removal
of debris resulting from tree care services. This debris may not be
placed at the curbside for collection, swept, or deposited into any public
or private street, any residence, or left on a property such that same
may be caused to be blown into a public and/or private street and/or
residence.
C. No tree care services may be performed in the Borough on Sundays.
D. The permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or a photocopy of the permit
signed by the permit holder, must be in the actual possession of the
person performing tree care services.
§ 221-13 NORWOOD CODE § 221-16
218:408
§ 221-16. Revocation of registration.
Any person providing tree care services who violates this chapter or any
other Borough ordinances, including but not limited to those relating to
dumping, littering, causing excessive noise, or causing damage to roadways
or curbing, will, upon conviction for any of these violations, be required
to return the registration for that year to the Borough Clerk and refrain
from further work in the Borough unless and until the Borough issues
registration for a future year.
§ 221-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the terms of this chapter will be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 174 of this Code.
§ 221-16 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 221-17
218:409
Chapter 222
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 221-17 NORWOOD CODE § 221-17
218:410
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 222-1. Words and phrases.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 222-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time as may be in current
use in the Borough.
§ 222-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Norwood covered in this
Chapter 222, Vehicles and Traffic, are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 222-1 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-3
218:411

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 222-4. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 222-5. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 222-6. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 222-32) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 222-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 222-33) of any day (except on Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 222-8. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III (§ 222-34) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays)
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections where temporary emergency no parking signs are
displayed. The Mayor or the Borough Council or the Chief of Police or,
in his absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of emergency no parking signs
when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate
or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic. Notification that the emergency no parking
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable cost
of removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 222-4 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-8
218:413
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-9. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 222-35) at any time between the hours listed in Schedule IV
of any day (except Sunday and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 222-10. Parking on snow-covered roads. [Amended by Ord. No.
88-0-25]
A. Parking prohibited. Parking of any vehicle on any portion of a public
road, street or highway is prohibited whenever snow has fallen and the
accumulation is such that it covers the public road, street or highway in
the Borough of Norwood.
B. Length of time prohibitions in effect. Said parking prohibition shall
remain in effect after the snow has stopped falling and until the streets,
roads or highways have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that
parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Definition of snow. As used in this section, the term "snow" shall mean
any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets, roads or
highways, including snow, sleet, hail, ice or freezing rain.
D. Regulatory and warning signs. Regulatory and warning signs in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 shall be erected and maintained at all
street, road or highway entrances for motor vehicles into this Borough.
E. Unmovable vehicles; notification of police. During extreme weather
conditions, when a vehicle is not able to proceed and must be parked on
any street, road or highway in the Borough, the operator or owner of
such vehicle must immediately notify the Police Department of the
Borough detailing the make, model and license plate number of said
vehicle and the location at which it is parked. The Police Department
shall then immediately notify the Supervisor of Public Works of these
details.
F. Unoccupied vehicles. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in
violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the
safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall pay the
reasonable cost of the removal and storage which may result from such
removal, before regaining possession of such vehicle.
G. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey state statute, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this section shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 222-8 NORWOOD CODE § 222-10
218:414
ARTICLE IIA
Resident Parking Permits
[Adopted 4-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04:03]
§ 222-10.1. Resident parking.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets or parking lots or parts of parking lots in the Borough
contrary to the restrictions described in Schedule XX (§ 222-52).
[Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:28]
B. The resident permit parking program described in § 222-10.1C to G
shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough upon the
adoption of a resolution of the Mayor and Council authorizing same.
[Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:28]
C. The following rules and regulations shall apply to the resident permit
parking program:
(1) A resident parking permit of a design specified by the Chief of the
Police Department of the Borough (the Police Department) will be
issued to the owner of a vehicle. The vehicle must be owned by a
person residing in the Borough.
(2) Proof of residency of the owner or lessee of a vehicle must be
presented when applying for a permit. The following is acceptable
proof of residency:
(a) A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license reflecting an
address in the Borough; and
(b) A copy of a valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the
vehicle for which the permit is sought, showing an address in
the Borough. In the case of a vehicle claimed to be leased and
used by a resident, a copy of a valid motor vehicle registration
and a copy of the automobile lease shall be presented to the
Police Department in lieu of the New Jersey motor vehicle
registration.
(3) The resident's sticker is to be placed on the rear window, driver's
side, lower left-hand corner of the registered vehicle.
(4) The Police Department shall have the authority to issue temporary
resident permit parking stickers to persons claiming to be
residents of the Borough but who have not yet changed their
license or their motor vehicle registration to reflect the Borough
address and to any resident holding a current resident permit but
whose car has been stolen or incapacitated and who is driving a
temporary vehicle. The temporary sticker shall be valid for a period
not to exceed 90 days, at which time the resident must obtain a
permanent sticker by presentation of the proofs of residency set
forth in Subsection C(2) above, in the case of new residents, and
§ 222-10.1 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-10.1
218:415
§ 222-10.2. Violations and penalties.
the temporary permit shall expire in the case of a temporary
vehicle.
(5) Contractors, service and delivery vehicles bearing the name and
address of a commercial business may park without a permit
during the time they are rendering service to a residence within the
permit parking area.
(6) Emergency vehicles and public service, telephone and other public
utility vehicles may park within the permit parking area during the
time they are rendering service or repairs within the area.
D. Two visitor permits shall be issued to each residential unit on any street
or portion thereof upon which parking is restricted by this article for
use only by visitors to that residential unit. The visitor permits shall be
issued per household for use by visitors only while visitors are actually
visiting the household to which the permit was issued.
E. All visitor permits are to be displayed on the front dashboard above the
steering wheel and must be fully readable from the exterior of the
vehicle. A visitor permit should be returned to the resident at the
conclusion of the visit as it will not be replaced if lost.
F. No permit fee shall be charged to Borough residents.
G. Resident permits and visitor permits will expire annually. Any vehicle
bearing an expired resident permit or visitor permit and parked on a
street posted "Permit Parking Only" shall be subject to the same penalty
as a vehicle parked on the street without a resident permit, visitor
permit or business permit.
A. Any vehicle parked on a street or in a parking lot contrary to this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for each part of a
twenty-four-hour period that the vehicle is parked in violation of this
section. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:28]
B. Residents who park and are ticketed due to the resident's failure to
display the proper parking sticker issued in accordance with
§ 222-10.1C(2) are entitled to a one-time exemption of the fine set forth
in § 222-10.2A, in the discretion of the court, upon proof submitted to
the court of residency within the Borough at the time the ticket was
issued. "Proof of residency," for purposes of this subsection, shall be
acceptable proof as determined within § 222-10.1C(2) herein. The
aforementioned exemption shall apply one time, and any subsequent
offenders will be fined accordingly.
§ 222-10.1 NORWOOD CODE § 222-10.3
218:416
§ 222-10.3. Parking restricted in Borough parking lots. [Added
8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:17]
No person may park a vehicle in violation of the restrictions applicable to
the parking spaces designated in the locations described in Schedule XXI
(§ 222-53) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-10.3 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-10.3
218:417

ARTICLE III
Traffic Regulations
§ 222-11. Trucks over four tons.
Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 222-36), except for the pick
up and delivery of materials on such streets or emergency vehicles and
trucks owned or operated by a public utility company engaged in the repair
or maintenance of public utilities on such streets described in Schedule V
being attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 222-37) attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 222-13. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 222-38) attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs having sides 36 inches in length are provided for
in the designations.
§ 222-14. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII (§ 222-39) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 222-15. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 222-40) attached to and made part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs having sides 36 inches
in length shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 222-16. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule X (§ 222-41) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 222-17. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 222-42) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 222-11 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-18
218:419
§ 222-18. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 222-43) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 222-19. Turn prohibitions.
§ 222-20. No U-turn.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XIV (§ 222-46) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-21. No turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XV (§ 222-47) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-22. No turns by trucks.
No trucks shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVII (§ 222-49) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-23. No right turn on red.
No person shall make a right turn on red at any of the locations described
in Schedule XVIII (§ 222-50) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 222-24. Speed limits.
A. No left turn. No person shall make a left turn at any location described
in Schedule XIIIA (§ 222-44) attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
B. No right turn. No person shall make a right turn at any location
described in Schedule XIIIB (§ 222-45) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
A. The streets or part of streets described in Schedule XVI (§ 222-48)
attached to and made a part of this chapter shall have the speed limits
designated in such schedule.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 222-18 NORWOOD CODE § 222-24
218:420
ARTICLE IV
Street Closings
§ 222-25. Declaration of emergency. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-31]
Upon the declaration of an emergency, traffic upon streets closed by police
barricades is prohibited. The Mayor or the Borough Council or the Chief of
Police, or in his absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare
an emergency and to direct the erection of police barricades, closing all or
part of any street in the Borough when weather conditions, accidents, fires,
public celebrations or other conditions dictate or require the avoidance of
hazards which interfere with the free flow of traffic; provided, however, that
no such closing of any street shall last more than 48 continuous hours.
§ 222-25 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-25
218:421

ARTICLE V
Traffic Regulations for Livingston Street and Broadway
[Amended by Ord. No. 95-0-29]
§ 222-26. No stopping or standing.
No stopping or standing regulations shall be established along both sides of
Broadway from High Street to Jay Street.
§ 222-27. No parking any time.
No parking any time regulations shall be established along both sides of
Livingston Street from a point 600 feet south of Broadway to Rockland
Avenue.
§ 222-28. Far-side bus stops.
Far-side bus stops shall be established:
§ 222-29. Lane use reservations. [Amended 3-3-1998 by Ord. No.
98:01]
The lane locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 222-51) attached to and
made a part of this chapter are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as directed.
§ 222-30. Left turn prohibitions.
Left turn prohibitions shall be established:
A. Along the east side of Livingston Street from the northerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 100 feet north thereof.
B. Along the west side to Livingston Street from the southerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 100 feet south thereof.
A. Out of the driveway on the east side of Livingston Street located
approximately 195 feet north of Hudson Avenue.
B. Out of the driveway on the east side of Livingston Street located
approximately 280 feet north of Hudson Avenue.
C. Out of the driveway on the east side of Livingston Street located
approximately 325 feet south of Rockland Avenue.
D. Out of the paved parking area on the east side of Livingston Street
between points approximately 130 feet and 270 feet south of Rockland
Avenue.
E. Out of the driveway on the east side of Livingston Street located
approximately 440 feet north of Hudson Avenue.
§ 222-26 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-31
218:423
§ 222-31. Existing driveway designations.
Existing driveway designations shall be established as follows:
A. Driveway on the east side of Livingston Street just south of Hudson
Avenue - exit only.
B. Driveway on the west side of Livingston Street approximately 200 feet
north of Hudson Avenue - exit only.
C. Driveway on the east side of Livingston Street approximately 195 feet
north of Hudson Avenue - exit only.
D. Driveway on the west side of Livingston Street approximately 270 feet
south of Rockland Avenue - entrance only.
E. Driveway on the west side of Livingston Street approximately 190 feet
south of Rockland Avenue exit - only.
F. Driveway on the west side of Livingston Street approximately 45 feet
south of Rockland Avenue - entrance only.
§ 222-31 NORWOOD CODE § 222-31
218:424
ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 222-32. Schedule I: No Parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 83-0-1;
Ord. No. 85-0-13; Ord. No. 86-0-28; Ord. No. 86-0-36; Ord. No.
87-0-12; Ord. No. 94-0-36; Ord. No. 94-0-38]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Location
Belden Place
[Amended 11-5-2003
by Ord. No. 03:13]
Both Blanche Avenue to Brook Streets
Blanche Avenue North From Livingston Street to the
Borough of Closter - Borough of
Norwood boundary line
Broad Street Both Broadway to Blanche Avenue
Broadway North From the east side of Tappan Road
to the west side of High Street
Broadway North From the intersection of Livingston
Street to High Street
Broadway South Intersection of Livingston Street to
Summit Street
Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-6-1998
by Ord. No. 98:10]
West From 430 feet south of Broadway to
Industrial Parkway
Chestnut Street West From Broadway 784 feet to
Industrial Parkway
D'Ercole Court [Added
3-6-2007 by Ord. No.
07:06]
Both From the corners of the intersection
of D'Ercole Court and McClellan
Street east to the first perpendicular
parking spaces on both sides of
D'Ercole Court
Hudson Avenue South Beginning 327 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Walnut Street to
the end of the roadway
Industrial Parkway Both From Chestnut Street to Maple
Street
Jay Street [Added
8-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 15:09]
East Between Broadway and the north
side of the cul-de-sac, which is
approximately 700 feet from the
center line of Broadway
§ 222-32 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-32
218:425
Name of Street Side Location
Jay Street [Added
12-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 13:17; amended
8-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 15:09]
West Entire length
Livingston Street Both From the north side of Broadway to
the Borough of Northvale - Borough
of Norwood boundary line
Livingston Street Both Intersection of Broadway to a point
300 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Broadway
Livingston Street Both Intersection of the south side of
Broadway to the Norwood and
Harrington Park Borough line
Maple Street East From Broadway 851 feet to
Industrial Parkway
Millbrook Circle East Commencing at the intersection of
Anderson Avenue west 200 feet from
said intersection
Oak Street Both Beginning 235 feet north of
northerly curbline of Broadway to
Rockland Avenue
Public Elementary
School Summit Street
Driveway
Both Entire length
Second Street East From southerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 360 feet south
therefrom
Second Street West From the southerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 105.88 feet
south therefrom
Somerset Road Both From Blanche Avenue to Kensington
Avenue
South Avenue Both At the intersection of South Avenue
and Livingston Street to the
intersection of South Avenue and
Summit Avenue
Summit Street
[Amended
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
East Between Broadway and South Street
and from the northerly curbline of
Blanche Avenue to a point 300 feet
north of that curbline
§ 222-32 NORWOOD CODE § 222-32
218:426
Name of Street Side Location
Summit Street
[Amended
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
West From the north side of South Street
to the south side of Broadway and
from the northerly curbline of
Blanche Avenue to a point 300 feet
north of that curbline
Tappan Road East Intersection of Mills Avenue to a
point 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Blanche Avenue
Tappan Road West Intersection of Mills Avenue to a
point 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Blanche Avenue
Tappan Road Both From Broadway to the Borough of
Norwood - Borough of Northvale
line
Walnut Street West From Broadway to Rockland Avenue
Walnut Street [Repealed 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08:01]
§ 222-33. Schedule II: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Briarwood
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Canterbury Road Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Dwars Kill Lane Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Frasco Lane Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Garnet Place Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Tappan Road to
Kenyon Court
Kenyon Court Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the corner
by the intersection of the
southerly line of Kenyon
Court and the easterly
line of Garnet Place and
running 105 feet
northerly
Knoll Way Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 222-32 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-33
218:427
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Lancaster Road Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Meadow Lane Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Tappan Road to
Meadow Court
Mohawk Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Mill Brook Circle Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Pierson Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Ridge Road Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Rockland Avenue Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Tappan Road to
Summit Street
Rockland Avenue
[Added
3-4-2008 by
Ord. No. 08:01]
North All day, Monday
through Friday
From Veterans Drive to
Walnut Street
Rockland Avenue Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Summit Street to
138 feet east on
Rockland Avenue
Summit Street Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Hudson Avenue to
the Borough of Northvale
boundary line
Summit Street
[Added
12-19-2006 by
Ord. No. 06:21]
East 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From South Street to
Blanche Avenue
Tilden Place Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Walnut Street
[Added
3-4-2008 by
Ord. No. 08:01]
East All day, Monday
through Friday
From Hudson Avenue to
Rockland Avenue
§ 222-34. Schedule III: No stopping or standing. [Amended by Ord.
No. 86-0-36; Ord. No. 94-0-36; Ord. No. 94-0-38]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
§ 222-33 NORWOOD CODE § 222-34
218:428
Name of Street Side Location
Blanche Avenue East From a point 150 feet east of the
easterly curbline on Tappan Road to a
point 150 feet west of the westerly
curbline on Tappan Road
Blanche Avenue West From a point 150 feet east of the
easterly curbline on Tappan Road to a
point 150 feet west of the westerly
curbline on Tappan Road
Broadway North From Jay Street westerly direction to
High Street
Broadway South From High Street westerly direction to
Railroad Avenue
Tappan Road East From the intersection with Mills
Avenue to a point 200 feet north of the
northerly curbline on Blanche Avenue
Tappan Road West From the intersection with Mills
Avenue to a point 200 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Blanche Avenue
§ 222-35. Schedule IV: Parking Time Limited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-9, no person shall park a vehicle
longer than the time shown on any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
Name of
Street Side
Hours/
Days
Time
Limit Location
Jay Street
[Added
8-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
15:09] East All/All 2 hrs.
Beginning at the north
side of the cul-de-sac, a
point about 700 feet from
the center line of
Broadway, to the end
Livingston
Street [Added
8-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
15:09]
Both All/All 2 hrs. Between Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
§ 222-36. Schedule V: Trucks Over Four Tons. [Amended by Ord. No.
86-0-36; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:20]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-11, no person may drive any
truck in excess of four tons gross weight on any street in the Borough other
than the following streets or portions of streets:
§ 222-34 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-36
218:429
Name of Street Location
Blanch Avenue All
Broadway All
Livingston Street All
Piermont Road All
Tappan Road All
Chestnut Street All
Oak Street All
Maple Street All
Walnut Street All
Broad Street All
Railroad Avenue All
Hudson Avenue East side
Rockland Avenue East side
§ 222-37. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets. [Amended by Ord. No.
83-0-1]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as One-Way Streets.
Name of Street Direction Location
Hudson Avenue [Added
9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
05:19]
Eastbound Between High Street
and Livingston Street
Public Elementary School
Summit Street Driveway
Counter-clockwise Entire length
§ 222-38. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield right of way signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
High Street Between Broadway and the Borough of Norwood
- Borough of Northvale boundary line
Summit Street Between Broadway and the Borough of Norwood
- Borough of Northvale corporate line
§ 222-36 NORWOOD CODE § 222-39
218:430
§ 222-39. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-14, the following intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Intersection Stop Sign on
Glenn Avenue and Grissom Street Grissom Street
Kensington Avenue and Summit
Street
Summit Street
Madison Avenue and Sherwood
Road [Added 8-10-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:15]
Madison Avenue
Meadow Lane and Garnett Place
[Added 7-3-2007 by Ord. No.
07:12]
Garnett Place
Somerset Road and Summit Street Summit Street
§ 222-40. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-15, the following intersections
are designated as yield intersections. yield right-of-way signs shall be
installed.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 222-41. Schedule X: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones.
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-42. Schedule XI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands.
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-43. Schedule XII: Bus Stops. [Amended by Ord. No. 86-0-36;
Ord. No. 94-0-36; Ord. No. 94-0-38]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 222-39 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-43
218:431
Name of Street Side Location
Livingston Street West 100 feet of the southerly curbline of
Broadway
Livingston Street East 100 feet north of the northerly curb
line of Broadway
Tappan Road West Between 30 feet and 150 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Blanche
Avenue
Tappan Road East Between 30 feet and 120 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Blanche
Avenue
Tappan Road [Added
11-5-1997 by Ord.
No. 97:17]
East Between 30 feet and 120 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Glanz
Avenue. The northerly Norwood/
Northvale corporate line
Livingston Street
[Added 11-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 97:17]
West Between 30 feet and 150 feet north of
the northerly curbline of South Avenue
Livingston Street
[Added 11-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 97:17]
East Between 30 feet and 120 feet south of
southerly curbline of South Avenue
§ 222-44. Schedule XIIIA: No Left Turn. [Amended by Ord. No.
96-0-018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-19, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following described locations.
Name of Street Side Location
Livingston Street
[Added 3-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 98:01]
East Out of the driveway on the east side of
Livingston Street located
approximately 280 feet north of
Hudson Avenue
Livingston Street
[Added 3-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 98:01]
East Out of the Driveway on the east side of
Livingston Street located
approximately 325 feet south of
Rockland Avenue
Livingston Street
[Added 3-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 98:01]
East Out of the Driveway on the east side of
Livingston Street located
approximately 440 feet north of
Hudson Avenue
Summit Street [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
East Exit and entrance to and from the
driveway of the church parking lot,
7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday
§ 222-43 NORWOOD CODE § 222-44
218:432
Name of Street Side Location
Summit Street [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
East Exit and entrance from and to the
library parking lot, 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday
Summit Street [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
East In and out of South Street, 7:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
Summit Street [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:21]
West Exit and entrance to and from Norwood
Public School, 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Tappan Road
(northbound)
-- No left turn onto Mills Avenue between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
§ 222-45. Schedule XIIIB: No Right Turn. [Amended by Ord. No.
96-0-018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-19, no person shall make a right
turn at any of the following described locations.
Name of Street Side Location
Blanche Avenue East No right turn onto Valley Place between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday
§ 222-46. Schedule XIV: No U-Turn. [Amended by Ord. No. 94-0-36;
Ord. No. 94-0-38]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-20, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following described locations.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 222-47. Schedule XV: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-21, no person shall make a Turn
at any of the following described locations.
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway South Left lane approach to Livingston Street
shall be reserved for left turns only
Broadway North Left lane approach to Livingston Street
shall be reserved for left turns only
§ 222-44 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-48
218:433
§ 222-48. Schedule XVI: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-24, the following described
streets or parts of streets shall have the following speed limits thereon in
the direction indicated.
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Blanche Avenue 25 Entire length
Piermont Avenue 25 Entire length
Tappan Road 25 Entire length
§ 222-49. Schedule XVII: No Turns by Trucks. [Amended by Ord. No.
86-0-36]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-22, no trucks shall make a turn
at any of the following described locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Turn Prohibited
Tappan Road Southbound Right turn
§ 222-50. Schedule XVIII: No Right Turn on Red. [Amended by Ord.
No. 86-0-36]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-23, no person shall make a right
turn on red at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn
Time of
Prohibition
Blanche Avenue Eastbound South onto
Tappan Road
Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Blanche Avenue Westbound North onto
Tappan Road
Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Tappan Road Northbound East onto
Blanche Avenue
Full time
Tappan Road Southbound West onto
Blanche Avenue
Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
§ 222-51. Schedule XIX: Lane Use Reservations. [Added 3-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 98:01]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-29, no person shall move in the
following lanes except as set forth herein.
§ 222-48 NORWOOD CODE § 222-51
218:434
Intersection Movement
Broadway at Livingston
Street
Left lane of the easterly approach of
Broadway at Livingston Street reserved for
left turns only
Left lane of the westerly approach of
Broadway at Livingston Street reserved for
left turns only
Livingston Street at
Hudson Avenue
Left southbound lane on Livingston Street
between points 310 feet and 440 feet north of
Hudson Avenue reserved for left turns only
Center lane of Livingston Street between
points 480 feet and 695 feet north of Hudson
Avenue reserved for left turns only in either
direction
§ 222-52. Schedule XX: Resident Permit Parking. [Added 4-28-2004
by Ord. No. 04:03; amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05:28]
§ 222-53. Schedule XXI: Parking restricted in Borough parking lots.
[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 222-10.3, no persons may park a
vehicle in violation of the following limitations:
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 222-10.1, no person shall park a
vehicle on the following described streets or parts of streets contrary to
the restrictions set forth herein and, if applicable, without the required
sticker:
Name of Street Side Location
D’Ercole Court (only residents
of Norwood Gardens are
eligible)
North Between McClellan Street
and the Feitner Street
right-of-way
D’Ercole Court (only residents
of Norwood Senior Citizens
are eligible)
South Between McClellan Street
and the Feitner Street
right-of-way
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 222-10.1, no person shall park a
vehicle on the following described parking lot(s) contrary to the
restrictions set forth herein and, if applicable, without the required
sticker:
Location of Lot Side Limitation
On D’Ercole Court (8 spaces to be
designated by
Norwood Gardens)
Only residents of
Norwood Gardens
On D’Ercole Court Undesignated spaces Not restricted
§ 222-51 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 222-53
218:435
Location of Lot Side Limitation
Tri Plex Building 453
Broadway
West Police personnel or
those conducting
business with the police
department only
Tri Plex Building 453
Broadway
North DPW personnel only
§ 222-53 NORWOOD CODE § 222-53
218:436
Chapter 224
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 177. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 224-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENCLOSED GARAGE — A fully enclosed building or structure having no
means of vehicle ingress or egress other than through an operable door or
doors.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that is not and has not,
for a period of 30 days or more, been capable of operation on the public
streets under its own power; and further means a vehicle, whether or not
so operable, which is kept and maintained for the purpose of stripping or
removing parts therefrom.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, partnership, corporation, limitedliability
company, and business or firm of any other type or form.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed for
operation on the public streets, which is not and has not, for a period of 30
days or more, been currently registered with, or is without bearing a valid
motor vehicle inspection sticker from, the state motor vehicle commission
or other agency having jurisdiction to register same, except for motor
vehicles stored by new car dealers and used car dealers with current
licenses issued by the State of New Jersey and the Borough.
§ 224-2. Storage prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, or maintain an
unregistered or junked motor vehicle in the Borough of Norwood, except in
an enclosed garage.
§ 224-3. Presumption of junked or unregistered vehicle.
A motor vehicle that conforms to the definitions of § 224-1 will be presumed
to be an unregistered or junked vehicle, as the case may be, subject to
rebuttal upon proof of the owner's contrary intentions.
§ 224-4. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Any person convicted of violating a prohibition of this chapter will be liable
for the penalties in Chapter 174. The Norwood Police Department will
enforce this ordinance.
§ 222-53 TRAILERS AND BOATS § 224-4
218:437
Chapter 226
VEHICLES, OPERATION OF
§ 226-1. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use or operate any motor
vehicle upon any property described in § 226-3.
§ 226-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes but is not limited to the following:
automobiles, trucks, buses, recreation vehicles, motorcycles, motor
scooters, motor bicycles, dune buggies, trail bikes, minibikes, go-carts,
racing minibikes, racing scooters, all-terrain vehicles (ATV's), snowmobiles
and any other vehicle designed for the transportation of the driver,
passengers or products and propelled by an internal-combustion engine or
other type of engine, either licensed or unlicensed.
§ 226-3. Regulated property.
The property to be regulated by this chapter shall include any parks,
recreation areas, lake areas, easements and sidewalks or areas dedicated
or commonly used for pedestrian traffic, borough storage facilities, borough
garage areas, parks, Board of Education properties and any and all other
borough and publicly owned or rented lands and premises, other than
improved rights-of-way, parking areas, driveways and dedicated roads and
streets.
§ 226-4. Exceptions.
A. It shall not be unlawful for any borough employee, school board
employee or other public employee to operate motorized vehicles for
the purpose of maintaining, repairing or doing work for the public, the
borough or the Board of Education on any lands as described in § 226-3.
B. This chapter shall not be applied to any individual or recognized
organization which has applied for and received written permission to
operate or park motor vehicles on borough property for a specific
purpose. Said individuals or organizations shall be responsible for any
damage to borough property.
C. The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to
police or other emergency vehicles, including but not limited to police
cars, ambulances, motorcycles, fire-control vehicles and the like, or to
motorized lawn mowers, tractors or farm vehicles or construction
equipment.
§ 224-4 NORWOOD CODE § 226-5
226:438
§ 226-5. Impoundment of vehicles.
The Police Department of the Borough of Norwood is hereby authorized to
confiscate and impound any motorized vehicle which is allegedly operated
in violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 226-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 226-7. Parental responsibility.
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 230
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
A. Any person under the age of 18 who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the adjudication and disposition
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:4-42 et seq.
B. Any person or persons who have reached the age of majority and who
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall also be
answerable in a civil action for damages inflicted upon borough- owned
or -leased properties.
A. Any parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor
child, who knowingly permits said minor child to violate any provisions
of this chapter, shall also be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II.
B. Any parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor
child who has violated the provisions of this chapter shall be
answerable in a civil action for damages inflicted upon borough-owned
or -leased properties in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
2A:53A-14 et seq.
§ 226-5 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 226-7
226:439

ARTICLE I
Zoning Board of Adjustment
[Added 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 04:2049]
§ 230-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(e), there is hereby reconstituted in the
Borough a Zoning Board of Adjustment with all powers and functions vested
in zoning boards of adjustment.
§ 230-2. Membership; appointments.
§ 230-3. Appointment of alternate members.
A. The Zoning Board shall consist of seven regular members who all shall
be residents of the Borough, and who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the Council.
B. The members shall hold no other municipal office, and shall not be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any member may be
removed from the Board by the Mayor and Council for cause, after a
public hearing, if the member requests the same.
C. The term of all members shall be for four years, except upon the
reconstitution of the Board, as set forth in the following section. All
terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
was made.
D. The terms of all members first appointed pursuant to this chapter upon
the reconstitution of the Board shall be determined, to the greatest
extent practicable, so that the expiration of the terms shall be evenly
distributed over the first four years after their appointment; provided,
however, that no term of any member shall exceed four years.
Thereafter, all members shall serve for a four-year term.
E. Vacancies occurring other than by the expiration of the member's term
shall be filled by appointment as above provided, for the unexpired
term.
A. The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall appoint two alternate
members to the Board, which members shall meet the qualifications of
regular members. These members shall be designated at the time of
49.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Board of Adjustment, was repealed 2-6-2001 by Ord. No.
01:01. However, Ord. No. 01:01 was subsequently repealed by this ordinance (Ord. No.
04:20), and the Norwood Board of Adjustment was reconstituted. Said ordinance also
provided that the Planning Board shall, on the effective date of this ordinance, exercise
only those powers authorized by the Municipal Land Use Law and this ordinance, except
that any development application that is certified to be complete on or before the effective
date of this ordinance may be heard and determined by the Planning Board. The Planning
Board will continue to be authorized to hold public hearings on and to render decisions on
applications duly filed and certified to be complete on or before the effective date of this
ordinance. This ordinance was approved at referendum 11-2-2004.
§ 230-1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-3
226:441
§ 230-4. Organization of Board; powers and duties.
§ 230-5. Zoning Board of Adjustment powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have all of the powers granted to
the zoning boards of adjustment by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., and any amendments or supplements thereto, including
the following powers and duties:
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that no term of the alternate members first appointed may
exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term
only.
B. Alternate members may participate in the discussions of proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. If a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. The Board shall elect a chair and vice chair from the members, and
select a secretary, who may be either a member of the Board or a
municipal employee designated by the Board. An alternate may not
serve as chairperson or vice chairperson.
B. There is hereby created the office of Board Attorney. The Board may
annually appoint and either fix the compensation of or agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Borough Attorney.
C. The Board may also employ or contract for the services of and fix the
compensation of any experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts
or grants, the amount appropriated by the Borough Council for its use.
D. The Board shall file with the Mayor and Council the annual report
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.1.
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or refusal made by an
administrative officer or agency based on or made in the enforcement of
the zoning regulations of this chapter.
B. To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or zoning
regulations of this chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such board is authorized by this chapter to pass.
§ 230-3 NORWOOD CODE § 230-5
226:442
§ 230-6. Administrative procedures; meetings; hearings.
C. To grant variances in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law, including but not limited to variances under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c) and (d) as amended and supplemented.
D. To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin, or public area reserved on the Official
Map.
E. To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
F. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76(b) and (c) and in accordance with the
terms thereof, the Board shall have the power to grant site plan
approval or conditional use approval whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d).
G. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68, grant a certificate certifying that a use
or structure is a nonconforming use or structure, or hear and decide
appeals from the administrative officer's denial of a nonconforming use
permit.
A. The Zoning Board shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with state law or any applicable Borough
ordinance, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties.
Copies of all of these rules and regulations and any amendments
thereto shall be filed in the Borough Clerk's office and shall be made
available to any person upon request and payment of the fee for such
copy.
B. The Board shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Board shall be scheduled not
less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled
for lack of applications for development process. Special meetings of
the Board may be held at the call of the chairman or at the request of
any two of its members. Special meetings shall be held on notice to the
members of the Board and the public in accord with state law. All
regular and special meetings shall be open to the public, and minutes
shall be kept and thereafter be made available for public inspection
during normal business hours in the office of the Borough Clerk.
C. The Zoning Board shall hold a hearing on each application for
development, appeal, or other application or matter within its
jurisdiction. The Board shall make rules governing hearings. Any maps
and documents for which approval is sought at the Board's hearings
shall be on file and available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the Borough Clerk's office at least 10 days before the
date of the hearing. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording
§ 230-5 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-6
226:443
of all proceedings at the hearings by either a stenographic, mechanical
or electronic means and shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request of any interested party, at any
party's expense.
§ 230-6 NORWOOD CODE § 230-6
226:444
ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 230-7. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, there is hereby created
a Planning Board to consist of nine members.
§ 230-8. Membership classes; appointments.
The Planning Board membership shall consist of four classes and the
members in each class shall be appointed as follows:
§ 230-9. Appointment of alternate members.
§ 230-10. Membership on other boards; terms.
A. Class I. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
[Amended 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 04:20]
B. Class II, one official of the Borough, other than a member of the
governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there be
an Environmental Commission, the member of such Commission who is
also a member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1,
shall be deemed to be a member of Class II in the event the Class IV
members of the Board include a member of the Board of Education. If
the Class IV members do not include a member of the Board of
Education, then the member of the Environmental Commission shall be
deemed a Class IV member. [Amended 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:01]
C. Class III, a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV, six citizens of the borough to be appointed by the Mayor.
A. Alternate members to the Planning Board shall be appointed follows:
(1) One alternate member shall be appointed for Class II, and one
alternate member shall be appointed for Class III, for terms to
expire at the same time as the terms of regular members of their
respective classes.
(2) Two alternate members shall be appointed for Class IV to serve for
a term of two years; provided, however, that the initial terms of
such alternate members shall be one year and two years
respectively. Such alternate members shall be designated by the
Chairperson as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2 and shall serve
in rotation during the absence or disqualification of any regular
member or members of Class IV.
(3) Alternate members of each class shall be appointed by the same
appointing authority as regular members of that class.
§ 230-7 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-10
226:445
§ 230-11. Organization; powers and duties.
A. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except
one may be a member of the Board of Education. [Amended 2-6-2001
by Ord. No. 01:01]
B. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his
official tenure.
C. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for
one year or shall terminate at the completion of respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first.
D. The term of a Class IV member, who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such
body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
[Amended 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:01]
E. The terms of the Class IV members first appointed under this section
shall be as follows: the two new members shall be appointed for terms
of four years, the member appointed to the seat of a person whose
present term expires on December 31, 1976, shall be appointed for a
term of three years and the member appointed to the seat of the person
whose term expires on December 31, 1977, the member appointed to
the seat of the person whose term expires on December 31, 1978, and
the member appointed to the seat of the person whose term expires on
December 31, 1979, shall be appointed for terms of four years. In the
event a vacancy occurs in the seat of a member in office on August 1,
1976, pursuant to Subsection 81b., N.J.S.A. 40:55D-92, the term of the
member appointed to fill the same shall be the initial term set forth in
this subsection; thereafter all appointments shall be for four years.
F. The term of a Class II or IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be three years or shall terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first.
G. Vacancies in any class occurring other than by expiration of the
Planning Board term shall be filled by appointment as above provided
for the unexpired term.
H. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any
member, other than the Class I member, may be removed from the
governing body for cause, after a public hearing, if the member
requests the same.
A. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Board or a municipal employee and fill such other offices as may be
established by borough ordinance. It may employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of legal counsel, experts and other staff and services
§ 230-10 NORWOOD CODE § 230-11
226:446
§ 230-12. Administrative procedures; meetings; hearings.
as it deems necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the governing body for its use. The Board shall
have and exercise its power in regard to:
(1) The Master Plan.
(2) Subdivision, control and site plan review.
(3) The Official Map.
(4) Chapter 233, Zoning, including conditional uses.
(5) The capital improvements program.
(6) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approvals.
(7) Exercising, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions,
all the powers of a Board of Adjustment; but the Class I and Class
III members shall not participate in the consideration of
applications for development which involves relief pursuant to
subsection d of Section 57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d). [Added 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:01]
B. In addition, the Planning Board may participate in the preparation and
review of programs or plans required by state or federal law or
regulation, assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process and perform such other advisory duties as may be
assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the
aid and assistance of the governing body or other municipal agencies or
offices.
A. The Planning Board shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with state law or any applicable borough
ordinance, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties.
Copies of all such rules and regulations and any amendments thereto
shall be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall be made
available to any person upon request and payment of the fee for such
copy.
B. The Board shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Board shall be scheduled not
less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled
for lack of applications for development process. Special meetings of
the Board maybe held at the call of the Chairman or at the request of
any two of its members. Such meetings shall be held on notice to the
members of the Board and the public in accord with state law. All
regular and special meetings shall be open to the public and minutes
shall be kept and thereafter be made available for public inspection
during normal business hours the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 230-11 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-12
226:447
§ 230-13. Architectural control and site review; purpose.
The Borough Council hereby finds and determines that it is important to the
borough that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor
quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings has an adverse
effect on the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas and
by so doing impairs the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such
areas, impairs the stability and value of both improved and unimproved
property in such areas, prevents the most appropriate development of such
areas, produces degeneration of property in such areas and destroys a
proper relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas
and the cost of municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of
this section and the following sections to prevent these and other harmful
effects of such exterior appearances of buildings and thus promote and
protect the health, safety, morals, values and general welfare of the
community.
C. The Planning Board shall hold a hearing on each application for
development, or adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
The Board shall make rules governing such hearings. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at such hearings shall be on file
and available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Borough Clerk at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of all
proceedings at such hearings by either a stenographic, mechanical or
electronic means and shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request of any interested party, at such party's
expense.
§ 230-12 NORWOOD CODE § 230-13
226:448
ARTICLE III
Advisory Committee
§ 230-14. Creation; membership; qualifications; officers.
There is hereby created an Advisory Committee of Architectural Design and
Site Review to the Planning Board which shall consist of five members who
shall serve without compensation at the pleasure and by the appointment of
the Mayor. The members shall be specifically qualified by reason of training
or experience in architecture, land development, municipal planning, real
estate, landscape design or other relevant business or profession or by
reason of civic interest or sound judgment to determine the effects of a
proposed building and its design upon the general aesthetics, desirability
and property value or development of a surrounding area. The Chairman
and the Vice Chairman of the Advisory Committee shall be elected by
the Committee. The Chairman shall appoint a Recording Secretary of the
Committee and the Committee shall be furnished with such stenographic or
secretarial assistance as the governing body may from time to time provide.
One member of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the Chairman of
the Planning Board to act as liaison between the Advisory Committee and
the Planning Board.
§ 230-15. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the Advisory Committee to review the architectural
and site plans as stipulated herein and make recommendations concerning
these matters to the Planning Board and to the Construction Official as
is herein provided. Meetings of the Advisory Committee of Architectural
Design and Site Review shall be held at the call of the Chairman but shall
also be held within 30 days of the date of the receipt of any application for a
building permit referred to the Committee as is required by this article. The
Committee shall render a decision and make it known to the Planning Board
and the Construction Official its recommendations within 10 days after the
meeting in which the particular subject matter was voted upon. A majority
of the Committee shall constitute a quorum and its minutes shall show the
vote of each member upon each question. The Planning Board may establish
bylaws and rules to facilitate the operation of the Committee.
§ 230-16. Basis of design and site review decisions.
After considering the recommendations of the Committee, the Planning
Board may recommend to the Construction Official that he disapprove any
application for a building permit, provided that such recommendation shall
be a majority vote of the members of said Board present at any meeting
where said vote is taken, and provided that the Planning Board finds that
the building, structure, siding, sign or fence for which the permit was
applied, would, if erected, be so detrimental to the desirability, property
values or development of surrounding areas as to provide one or more of
the harmful effects as set forth by reasons of:
§ 230-14 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-16
226:449
§ 230-17. Referral of building permit applications; submission of
site and plat plans; review; disposition; appeal.
A. Excessive similarity to any other structure existing or for which a
permit has been issued or to any other structure included in the same
permit application, facing upon both sides of the same street and within
250 feet of the proposed site, in respect to one or more of the following
features of exterior design and appearance:
(1) Apparently identical facade.
(2) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos or other openings or breaks in the facade facing
the street, including reverse arrangement.
(3) Other significant identical features, such as, but not limited to,
material, roofline and height or other design elements, provided
that a finding of excessive similarity shall state not only that such
similarity exists but, further, that it is of such a nature as to be
expected to provoke beyond reasonable doubt one or more of the
harmful effects set forth.
B. Excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other
structure existing or for which a permit has been issued, or for any
other structure included in the same permit application which structure
so described will face upon the same street and within 250 feet of the
proposed site in respect to one or more of the following features:
(1) Cubical contents.
(2) Gross floor area.
(3) Heights of building or height of roof.
(4) Other significant design features, such as but not limited to quality
of architectural design, provided that a finding of excessive
dissimilarity or inappropriateness shall state not only that such
dissimilarity or inappropriateness exists but, further, that it is of
such nature as to be expected to provoke beyond reasonable doubt
one or more of the harmful effects set forth and that the finding is
not based on personal preferences as to taste or choice of
architectural style.
A. Every application for a building permit for the construction,
reconstruction or alteration of a building or structure in excess of 2,000
cubic feet of cubical content proposed for construction with the
borough or for a sign or fence or application of new siding within the
borough shall be referred by the Construction Official to the Committee
of Architectural Design and Site Review within 10 days of the date of
the receipt of the application provided it conforms in all respects to all
other applicable laws and ordinances. Applications must be
accompanied by plat plans showing building lines within the block. The
§ 230-16 NORWOOD CODE § 230-17
226:450
site plan shall be submitted showing contours at five-foot intervals,
location of trees over six inches in diameter or all trees on a public
right-of-way or other type of topographical features when such
information is required by the Advisory Committee or deemed
necessary by the Construction Official.
B. For any use permitted in any zone, the plat shall also indicate on the site
plan signs, fences and walls, landscaped areas and plant materials,
trees and shrubs to be provided, utility lines, parking areas and
entrances and exits therefrom, together with the location of all existing
structures within 100 feet of the tract. Prior to approving the
application for a plat in these zones, the Construction Official shall
forward the application, together with all pertinent data and
information, including requirements and comments of all interested
municipal departments and officials to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall, within 45 days of the receipt of the same, review
the entire matter with a view toward ascertaining whether the
requirements and standards of this section have been met, as well as
the relationship of the proposed project to the Master Plan of the
borough as it is developed and shall make a written report thereon to
the Construction Official. No building permit shall be issued by the
Construction Official upon such application before the expiration of
such forty-five-day period unless an earlier decision is rendered by the
Planning Board. If no report is received during that period, the
Construction Official shall thereupon issue a permit. Any applicant
wishing to make a change in a duly approved application shall follow
the same procedure for obtaining approval thereof as in the original
application. In the event that the Planning Board recommends against
granting a building permit, the Construction official shall not override
the recommendations of the Planning Board unless his action is
approved by the Borough Council.
C. The aggrieved party may file an appeal to the Council within 10 days
after his building permit application is denied, and the Council shall
render its decision within 30 days following the first public meeting
after receipt of notice of appeal by the Borough Clerk. In the event that
there shall be no action taken by the Council within said thirty-day
period, the appeal shall be deemed denied.
§ 230-17 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-17
226:451

ARTICLE IV
Fee Schedule for Planning Board and Board of Adjustment
[Amended 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:01]
§ 230-18. Planning Board fees.
Planning Board fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Use permit $100
Erasure of lot lines, each $50
Major subdivision $100
Each lot of a subdivision, each $50
Site plan approval $100
Minor subdivision $50
Application fee $50
Variance $50
§ 230-19. Board of Adjustment fees. [Added 11-4-2009 by Ord. No.
09:1250]
Board of Adjustment fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) $100
Site plan and subdivision $100
Appeals and requests for
interpretation
$100
Variance under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)
$250
Tennis court approval, each $50
Swimming pool approval $50
Zoning permit $0
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of Article IV to include "Board of
Adjustment."
§ 230-18 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-19
226:453

ARTICLE V
Escrow Accounts
[Added 5-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98:03]
§ 230-20. Establishment of accounts.
In addition to the required application fees established by this chapter, an
applicant for any development application shall be required to establish
one or more escrow accounts with the Borough of Norwood to cover the
reasonable and necessary review and consultation costs and fees of the
borough's professional personnel and shall be responsible to reimburse the
borough for all payments made to the professional personnel, in accordance
with the terms of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 230-21. Use of accounts.
The escrow accounts shall be used to reimburse the borough for all costs
of professional services of professional personnel incurred and paid by it
necessary to process an application for development before a municipal
agency such as but not by way of limitation:
§ 230-22. Scope of charges and rates.
A. Charges for reviews by professional personnel of applications and
accompanying documents.
B. Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the municipal agency
setting forth recommendations resulting from the review of any
documents submitted by an applicant.
C. Charges for any telephone conference or meeting required or initiated
by the applicant, his attorney, or any of his experts.
D. Review of additional documents submitted by the applicant and
issuance of reports relating thereto.
E. Review or preparation of easements, developer's agreements, deeds,
resolutions or the like.
F. Preparation for and attendance at meetings and site inspections of
improvements.
G. The cost of expert advice or testimony obtained by the municipal
agency for the purpose of corroborating testimony of an applicant's
experts provided that the municipal agency gives prior notice to the
applicant of its intention to obtain such additional expert advice or
testimony and affords the applicant an opportunity to be heard as to the
necessity for such additional advice or testimony and the definition of
the limitations on the nature and extent thereof.
A. All professional charges for review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements
§ 230-20 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-22
226:455
§ 230-23. Escrow deposit fees.
Upon the filing of an application as set forth in § 230-20 of this article, an
applicant shall deposit with the Board Secretary the initial escrow deposits
set forth below. Deposits shall be made by personal check, certified check or
money order payable to the borough. The following are the initial required
escrow deposits:
shall be reasonable and necessary given the status and progress of
the application or construction. The hourly charges of professionals
shall be at the same rate as all other work of the same nature by
the professional charged to the borough when fees are not reimbursed
or otherwise imposed on applicants or developers. Review fees shall
be charged only in connection with an application for development
presently pending before the approving authority or upon review of
compliance with the conditions of approval or review of requests for
modification or amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall
not review items that are subject to approval by any state governmental
agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent
consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the effect of site
approvals on the subdivision or site plan.
B. The term "professional personnel" or "professional services" as used
herein shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or other expert who would provide
professional services to ensure that an application meets the standards
set forth in the applicable ordinances and statutes and other experts
whose testimony is in an area in which the applicant has presented
expert testimony.
C. Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan or required by an approved resolution.
Professionals inspecting improvements under construction shall charge
only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the
progress and quality of the work, and such inspections shall be
reasonably based on the approved development plans and documents.
D. If the borough retains a different professional or consultant in the place
of a professional originally responsible for development application
review or inspection of improvements, the borough or approving
authority shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new
professional to become familiar with the application or the project, and
the borough or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or charge
to the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
A. Site plans.
(1) Concept plan. No charge where the applicant asks for review
without input and advice from the Board's professional advisors.
Where the applicant requests review with input and advice from
§ 230-22 NORWOOD CODE § 230-23
226:456
the Board's professional advisors, there shall be a minimum escrow
deposit fee of $1,000.
(2) Preliminary site plan. For any site plan involving nonresidential
development there shall be a review fee of $50 for the first 20,000
square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus $10 for each 10,000
square feet or fraction thereof of lot area over 20,000 square feet,
plus $50 for the first 1000 square feet of floor area of any new
building or alteration of or addition to any existing building on the
subject property, plus $10 for each 1,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of floor area over 1,000 square feet. For any site plan for
residential development, the review fee is $100 for each acre, or
part thereof, in the development site and $40 for each proposed
dwelling unit. No site plan for preliminary approval shall have a
review fee less than $1,000.
(3) Final site plan. The final site plan review fee shall be one-half the
preliminary site plan review fee prorated. Any site plan containing
both nonresidential and residential development shall pay a fee
that equals the collective technical review fee of the nonresidential
and residential parts as above outlined.
B. Conditional use. The review fee for a conditional use shall be $1,000.
C. Subdivision:
(1) Concept plan. No charges where the applicant asks for review
without input and advice from the Board's professional advisors.
Where the applicant requests review with input and advice from
the Board's professional advisors, there shall be a minimum escrow
deposit fee of $1,000.
(2) Minor subdivision or resubdivision. One hundred dollars for each
lot within the proposed subdivisions or $500, whichever is greater.
(3) Preliminary plat of a major subdivision. One hundred dollars for
each lot within preliminary plat of subdivision or $500, whichever
is greater.
(4) Final plat of a major subdivision. Fifty dollars for each lot within the
final plat of subdivision.
D. Variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
(1) When no site plan or subdivision is sought, $1,000 for each
variance.
(2) When a variance is sought in connection with an application listed
in Subsections A through C of this article, no charge.
E. For applications involving a combination of approvals, the applicant
shall deposit an amount equal to the sum of the deposits as required by
Subsections A through D of this section.
§ 230-23 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-24
226:457
§ 230-24. Estimate of funds required.
Upon receipt of an application for one of the developments listed in the
preceding section, the Board Secretary shall send a copy of the application
and one set of all plans and reports to the Municipal Engineer, the Planning
Consultant, the Board Attorney and any other professional authorized by
the Board. Within seven days of the receipt of same, said professionals
shall submit an estimate of funds sufficient in the amount to undertake
technical reviews and findings of fact relative to the application. If upon
review of those estimates the Board and/or its designee or committee finds
that the fees listed in the preceding section are insufficient to pay the
estimated necessary costs for examination and review of an application,
such additional amount as in the reasonable judgment of the Board will be
necessary to pay said costs shall be requested from the applicant.
§ 230-25. Determination of completeness.
The approving authority and/or its designee or committee shall not
determine an application is complete until the initial escrow deposit is paid.
§ 230-26. Deposit of escrow funds and payments.
A. Deposits received from any applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held
by the Chief Financial Officer in a special interest-bearing deposit
account, and all other deposits may be in a noninterest-bearing
account. Upon receipt of bills from professionals and approval of the
bills as hereinafter provided for, the Chief Financial Officer may use
such funds to pay the bills submitted by the professional or experts. The
borough shall not be required to refund an amount of interest paid on a
deposit that does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest
exceeds $100, the entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall
be refunded to the applicant by the borough annually or at the time the
deposit is repaid or applied for the purposes for which it was deposited,
as the case may be, except that the borough may retain for
administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of
that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and
custodial expenses. All sums not actually so expended shall be refunded
to the applicant within 90 days after the final decision by the
appropriate municipal agency with respect to such application, upon
certification by the Board Secretary that such application has been
finally decided.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall make all of the payments to
professionals for services rendered to the borough or approving
authority for review of applications for development, review and
preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The
application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to
professional charges for review of applications, review and preparation
of documents and inspections of developments under construction and
§ 230-24 NORWOOD CODE § 230-26
226:458
§ 230-27. Payments required prior to issuance of permits.
No zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other
types of permits may be issued with respect to any approved application
for development until all bills for reimbursable services have been received
by the borough from the professional personnel rendering services in
connection with such application and payment has been made.
for review by outside consultants when an application is of a nature
beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized
by the borough. The only cost that shall be added to any such charges
shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements. No applicant
shall be charged for any municipal, clerical or administrative functions,
overhead expenses, meeting room charges or any of the municipal costs
and expenses except as provided for specifically by statute, nor shall a
municipal professional add any such charge to this bill.
C. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be
pursuant to a voucher submitted by the professional. All vouchers shall
identify the personnel performing the service and each date the
services were performed, the hours spent to one-fourth-hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professionals
shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the borough on a
monthly basis in accordance with the schedules and procedures
established by the Chief Financial Officer. The professional shall send
an informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer of the borough simultaneously to the applicant
and the municipal agency for which the services were performed.
D. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
statement that shall include an accounting of funds listing all deposits,
interest, earnings, disbursements and the cumulative balance of the
escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly basis,
if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly
charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow account or deposit contains
insufficient funds to enable the borough or approving authority to
perform required application reviews or improvement inspections, the
Chief Financial Officer shall provide the applicant with a notice of the
insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on
the development or the application, the applicant shall, within a
reasonable time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be
agreed upon by the borough or approving authority and the applicant.
In the interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made
and charged back against the replenishment of funds.
§ 230-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-28
226:459
§ 230-28. Close out procedures.
The following close out procedures shall apply to all deposits and escrow
accounts established under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and
shall commence after the approving authority has granted final approval
and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been approved in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in the case of improvement inspection
escrows and deposits.
§ 230-29. Estimate of cost of improvements.
The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be estimated by the Borough Engineer based on
documented construction costs for the public improvements prevailing in
the general area of the Borough. The developer may appeal the Borough
Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-1:27.
§ 230-30. Appeals.
A. The applicant shall send written notice, by certified mail, to the Chief
Financial Officer and the approving authority and to the relevant
municipal professional that the application or the improvements, as the
case may be, are completed. After receipt of such notice, the
professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer within
30 days and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The
Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of
receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow
account, including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1,
shall be refunded to the developer along with the final accounting.
A. An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body, with copies to
the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional, whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a
professional for a service rendered to the borough in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other charges made pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2. The governing body or its designee shall, within a
reasonable time, attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the
matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant
may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals, established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, any charge to an escrow account or
deposit by any municipal professional or consultant or the cost of the
installation of improvements estimated by the Borough Engineer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:SSD-53.4. An applicant or authorized agent shall
submit the appeal, in writing, to the County Construction Board of
Appeals and shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the
borough, the approving authority and any professional whose charges
§ 230-28 NORWOOD CODE § 230-30
226:460
are the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an appeal within
45 days from receipt of the informational copy of the professional's
voucher required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c), except that if the
professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational copy
of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days
from receipt of the statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2c. An applicant may file an
appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a professional during a
period not exceeding six months to demonstrate that they represent a
pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of
this provision need not appeal each charge individually.
B. Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the rules and procedures
established by the County Construction Board of Appeals.
C. During the pendency of any appeal, the borough or approving authority
shall continue to process, hear and decide the application for
development and to inspect the development in the normal course and
shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections, signing of
subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release of
performance or maintenance guaranties, the issuance of construction
permits or certificates of occupancy or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this section. The
Chief Financial Officer may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow
account or deposit for which an appeal has been filed. If a charge is
disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer shall reimburse
the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any such disallowed
charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a charge is disallowed
after payment to a professional or consultant who is not an employee of
the borough, the professional or consultant shall reimburse the
borough in the amount of any such disallowed charge.
§ 230-30 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 230-30
226:461
Chapter 231
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Soil removal — See Ch. 194.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 230-30 NORWOOD CODE § 230-30
226:462
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 231-1. Title.
An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
site plan review within the Borough of Norwood, pursuant to the authority
and provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws
of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and the amendments and supplements
thereto, and providing for the penalties for violations thereof.
§ 231-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Site Plan Ordinance of Norwood."
§ 231-3. Purposes.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. Promote orderly development. To protect the character and maintain
the stability of all areas within the borough and promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas.
B. Promulgate rules and procedures. To provide rules, regulations and
procedures to guide the appropriate development of lands within the
municipality in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
C. Location and design of streets. To encourage the location and design of
streets and roadways which will promote the free flow of traffic while
discouraging the location of such facilities and route which will result in
congestion, or hazardous conditions for particular pedestrian traffic.
D. Prevent overcrowding. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
E. Secure safety from hazards. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other natural and man-made disasters.
F. Limit congestion. To limit congestion in the public streets and so
protect the public health, safety, convenience and the general welfare
by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and
unloading of vehicles.
G. Promote appropriate densities. To promote the establishment of
appropriate population densities and concentrations that will
contribute to the well being of persons, neighborhoods, communities
and regions and preservation of the environment.
H. Provide sufficient space. To provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations for a variety of agricultural, residential, recreational,
commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and
private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens.
§ 231-1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-3
226:463
§ 231-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Secretary of the Norwood Planning
Board for any application before the Planning Board and the Secretary to
the Norwood Board of Adjustment for any application before the Board of
Adjustment.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit when provided for by
statute, ordinance or regulation.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Norwood Planning Board or the Norwood
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, as hereinafter provided in Article
III.
BOARD — The Norwood Planning Board.
I. Creative development techniques. To promote a desirable visual and
aesthetic environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangement.
J. Efficient use of land. To encourage coordination of the various public
and private procedures and activities shaping land development with a
view of lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land.
K. Promote conservation of open space. To promote the conservation of
open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl
and degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
L. Reduce hazards in steep-sloping areas. To reduce the hazards which
exist in steep-sloping areas by reason of erosion, siltation, flooding,
surface water runoff or pollution of water supplies from point and
nonpoint sources.
M. Preserve water supply. To preserve streams, watercourses and
wetlands in their natural state wherever possible.
N. Control runoff. To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges; to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical; to lessen nonpoint pollution; to maintain the integrity of
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage
and the means necessary for water supply, preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.
O. Protect flood hazard areas. To preserve and protect development within
areas of high water table, floodways and flood hazard areas.
§ 231-3 NORWOOD CODE § 231-4
226:464
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate to the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the approving authority and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited to,
a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the approving authority may
require such additional information not specified in the ordinance or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately
upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in
the rules and regulations of the approving authority and shall be deemed
complete as of the date it is so certified by the administrative officer
for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
approving authority.
CONDITIONAL USES — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in Chapter 233, Zoning, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of Bergen County, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts
and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the Bergen County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Bergen County Planning Board.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and control discharge of this water to a
receiving drainage system.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
§ 231-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-4
226:465
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required by statute, ordinance or regulation.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or underground water from
land by drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff
to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority taken
on a preliminary approved site plan after all conditions, engineering plans
and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted for their
completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas subject to inundation in the event of the design flood of a onehundred-
year-frequency storm. These areas include the floodway and floodfringe
areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary Maps, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
and as adopted by the Borough of Norwood.
FLOODWAY — The rivers or other watercourses and the adjacent land areas
to be reserved in order to discharge the design flood of a one-hundred-yearfrequency
storm without cumulative increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 feet.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Norwood.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation and has so been designated.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person, whether residing within or without
the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
chapter or any law of this state or of the United States has been denied,
violated or infringed upon by an action or failure to act under this chapter.
LAND — To include improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOT — A designated parcel, plot, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the borough, for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MASTER PLAN — The composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the Borough of Norwood by the Norwood
§ 231-4 NORWOOD CODE § 231-4
226:466
Planning Board pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A
40:55D-28).
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Norwood.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established from time to time by resolution of the Bergen
County Board of Chosen Freeholders pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by ordinance of the Norwood Mayor
and Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject matter of a
development application or the contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFFICE BUILDING — Under the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,
pertaining to physically handicapped persons, a building or structure of
more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area wherein commercial or
building activity or service is performed or a profession is practiced, or
wherein any combination thereof is performed or practiced in all or the
majority of such building or structure.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN-SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — One that is submitted in a proper and
complete form, including all required application forms and maps, all
required fees are submitted and filed within the appropriate time schedules,
proof is submitted that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property for which approval is sought, and other
municipal reviews and governmental approvals as required.
§ 231-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-4
226:467
PERFORMANCE GUARANTIES — Any security which may be accepted by
the municipality, including cash, provided that the municipality shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
syndicate, copartnership, trust or other legal entity.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person
to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity;
affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in
public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty coordination; or
reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness to the extent
that facilities are needed for the safety of that person.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — When permitted by ordinance or
variance, an area with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more
residential clusters or planned residential development, and one or more
public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios
of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified in Chapter
233, Zoning.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — When permitted by
ordinance or variance, an area with a specified minimum contiguous
acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a single entity according
to a plan containing one or more residential clusters, which may include
appropriate commercial, public or quasi-public uses, all primarily for the
benefit of the residential development.
PLAT — A map or maps of subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
this chapter prior to final approval after specific elements of a development
plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Under the provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law pertaining to physically handicapped persons, any building, structure,
facility or complex used by the general public, including but not limited
to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools, libraries,
recreational facilities, public transportation terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, business establishments, passenger vehicle
service stations, shopping centers, hotels or motels and public eating
places, constructed by any state, county or municipal government agency
or instrumentality or private individual, partnership, association or
corporation with the following exceptions: one- to four-family private
residences, warehouse storage areas and all buildings classified as
hazardous occupancies. As used herein, "hazardous occupancy" shall mean
the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof
§ 231-4 NORWOOD CODE § 231-4
226:468
that involves highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material, or
which has inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire hazard.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Land reserved or dedicated for installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion.
RETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and absorption of this water into the
ground.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SITE TRIANGLE — A triangular shaped easement established at the
intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to obstruct vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet above the centerline
grade of the street or driveway. The municipality shall have the right of
entry to remove any obstruction to vision within a site easement area not
conforming to the standards of this definition, following due notice to the
property owner. Said triangle shall be determined along such street lines or
edge of driveway 30 feet distant from their joint intersection.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots in which is shown
the existing or proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, driveways,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and any other information that may be reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
SLOPE — The ratio or rise of land to horizontal separation of this rise. For
the purpose of this chapter, a slope shall be determined by dividing vertical
elevation difference on adjacent contour lines by the scaled horizontal
distance perpendicular to these adjacent contour lines. For the purpose
of measurement or calculation on any map, plat, plan or other document
required by the Borough of Norwood, or any agency or Board thereof, slopes
shall be measured from a topographic map upon a scale of one inch equals
100 feet or larger.
STEEP SLOPE — Land area where at least 10% of a given site of one acre or
more has land surface gradients of 15% or greater. Steep slopes shall also
mean steep topography.
STREAM — Any natural body of water flowing continuously or
intermittently, whether designated as a stream, spring, brook, river or
otherwise and consisting of a bed, bank and water, but not including lakes
or ponds.
§ 231-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-4
226:469
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law;
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Bergen County
Clerk's office prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to
such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between the
street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street lines.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created:
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TREE — Any woody perennial plant with one main trunk, such trunk having
a diameter of at least eight inches when measured four feet above the level
of the existing grade.
WATERCOURSE — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes and all other
bodies of water, whether public or private, excluding piped drainage
systems, which are contained within, flow through or border on the Borough
of Norwood and which receive or conduct surface water runoff.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated by surface or ground water
with a frequency sufficient to support and under normal circumstances does
or would support a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life that requires
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
A.
B. Divisions of land by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of land upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the
municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
E.
§ 231-4 NORWOOD CODE § 231-4
226:470
saturated or seasonally saturated soil condition for growth and
reproduction. Wetlands include but are not limited to swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas, such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river
overflows, mud flats and natural ponds. Wetlands shall include but not be
limited to those shown on the United States Department of the Interior
Wetland Maps or similar maps published by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 231-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-4
226:471

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 231-5. Application of requirements.
§ 231-6. Site plan approval.
§ 231-7. Small additions to existing uses.
A. Except as provided herein, no building or excavation permit shall be
issued for a building, structure or use or any enlargement, expansion or
change of use, unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the
approving authority.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally
approved by the approving authority as provided herein.
A. Site plan review. Site plan review shall not be required for single-family
detached dwellings or for such accessory uses as private garages, tool
houses, gardens and private greenhouses, swimming pools and other
similar uses incidental to a single-family detached dwelling or for
similar improvements as accessory uses to a principal use, except as
may be provided in Subsection C below.
B. Site plan approval. Site plan approval shall not be required when:
(1) Minor repairs to the interior of a building does not involve
structural change or enlargement of the building as determined by
the Construction Official, except as may be provided in Subsection
C below.
(2) Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a building or
structure which do not involve any enlargement of the building or
major structural change, as determined by the Construction
Official, except as may be provided in Subsection C below.
C. Approving authority approval. The Construction Official, at his
discretion, may refer any application for a building permit to the
approving authority for site plan approval where, in the Construction
Official's judgment, the construction, reconstruction, alteration or
change of use will affect motor vehicle and pedestrian circulation,
drainage, water supply, sewerage disposal, landscaping, signs, lighting,
off-street parking or loading, or any lack of any or all of these factors,
environmental factors and other considerations as specified in this
chapter.
D. Required approval. Except as provided in Subsection B(1) and (2)
above, all construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of a
building, structure or use or a change of use or occupancy on or in a
nonconforming structure, use or lot shall require site plan approval.
§ 231-5 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-7
226:473
§ 231-8. Administration.
A. In cases where an applicant proposes to expand or otherwise enlarge
an existing use, structure or building, the standards established by this
chapter shall be applicable only to new additions, provided that the
same constitutes a small addition.
B. Under the terms of this chapter, a small addition shall not exceed 15%
of the gross floor area of an existing use or 1,000 square feet,
whichever shall be the lesser. All other additions shall fully comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
A. Planning Board as approving authority. In accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) the Planning Board
shall act as approving authority for site plan approval, either
individually or as part of a simultaneous application, as follows:
(1) For preliminary and final site plans.
(2) For site plans which also require minor or major subdivision
approval.
(3) For site plans which require conditional use approval.
(4) For site plans which also require planned development approval.
(5) For site plans in which a variance request (in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60) from lot area, lot dimension, setback and yard
requirements is sought, provided that relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
B. Board of Adjustment as approving authority. In accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), the Board of
Adjustment shall act as approving authority for site plan approval
where a use variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), is requested in
which a site plan is part of the application.
C. Planning Board and Board of Adjustment as approving authority. In the
case of a variance request, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, from lot
area, lot dimension, setback and yard requirements where the relief
sought from lot area requirements exceeds one lot, the applicant shall
proceed initially with the Board of Adjustment as to the lot area
variance only and, if approved by the Board of Adjustment, the
applicant shall then proceed with the balance of the variances
requested before the Planning Board where a site plan is part of the
application.
D. Exception in application of site plan regulations. The approving
authority, when acting upon applications for site plan approval, shall
have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements of this
chapter as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for site plan review, if the literal enforcement of
§ 231-7 NORWOOD CODE § 231-8
226:474
§ 231-9. Fees.
one or more provisions of the chapter is impractical or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land sought
to be developed.
E. Simultaneous review and approval. The approval authority shall have
the power to review and approve one or more land use ordinance
requirements simultaneously with review for site plan approval without
the applicant being required to make further application to the
approving authority, or the approving authority being required to hold
further hearings. The longest time period for action by the approving
authority, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use, site plan
approval or variance, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional
use or a use variance is requested by the applicant, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use or use variance.
F. Informal review of concept plan. At the request of a developer, the
approving authority shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for
a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit
an application for development. The developer shall not be required to
submit any fees for such an informal review. The developer shall not be
bound by any concept plan for which review is requested, and the
Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review.
A. Preliminary site plan approval. The application fees for preliminary site
plan approval shall be as set forth in Schedule A of this chapter and
shall be paid with the filing of the application, in cash, certified check or
bank check, payable to the borough.
B. Final site plan approval. The application fees for final site plan approval
shall be as set forth in Schedule B of this chapter and shall be paid with
the filing of the application, in cash, certified check or bank check,
payable to the borough.
C. Simultaneous filing for preliminary and final site plan approval. The
application fees for simultaneous applications for preliminary and final
site plan approval shall be as set forth in Schedule C of this chapter and
shall be paid with the filing of the application, in cash, certified check or
bank check, payable to the borough.
D. Existing building occupancy or change of use approval. The application
fees for existing building occupancy or change of use approval shall be
as set forth in Schedule D of this chapter and shall be paid with the
filing of the application in cash, check, certified check or bank check,
payable to the borough.
E. Filing fees for amended site plan application. The application fees for
an amended site plan application shall be as set forth in Schedule E of
§ 231-8 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-9
226:475
§ 231-10. Developer's agreement.
As a further condition to approval by the approving authority and the
issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall be required to enter
into a developer's agreement with the borough specifying the conditions of
approval and the work to be performed by the applicant.
§ 231-11. Public hearings.
this chapter and shall be paid with the filing of the application, in cash,
certified check or bank check, payable to the borough.
F. Inspection fees. The applicant shall deposit the sum of 3% of the
estimated cost of the improvements required by the site plan approval
to cover engineering investigation and inspection of construction,
together with a sum sufficient, in the opinion of the approving authority,
for all other costs concerning the application.
G. Fees for specific services. The fees for reproduction of minutes of
meetings, transcripts, copies of decisions and certified lists of persons
requiring notice and other miscellaneous services shall be as set forth
in Schedule F of this chapter.
H. Escrow fees and accounts for site plan applications shall be required
and administered as in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 230, Land
Use Procedures, Art. V, Escrow Accounts. [Amended 5-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-03]51.
A. Required. A public hearing shall be required for the following
preliminary applications:
(1) Site plan approval.
(2) Any site plan requiring conditional use approval.
(3) Any site plan requiring subdivision approval.
(4) Any site plan requiring planned development approval.
(5) Any site plan requiring a variance of any type.
B. Availability of maps and documents prior to hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing during normal business hours in the office of the Borough
Clerk. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the
previous filed maps and documents.
C. Notice of public hearing.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the deletion of former Subsection I,
Escrow Fees; how determined, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 231-9 NORWOOD CODE § 231-11
226:476
(1) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection
A of this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as
shown on the current tax duplicate, located in the state and within
200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearing, provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied
by notice to the condominium association, in the case of any owner
whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property
regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an
apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by:
(a) Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on said
current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
(b) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate.
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowner's association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject matter of the
hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation
without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
(3) Said notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the application and the matters to be considered by the
approving authority; the identification of the property proposed for
subdivision or development by its street address and current tax lot
and block numbers. The notice shall also state that the maps and
documents concerning the application will be available for public
inspection at the Borough Clerk's office during normal business
hours.
(4) Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(5) The applicant shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published
in the official newspaper of the borough at least 10 days prior to the
public hearing.
(6) Proof of service upon property owners and proof of publication in
affidavit form shall be submitted to the administrative officer at
least 48 hours prior to the public hearing.
D. Certification of list of persons entitled to notice. Upon the written
request of an applicant, the administrative officer of the borough shall,
within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
§ 231-11 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-11
226:477
required to give notice pursuant to Subsection C of this section. The
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on said list shall
not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. The applicant shall pay a fee
of $0.25 for each name or $10, whichever is the greater, for such list.
E. Other notification.
(1) Adjoining municipalities. Notice of all hearings on applications for
development involving property located within 200 feet of an
adjoining municipality shall be given by personal service or
certified mail to the clerk of such municipality.
(2) Bergen County Planning Board. Notice of all hearings on
applications for the development of property adjacent to an
existing county road or proposed road shown of the official County
Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or
situated within 200 feet of the municipal boundary shall be given by
personal service or certified mail to the Bergen County Planning
Board.
(3) Commissioner of Transportation. Notice of all hearings on
applications for development of property adjacent to a state
highway shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation.
(4) Department of Community Affairs. Notice of all hearings on any
applications for development of property which exceeds 150 acres
or 500 dwelling units shall be given to the New Jersey Division of
State and Regional Planning in the Department of Community
Affairs. The notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Borough Clerk concerning such
application.
(5) Effect of mailing notice. Notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
F. Verbatim recording required. The approving authority shall provide for
the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographer,
mechanical or electronic means. The approving authority shall furnish a
transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to any
interested party at his expense. The charge to an interested party for a
transcript shall not be more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
42A:11-15, and such transcripts shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
G. Written findings and conclusions.
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced
to writing as provided in this subsection and shall include findings
of fact and conclusions based thereon.
§ 231-11 NORWOOD CODE § 231-11
226:478
§ 231-12. Other site plan requirements.
(2) Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to
receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
(3) The approving authority may provide such written decision and
findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which
the approving authority grants or denies approval or, if the meeting
at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45 days of the
applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application
for development, within 45 days of such meeting by the adoption of
a resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and the
findings and conclusions of the approving authority thereon. An
action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within the
applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application.
(4) The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time
period for rendering a decision on the application for development.
Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the
members of the approving authority who voted for the action
previously taken, and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote
on such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an
action of the approving authority and not to be an action of the
approving authority, except that failure to adopt such a resolution
within the forty-five-day period shall result in the approval of the
application for development, notwithstanding any prior action
taken thereon.
(5) Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the
date of decision for purposes of the mailing, filings and publications
required by law.
H. Publication of notice of decision. A brief notice shall be published in the
official newspaper of the borough. The period of time from which an
appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the publication of the
decision.
A. Site plan amendments. Amended site plan applications shall be filed
with the approving authority and shall be considered at the next regular
meeting date of the approving authority, provided that the complete
amended application is received no less than 14 days before said
meeting date and said amendments are minor in nature.
B. Compliance.
§ 231-11 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-12
226:479
§ 231-13. (Reserved)52
(1) All proposed improvements or development indicated on the
approved site plan map shall meet the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and specifications of the borough,
county, state and/or federal governments and their agencies with
jurisdiction concerning the site development.
(2) It shall be the joint responsibility of the Borough Engineer and
Construction Official to enforce their respective rules and
regulations to ensure compliance with the site plan approval and
specified conditions imposed by the approving authority.
C. Site plan binding. The site plan, as approved by the approving authority,
shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from the approved
plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the approving
authority or approved amendments as provided in Subsection A above.
D. Revocation of building permit or certification of occupancy. In the event
of a failure to comply with any condition of site plan approval, the
Construction Official, on his own initiative or upon recommendation
from the Borough Engineer, may revoke the building permit or
certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, and enforce the terms and
conditions of the site plan approval in such other manner as permitted
by law.
E. Action subject to other governmental approvals.
(1) Any application for site plan approval which either requires
municipal approval prior to other governmental action or requires
extensive review and consideration by other governmental
agencies may be granted conditional site plan approval by the
approving authority. The conditional approval shall expire within
one year if the applicant does not file for final site plan approval
with the approving authority.
(2) In the event that the design and layout have been affected by other
governmental requirements, the applicant shall make application
for an amended site plan approval and pay the required application
fees and deposit the escrow funds required by this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 231-13, Change of use approval, as amended, was repealed
6-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:10. See now Ch. 106, Certificates of Continued Occupancy.
§ 231-12 NORWOOD CODE § 231-13
226:480
ARTICLE III
Procedure for Site Plan Approval
§ 231-14. Submission of application for preliminary approval.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate, on forms provided by the approving authority. Application for
preliminary site plan approval shall be filed no later than 21 days prior to
the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Fees shall be required
as provided in Article II of this chapter and shall be submitted with the
application.
§ 231-15. Procedural requirements for preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary site plan review.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval,
the administrative officer shall submit copies of the preliminary
plat to:
(a) The Borough Engineer.
(b) The Construction Official.
(c) The Chief of Police.
(d) The Fire Prevention Bureau.
(e) Such other persons as the approving authority may designate.
(2) Said officials and agencies shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 45 days of the date of the
filing of the application. The approving authority shall consider
such recommendations but shall have the authority to proceed in
the absence of such recommendations should the approving
authority deem such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) If the application is found to be incomplete for any reason, the
applicant shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the date of
submission or it shall be deemed to be perfected as to content.
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
as a perfected application as to content for public hearing
purposes.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approval.
(1) Any site plan application requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental agencies approval shall be submitted by the
applicant to the County Planning Board and/or other governmental
agencies for review and approval. The approving authority may
§ 231-14 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-15
226:481
§ 231-16. Effect of preliminary site plan approval.
The preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three-year period from the date of preliminary
approval:
condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or other governmental agency or upon the County Planning Board
or such other governmental agency failing to report thereon within
the time provided by law.
(2) A preliminary site plan requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental agency approval which may not have been received
at the time of the public hearing by the approving authority shall
require the public hearing to be continued until such time as the
required reports are received or by the failure to report thereon as
provided by law.
C. Other requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which preliminary site plan approval is sought.
(2) All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving
authority.
D. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
administrative officer shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in
§ 231-11C of this chapter for public hearings.
E. Time period within which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny preliminary
site plan approval within 45 days of the receipt of a perfected and
complete site plan application for a site plan of 10 acres or less, or
within 95 days of the receipt of a perfected and complete site plan
application of more than 10 acres, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing,
shall constitute a preliminary approval by the approving authority.
A. That the general terms and conditions upon which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-tract and off-tract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the specific site plan.
The borough may modify, by ordinance, such general terms and
§ 231-15 NORWOOD CODE § 231-16
226:482
§ 231-17. Submission of application for final site plan approval.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate, on forms provided by the approving authority. An application
for final approval of a site plan shall be filed no later than 21 days prior to
the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Fees shall be required
as provided in Article II of this chapter and shall be submitted with the
application form.
§ 231-18. Procedural requirements for final site plan approval.
conditions of preliminary approval as they may relate to public health
and safety, provided that such modifications are in accord with
amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to approval.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
C. That the applicant may apply for, and the approving authority may
grant, extension of such preliminary approval for the additional period
of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance,
such revised standards shall govern.
D. That, in the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights conferred in Subsections A, B
and C above for such a time period longer than three years, as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under the preliminary approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
thereafter apply for, and the approving authority may thereafter grant,
an extension of preliminary approval for such additional period of time
as shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under the preliminary approval,
the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards shall govern.
Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
A. Final site plan review.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for final site plan approval, the
administrative officer shall submit copies of the final plat to:
(a) The Borough Engineer.
(b) The Construction Official.
§ 231-16 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-18
226:483
(c) The Chief of Police.
(d) The Fire Prevention Bureau.
(e) Such other persons as the approving authority may designate.
(2) Said officials and agencies shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 45 days of the date of the
filing of the application. The approving authority shall consider
such recommendations but shall have the authority to proceed in
the absence of such recommendations should the approving
authority deem such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) If the application is found to be incomplete for any reason, the
applicant shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the date of
submission or it shall be deemed to be perfected as to content.
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
as a perfected application as to content for public hearing
purposes.
(5) The approving authority shall approve the application for final site
plan approval, with or without conditions, provided that the
following requirements have been met:
(a) That detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) That the final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan and conditions governing same.
(c) That all improvements have been installed or a developer's
agreement has been entered into between the applicant and
the borough and all performance guaranties have been posted
to ensure the installation of the improvements.
(d) That the applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final
approval.
(e) That proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on the premises for
which final site plan approval is sought.
(f) That all applicable fees have been paid.
(g) That requirements of all other governmental agencies have
been complied with.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approval.
Whenever review or approval is required by the County Planning Board
of other governmental agency, a final site plan application shall be
submitted by the applicant to the County Planning Board and such
§ 231-18 NORWOOD CODE § 231-18
226:484
§ 231-19. Effect of final site plan approval.
other governmental agency. The approving authority shall condition
any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or such other
governmental agency or the failure of the County Planning Board or
such other governmental agency to report on the application within the
time provided by law.
C. Time within which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny final site
plan approval within 45 days of the receipt of a perfected and
complete site plan application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant, in writing, shall constitute final approval, and a
certificate of the Borough Clerk as to the failure of the approving
authority to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence
of approval.
D. Final site plan approval authorization. Upon approval of the site
development plan and compliance with all conditions, the Borough
Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority
shall be authorized to sign the plan, and the Secretary shall affix the
seal of the approving authority. The tracing shall become and remain a
permanent record of the approving authority, and the applicant shall
supply to the approving authority the number of prints reasonably
required for its records. A print shall be forwarded to each of the
officials and agencies set forth in Subsection A above.
A. Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval
for the section granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant
that the zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
and all other rights conferred upon the applicant as part of the
preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two years
from the date of final approval.
B. Final approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval
unless the applicant has secured a building permit to commence
construction. The approving authority may extend final approval and
the protection offered under the provisions of this subsection for one
year. The approving authority may grant three such extensions.
C. In the case of site plan for a planned development of 50 acres, or
conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the approving authority
may extend the rights granted under final approval for such period of
time longer than two years as shall be determined by the approving
§ 231-18 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-19
226:485
§ 231-20. Conditions of final site plan approval.
The approving authority may, as a condition of final approval:
§ 231-21. Simultaneous action for preliminary and final site plan
approval.
The approving authority shall accept simultaneous applications for
preliminary and final site plan approval where so requested by the
applicant, provided that the applicant adheres to all of the conditions,
requirements and safeguards established for preliminary and final site plan
approval.
§ 231-22. Soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. Thereafter, the applicant may apply, and the approving
authority may grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the approving authority to
be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to
be developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
A. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development.
B. Grant final approval for certain work but not require resubmission for
final approval for designated elements, such as but not limited to
landscaping, signs and related matters, and require approval of these
elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit.
C. Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit
subject to the applicant or developer or successors in interest fulfilling
certain requirements within a designated period of time not to exceed
one year from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
zoning permit. This may include, but is not limited to, the installation of
improvements, reevaluation of circulation patterns and related matters.
A. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan required. Any application
for development, including a subdivision, site plan, conditional use,
zoning variance, planned development or building permit application
for two or more single-family dwellings, in which 5,000 square feet or
more of surface area of land is to be disturbed to accommodate
construction, shall require an approved soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan from the New Jersey Soil Conservation District.
§ 231-19 NORWOOD CODE § 231-22
226:486
B. Time limits. The New Jersey Soil Conservation District shall grant or
deny approval or certification within the period of 30 days of
submission of a complete application, unless by mutual agreement, in
writing, between the district and the applicant, the period of 30 days
shall be extended for an additional period of not more than 30 days.
Failure of the New Jersey Soil Conservation District to grant or deny
approval or certification of a plan within such period, or as it may be
extended, shall constitute approval and certification of the plan.
C. Condition. Any site plan approval by the approving authority shall be
conditioned upon approval or certification by the New Jersey Soil
Conservation District.
§ 231-22 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-22
226:487

ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Details
§ 231-23. Information required on site plan.
A. All applications for site plan approval shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or architect. It shall bear the
signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor as to topographic and
boundary survey data.
B. All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
and shall contain the following information and data, where applicable:
(1) A title block shall be indicated in the lower right-hand corner of the
plan and shall include the name and address of the owner; the tax
assessment map lot and block number of the site; the proposed
name of the development; and the name, address and license
number and seal of the person preparing the plan. If the owner is a
corporation, the name and address of the president and secretary
shall be submitted with the application.
(2) A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing
the date of preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and
dated.
(3) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections within 500 feet
of the boundaries of the subject premises.
(4) A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used and a
geographic representation of the scale shall be displayed; all
distances and dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot,
and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds. There
shall be an arrow indicating North.
(5) The names of all owners of adjacent properties within 200 feet of
the subject premises, together with the Tax Assessment Map lot
and block numbers of said properties.
(6) Zone boundaries within 200 feet shall be shown on the plan.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, required building
or setback lines, lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and public and private rights-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements
or exceptions which affect the subject premises. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions, easements or exceptions shall be
submitted with the application. If there are no known covenants,
deed restrictions, easements or exceptions affecting the subject
premises, a notation shall so state on the site plan.
§ 231-23 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-23
226:489
(9) Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all
other structures, such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges and
roadways, with spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines and structures to
remain shall be indicated by solid lines.
(10) All distances as measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the premises to the nearest intersection with any
other street.
(11) Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other
structures, including required yard and setback areas, building
height and feet in stories, lot coverage and improved lot coverage
calculations.
(12) Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs, either
freestanding or affixed to a building. Where signs are not to be
provided, a notation shall so state on the site plan.
(13) Location of all storm drainage structures, soil erosion and
sedimentation control devices and utility lines, whether publicly or
privately owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow. If
existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location of
such underground utility lines.
(14) Existing and proposed contours, referred to a United States Coast
and Geodetic datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes
of 3% or less, an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 3% but
less than 15% and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or more.
Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines, and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(15) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses where available.
(16) All proposed streets, with profiles indicating grading, and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks
where required, and location and size of utility lines according to
municipal standards and specifications.
(17) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed
location of buildings, including proposed grades. Floor space of
buildings and estimated number of employees or other capacity
measurements, where required, shall also be indicated. If the
precise use of the proposed building is unknown at the time of the
application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to a certificate of occupancy.
(18) All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public or private streets, showing the size and location of driveways
§ 231-23 NORWOOD CODE § 231-23
226:490
§ 231-24. Site plan legends.
The following legends shall be indicated on the site plan:
and curb cuts, including proposed traffic lanes, acceleration and
deceleration lanes and proposed traffic control devices.
Improvements, such as roads, curbs, sidewalks and the design
details of parking stalls, access aisles, curb radii, direction of traffic
flow and other conditions as may be required in Chapter 233,
Zoning, Chapter 232, Subdivision of Land, or this chapter.
(19) Location and design of any off-street parking areas and loading
zones, showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(20) Location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants, sanitary
sewer lines and facilities and public utility lines.
(21) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting shall conform to applicable municipal
standards.
(22) The proposed screening and landscaping and plant plan, indicating
natural vegetation to remain and areas to be planted, with the size,
number and type of vegetation to be utilized.
(23) Proposed stormwater drainage system as to conform with designs
based on a one-hundred-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of
two inches of rainfall. All site plans shall be accompanied by a
sketch plat showing an existing drainage facilities within 500 feet
of any boundary, and information as to the building, paved and
wooded areas, and any other conditions contributing to the
calculations and methods used in determination of the adequacy of
the proposed stormwater drainage system.
(24) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details of the
site plan are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 233,
Zoning, Chapter 232, Subdivision of Land, and this chapter.
(25) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details of the
site plan are in accordance with all other applicable municipal,
county, state and federal laws, ordinances and regulations.
A. To be signed before submission:
I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN.
Owner Date
Applicant Date
§ 231-23 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-24
226:491
B. To be completed before submission:
SITE PLAN OF
LOT BLOCK ZONE
DATE SCALE
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
C. To be signed before submission:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I HAVE PREPARED THIS SITE PLAN AND
THAT ALL DIMENSIONS AND OTHER INFORMATION SET FORTH
ARE CORRECT.
Name
Title and License Number
D. To be signed before issuance of building permit:
APPROVED BY THE____________________BOARD OF THE BOROUGH
OF NORWOOD.
BOARD OF THE BOROUGH OF NORWOOD
By:
Chairman Date
E. To be signed before (preliminary or final) approval is given:
I HAVE REVIEWED THIS SITE PLAN AND CERTIFY THAT IT MEETS
ALL ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS UNDER MY JURISDICTION.
Borough Engineer Date
F. To be signed before issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS HAVE
BEEN INSTALLED OR THAT A PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE HAS
BEEN POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE SITE PLAN
ORDINANCE.
Construction Official
Borough Engineer
G. To be signed prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy:
§ 231-24 NORWOOD CODE § 231-24
226:492
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OF
THIS SITE PLAN HAVE BEEN INSTALLED IN COMPLIANCE WITH
ALL APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.
Borough Engineer Date
Construction Official Date
OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUED:
Date
§ 231-24 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-24
226:493

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 231-25. General requirements.
In review of any site plan, the approving authority, all advisory boards
and professional advisors shall be guided by the general and specific
requirements contained herein.
A. Circulation.
(1) The review of the site plan shall consider pedestrian and vehicular
traffic movement within and adjacent to the site, with particular
emphasis on parking areas, off-street loading and unloading,
movement of people, goods and vehicles from access roads, within
the site and between buildings and vehicles.
(2) All parking spaces shall be usable and safely and conveniently
arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with the traffic flow on these
roads and to permit vehicles with a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to the site.
B. Building design and layout. The design and layout of buildings and
parking areas shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically
pleasing and efficient design and arrangements. Particular
arrangements shall be made for safety and fire protection, impact upon
surrounding areas and environmental and ecological considerations.
C. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights
shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
D. Buffering. Buffering, where required, shall be located around the
perimeter of the site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light
from structures, movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to
achieve these objectives.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site
plan and designed and integrated into building arrangements,
topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping may
include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals,
plants, sculpture, art, street furniture and the use of building and
paving materials.
F. Signs. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles or pedestrians.
§ 231-25 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-25
226:495
§ 231-26. Off-street parking requirements.
G. Environmental considerations. Environmental elements relating to soil
erosion and sedimentation, preservation of trees, protection of
watercourses and water quality, noise pollution, topographic limiting
areas, wetland areas and other environmental and ecological factors
will be considered by the approving authority to minimize adverse
effects from development.
A. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Chapter 233, Zoning, or as set
forth in Table I of this chapter, whichever may be more restrictive. If the
determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a
fractional space, the fraction shall require one additional parking
space.
Table I
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Automobile service stations 4 parking spaces for each bay plus
1 for each employee in the
maximum working shift
Banking and savings institutions 1 parking space for each 300
square feet of floor area or 8
spaces for each teller window,
whichever is greater
Bowling lanes 5 parking spaces for each lane
Churches and other places of
worship
1 parking space for each 3 seats or
1 for each 72 inches of seating
space when using benches rather
than seats
Colleges and institutions of
higher learning
1 parking space for each full-time
or part-time day student
Community buildings, social halls
and places of public assembly
1 parking space for each 2 seats,
except where a specific amount of
seating is undetermined, then 1
parking space shall be required for
each 75 square feet of assemblage
area
Country clubs 1 parking space for each 100
square feet of floor area occupied
by all principal or accessory
structures, except those used for
parking purposes
§ 231-25 NORWOOD CODE § 231-26
226:496
Table I
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Farm or garden produce sold on
premises
1 parking space for each 200
square feet of building area or 15
parking spaces, whichever is
greater
Funeral homes, mortuaries 15 parking spaces for each parlor
or slumber room
Golf courses and clubs 10 parking spaces for each tee
Golf driving ranges 2 parking spaces for each tee
Industrial and manufacturing
uses
1 parking space for each 400
square feet of floor area or 3
spaces for each 4 employees in the
maximum working shift, whichever
is greater
Laboratory and research uses 1 parking space for every 300
square feet of floor area
Medical or dental clinics or
offices
5 parking spaces for each doctor or
dentist, plus 1 space for each 100
square feet of floor area
Motels, hotels, motor lodges 1 parking space for each rental
unit, and in addition, compliance
with the requirements for each
particular additional use located
on the property, such as
restaurants, eating and drinking
establishments, retail stores,
meeting rooms, etc.
Nursing homes, hospitals,
convalescing homes
1 parking space for each bed
Offices, business and professional
(other than medical and dental)
1 parking space for each 250
square feet of floor area
Residential dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling
unit
Restaurants, eating and drinking
establishments and catering halls
1 parking space for each 2 1/2
seats
Restaurants, fast-food 1 parking space for each 2 seats,
plus 1 parking space for each 2
employees in the maximum work
shift or a minimum of 40 parking
spaces, whichever is greater
§ 231-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-26
226:497
Table I
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Retail stores, store groups, shops,
shopping centers
1 parking space for each 150
square feet of floor area where the
floor area shall not exceed 2,000
square feet; 1 parking space for
each 175 square feet of floor area
where the floor area shall exceed
2,000 square feet
Schools, elementary 3 parking spaces for every 2
teaching stations
Schools, high school 3 parking spaces for every 2
teaching stations, plus 1 parking
space for every 3 students of
driving age
Ski areas 1 parking space for every 10
persons of practical lift capacity
Theaters 1 parking space for each 2 seats
Wholesale establishments,
warehouses, furniture stores
1 parking space for each 600
square feet of floor area
Mixed land uses Mixed land uses in the same
building shall be calculated as the
sum of the individual uses unless
the applicant can demonstrate to
the approving authority that the
parking characteristics of the
individual uses are such that the
total needs of the development are
less than the sum of the parts and
the number of spaces to be
provided will satisfy the lesser
need.
Other uses not provided for
herein
To be determined by the approving
authority
B. Location of parking spaces.
(1) The approving authority shall approve the location of all proposed
parking spaces on the site and shall take into consideration the size
and topography of the site, visibility from the site to adjoining
streets as well as within the parking area, conditions of safety
relating to the movement of pedestrians and vehicles and
elimination of nuisance factors, including glare, noise, dust and
other similar considerations.
§ 231-26 NORWOOD CODE § 231-26
226:498
(2) Parking shall not be permitted in the area located within 30 feet
from the street right-of-way line or within eight feet from any side
or rear lot line, or within the site triangle of any driveway, or in
such other areas as may be prohibited by Chapter 233, Zoning.
C. Parking area design standards.
(1) Aisle widths.
(a) Provisions shall be made for safe and adequate circulation of
pedestrians and vehicles. The widths of all aisles providing
direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in accordance
with standards established in Table II.
Table II
Minimum Aisle Width
(Feet)
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular) 24
(b) Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles of less than 24
feet.
(2) Size of parking stalls.
(a) Parking stalls shall have a minimum area of 200 square feet,
exclusive of aisles, and shall measure 10 feet in width and 20
feet in length.
(b) The Planning Board may make provisions for special parking
areas limited to the parking of smaller standard car vehicles
where the need for such parking facilities can be shown by the
applicant.
(3) Circulation within parking area.
(a) Except for attendant parking, all parking spaces shall be
designed free and clear of obstructions to individual parking
stalls.
(b) Such parking spaces shall be located in such a manner as to
permit all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under
no condition shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a
§ 231-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-26
226:499
parking lot driveway or otherwise block the free movement
of traffic within the parking area or specific points of traffic
control, such as fire hydrants and standpipes, exits and
entrances or similar locations.
(c) Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to
permit emergency vehicles and service vehicles, such as
delivery trucks and solid waste collection vehicles, to have
reasonable access to the site and space for their intended
functions.
(d) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as
great an extent as possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas where needed
shall be provided.
(4) Driveway design criteria.
(a) Location of driveways. All entrances and exit driveways to a
public or private street shall be so located as to afford
maximum safety and to provide convenient ingress and egress
to the site and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic on
the public or private street.
(b) Site distances.
[1] The minimum site distances established in Table III shall
be required between a driveway and an adjoining street.
Table III
Minimum Site Distance From Driveway and
Adjoining Street
Allowable Maximum
Speed on Roadway
(miles per hour)
Minimum Site Distance
(feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
50 (or more) 500
[2] For purposes of this chapter, site distance measurements
shall be measured from the driver's seat of a standing
vehicle located on that portion of the exit driveway that is
immediately contiguous to the street with the front of a
vehicle standing 10 feet behind the right-of-way line of the
street, with the height of eye 3.75 feet above the driveway
§ 231-26 NORWOOD CODE § 231-26
226:500
pavement to an object 4.5 feet above the road or other
driveway pavement.
[3] Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets,
no driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet
of the point where the curb return of the street
intersection and curbline meet.
[4] No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20
feet from any other driveway on an adjoining parcel nor
shall more than one driveway be located closer than 60
feet to another driveway on the same site, as measured
from the closest sidelines of the two driveways along the
right-of-way line. No entrance or exit driveway shall be
located on a traffic circle on a ramp of an interchange or
within 50 feet of the beginning of any ramp or other
portion of an interchange.
(c) Geometric design. The geometric design of a driveway
connection to a public or private street shall be governed by
sound traffic engineering principles. The following guidelines
shall be utilized in preparing a geometric design but deviations
from such guidelines may be required under certain
circumstances in the course of preparing a design. Therefore,
although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines,
conditions on the site may require deviations from such
requirements as may be determined by the Borough Engineer:
[1] Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
will intersect a public street or private street at an angle as
near to 90° as site conditions permit, but in no case less
than 60°.
[2] One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a public or private street.
[3] Dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall be
designed to adequately accommodate the volume and
character of vehicles anticipated to use the premises daily.
The required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways connecting to a public street or private street at
90° shall be as set forth in Table IV.
§ 231-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-26
226:501
Table IV
Standards for Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs
and Curb Return Radius
One-Way Operation
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to
10-family
residence
12 to 15 32 to 35 20 minimum
30 maximum
Over
10-family
residence
15 to 16 35 to 38 20 minimum
30 maximum
Commercial
and
industrial
15 to 30 35 to 50 35 minimum
45 maximum
Service
stations
20 to 30 35 to 50 20 minimum
35 maximum
Two-Way Operation
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to
10-family
residence
22 to 26 44 to 50 20 minimum
30 maximum
Over
10-family
residence
24 to 30 46 to 52 25 minimum
35 maximum
Commercial
and
industrial
30 to 50 50 to 70 35 minimum
45 maximum
Service
stations
40 to 50 50 to 60 20 minimum
35 maximum
Note: Driveways connecting to a public or private street
at an angle shall have the same widths as shown in this
Table IV. The width of depressed curbs and the radius of
curb returns shall provide for the sharpest turning radii
of vehicles using the driveway and keeping said vehicles
within their prescribed lanes.
§ 231-26 NORWOOD CODE § 231-26
226:502
[4] Vertical curve. Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be
flat enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle
undercarriage.
[5] Ramp gradient. Should the sidewalk be so close to the
curb at a depressed curb driveway as to cause the ramp to
be too steep and be likely to cause undercarriage drag, the
sidewalk shall be appropriately lowered to provide a
suitable ramp gradient.
[6] Permanent pavement. The surface of any driveway shall be
constructed with a permanent pavement of a type
specified by standards set by the Borough Engineer. Such
pavement shall extend to the paved portion of the public or
private street pavement.
(5) Acceleration and deceleration lanes.
(a) Where a driveway serves a parking area of 150 or more
parking spaces, and the road has a traffic volume exceeding
7,500 vehicles per day, an acceleration lane may be required
which is at least 200 feet long and at least 13 feet wide,
measured from the road curbline. A minimum thirty-five-foot
curb return radius shall be used from the driveway to the
acceleration lane.
(b) Where a driveway serves as an entrance to a land development
providing 150 or more parking spaces, a deceleration lane may
be required for traffic turning right into the driveway from the
road. The deceleration lane shall be at least 200 feet long and
at least 13 feet wide, measured from the road curbline. A
minimum thirty-five-foot curb return radius shall be used from
the deceleration lane into the driveway.
(6) Guardrails, wheel stops and parking lot striping.
(a) Guardrails required for safety shall be provided.
(b) Wheel stops, permanently anchored in the ground, may be
required in appropriate locations. No parked vehicle shall
overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional
sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to accommodate such
overhang.
(c) Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked
and delineated. The approving authority may require certain
areas to be maintained for fire-fighting purposes or other
emergency purposes. These areas, as well as other pavement,
shall be appropriately designated.
(7) Minimum and maximum grades in parking areas. The minimum and
maximum parking area grades shall be in accordance with Table V.
§ 231-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-26
226:503
Table V
Minimum and Maximum Grade in Parking Areas
Minimum Grade
(percent)
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Parking stalls and
service aisles
1/2 6
Main approach
(walkways to
buildings)
1/2 4
Collector or other
service walkways
1/2 8
Swales 2 10
Principal circulation
aisles
1/2 8
Driveways
(entrances and exits)
1/2* 6*
*For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(8) Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas.
(a) Every parcel of land used as a public or private off-street
parking or loading area shall be maintained in good condition,
free of hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas,
sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers,
guardrails, markings, signs, landscaping and other
improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good
condition.
(b) The governing body may authorize repairs for such
improvements if, after proper notice, the owner fails to
maintain such improvements and such conditions constitute a
hazard to health and safety or where such improvements are
governed by a development or other similar agreement.
(c) The cost of such repairs shall be charged to the property owner
and become a lien on the land and shall be added and become
part of the taxes next assessed against the land upon which the
work was performed and shall bear interest and be collected
and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
(9) Waiver of parking requirements. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the approving authority that, because of the nature
of the operation or use, the parking requirements of this section
are unnecessary or excessive, the approving authority shall have
the power to approve a site plan showing less parking area than is
required by this chapter; provided, however, that a landscaped area
§ 231-26 NORWOOD CODE § 231-26
226:504
§ 231-27. Off-street loading requirements.
of sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and
reserved for the purpose of future off-street parking requirements
in the event that a change of use of the premises shall make such
additional off-street parking spaces necessary.
D. Other off-street parking requirements.
(1) Limitation as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be used solely
for the parking of passenger automobiles, and no commercial
repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in such
parking areas.
(2) Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street parking
facilities cease to be available as required, the certificate of
occupancy for the building or buildings built in conjunction with
such parking areas may be canceled by the borough and become
null and void.
(3) Changes. There shall be no changes made in the use of off-street
parking facilities, and no motor vehicles other than self-propelled
passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use any of the off-street
parking facilities, and no service of any kind shall be extended to a
vehicle occupying such off-street parking facilities except for
emergency purposes.
(4) Controls. All municipal ordinances governing the control of motor
vehicles and all the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq.
shall apply to driveways, loading zones and parking areas of any
premises for which site plan approval has been granted by the
approving authority under the provisions of this chapter.
E. Off-street parking construction.
(1) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to unreasonably
impair surrounding areas.
(2) All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt,
bituminous or cement binder pavement as prescribed by
ordinances or resolutions of the governing body of the borough or
the Borough Engineer.
(3) All off-street parking areas and access drives shall have concrete
curbs conforming to specifications for concrete curbs in Chapter
232, Subdivision of Land, or Belgian block set in concrete for a
comparable depth as set forth in such specifications, and exceeding
six inches above the paved surface.
§ 231-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-27
226:505
A. There shall provided and maintained on the same lot with a building for
which site plan approval is sought, off-street loading area spaces in
accordance with the requirements of Table VI.
Table VI
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Floor Area
(square feet)
Land Use**
At Which First
Berth is Required
At Which Second
Berth is Required*
Industrial:
Manufacturing 5,000 40,000
Warehouse 5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research 5,000 40,000
Commercial:
Wholesale 5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service
establishments
5,000 40,000
Commercial
recreation
5,000 100,000
Restaurants 2,000 25,000
Office buildings 5,000 100,000
Hotel 10,000 100,000
Funeral home 10,000 100,000
Residential:
Apartment building 20,000 100,000
Institutional (public):
Schools 10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing
homes
10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 10,000 100,000
*An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount of
square feet as indicated as may be required between the need for oneand
two-berth intervals.
**In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of off-street
loading required shall be equal to the sum of the parts unless same can
be demonstrated to be in excess as shall be subject to determination
by the approving authority.
§ 231-27 NORWOOD CODE § 231-27
226:506
§ 231-28. Lighting and signs.
B. Each such loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in width and 50
feet or more in length, depending upon the function of the loading
space. The overall floor-to-ceiling height or clear height distance shall
not be less than 12 feet, which may be increased where required.
C. The loading spaces shall only be placed inside of rear yards as may be
allowed by Chapter 233, Zoning, and screening or landscaping from
adjoining properties may be required by the approving authority.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall not be included within any fire
prevention zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or standpipe, or
within 10 feet of any entranceway or pedestrian walkway, or any other
general means of entry to and from a building for the general public,
nor shall it block or in any way interfere with the free flow of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic in the area.
E. All such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by sign or other
visual communication indicating the purpose or the location.
A. Lighting. With every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans for all
proposed exterior lighting. Such lighting shall conform to Chapter 233,
Zoning, and the provisions of this chapter. The plans shall include the
location, type of light, radius of light and intensity in footcandles. The
following design standards shall be followed:
(1) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building.
(2) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the
height of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is less.
(3) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 150°.
(4) Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
property, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
(5) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be avoided,
except where properly screened from adjacent properties.
(6) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being
damaged by vehicles.
(7) Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split.
(8) Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low standards.
(9) Stairways, sloping or rising paths and building entrances and exists
shall require illumination.
§ 231-27 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-28
226:507
§ 231-29. Landscaping and buffer areas.
(10) The following intensity in footcandles shall be provided
throughout:
(a) Parking lots: an average of 1.5 footcandles throughout.
(b) Street intersections: three footcandles.
(c) Maximum at property line: 1.0 footcandles.
(d) In residential areas: an average of 0.6 footcandles.
(11) Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or
intermittent illumination. Lighting which requires change in color,
intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited. Said lighting shall in
no way interfere with, detract from or diminish in anyway from the
effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning
device.
B. Signs. Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the
specific design, location, size, construction and illumination. If the
applicant is unable to provide said details for signs, the approving
authority shall condition its approval upon receipt of same prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features, such as
boulders and rock outcroppings. It should show where they are or win
be located and planting details. The following design principles are
suggested and may be required by the approving authority:
(1) Use of landscaping to accent and complement buildings; for
example, groupings of tall trees to break up long, low buildings and
lower plantings for taller buildings.
(2) Landscaping should be provided in public areas, recreation sites,
adjacent to buildings.
(3) Vines and climbing plants should be considered for large expanses
of walls.
(4) Massing of trees at critical points should be considered rather than
in a straight line at predetermined intervals along streets.
(5) Use of smaller trees on narrow streets or driveways.
(6) Ground cover should be used extensively on slopes to prevent
erosion.
(7) The impact of any proposed landscaping plan should be considered
at various time intervals and the size of trees or shrubs when they
mature.
§ 231-28 NORWOOD CODE § 231-29
226:508
§ 231-30. Utility improvements.
(8) Deciduous trees should have at least a two-inch caliber at planting,
and evergreens should be at least four feet tall. Shrubs should be at
least two feet tall at planting. All trees and shrubs should be balled
and burlapped.
(9) Existing large trees should be saved, but there shall not be a
varying of the grade around the trees by more than six inches to 12
inches, and there should be provided protection of root systems,
construction of tree wells and erection of protective fences.
(10) In parking areas, at least 5% of the parking area should be
landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected areas,
along walkways, center islands and at the end of bays. In narrow
islands, low spreading plants, such as creeping juniper, English ivy,
myrtle or pachysandra, should be considered.
(11) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct vision of motor vehicles and pedestrians.
B. Buffer areas. Buffers or fences, landscaping, berms and mounds shall
be used to minimize any adverse impacts of the site on adjacent areas.
Buffers shall be required for the following areas:
(1) Along property lines shielding various uses from one another.
(2) Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
(3) Where parking areas abut other properties.
(4) In the general area of garbage storage places and loading and
unloading areas.
(5) Where windbreaks are necessary.
C. Buffer area design.
(1) Where evergreens are used as buffer materials, they shall be
planted in two or more staggered planted rows. The rows shall be
four feet to five feet apart, and the evergreens shall be planted four
feet on center and in each row shall be staggered from the adjacent
rows.
(2) Where earth and berms are utilized, they shall be maintained with
a minimum height of four feet and a maximum slope ratio of one to
one. The slope shall be suitably stabilized to prevent erosion.
A. Gas, electric and telephone service.
(1) Gas, electric and telephone service shall be provided by the
applicant with the public utility providing such service. The utility
§ 231-29 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-30
226:509
services on the site shall be provided as part of an underground
system.
(2) If such utility services cannot be reasonably provided due to
topographic or geological conditions of the land or due to
technological circumstances, and when the applicant can
adequately demonstrate the lack of feasibility for these reasons to
the satisfaction of the approving authority, the approving authority
may waive this requirement.
B. Water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal. Adequate provisions for
water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal shall be provided. The
locations of all proposed fire hydrants, standpipes or similar facilities
shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Prevention Bureau, and
provisions shall be made, where necessary, for fire lanes or protective
areas which shall not be impeded by parking or standing vehicles or
other obstructions.
C. Mandatory stormwater drainage standards. The drainage system shall
be designed in conformance with accepted engineering standards. A
report on storm drainage calculations shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of New Jersey, in
sufficient detail for a review of these calculations. Included shall be
maps, plats or other materials necessary to establish areas tributary to
the site as well as areas within the site tributary to a specific
watercourse or drainage structure, methodology for selection of design
variables and capacities of the proposed and existing systems. The
design considerations shall include and not be limited to drainage
areas, runoff calculations, flow velocities, storm drains, pipelines,
channel capacities and stabilization, inlet designs and manholes.
D. Design storms. All stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the following schedule of design storms:
Street Inlets, Catchbasins,
Connecting Storm Drains
Return Frequency Storm 25
years
Drainage channels, major 100 years
culverts, piped watercourses,
detention/retention basins
and associated piping
Hydraulic designs utilizing the Rational Formula and Runoff
Coefficients shall be based upon the Intensity-Duration curves shown
on Table VI-7A and Table VI-7B.53
Hydraulic designs employing the SCS method shall use the following
twenty-four-hour precipitation totals (Type II storm) for the indicated
return frequency storm:
53.Editor's Note: Tables VI-7A and VI-7B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-30 NORWOOD CODE § 231-30
226:510
10 year - 5.1 inches
25 year - 5.7 inches
100 year - 7.2 inches
E. Stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities include but are not limited
to drywells, swales, basins, porous pavement, watercourses, drainage
pipes and structures or a combination of these or other methods.
F. Maintain present runoff rate. All applications for subdivision and site
plan approval shall be required to maintain the rate of stormwater
runoff from the property to no more than the rate of runoff from the
lands in its present state, both during and after construction, except as
hereinafter provided under Subsection H(2)(c) of this section relating
to detention areas.
G. Methodology. Methodology for determining runoff shall conform to one
of the following:
(1) SCS Runoff Equation, runoff curve numbers and dimensionless unit
hydrograph as described in National Engineering Handbook -
Section 4 - Hydrology, United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, August 1972, and Technical Release
Number 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Engineering
Division January 1975.
(2) The Rational Formula and Runoff Coefficients, published in the
Handbook of Applied Hydrology, Ven Te Chow, Editor, McGraw-Hill,
1964.
H. Storm drainage facilities. The following are mandatory design
standards for storm drainage facilities, where required:
(1) Interceptor ditches. Interceptor ditches shall be established above
all cut and fill slopes where required by the Borough Engineer to
prevent erosion of the new slopes or excessive concentrations of
storm flows into preexisting developed areas. The intercepted
water shall be conveyed to a stable channel, watercourse or
drainage structure of adequate capacity.
(2) Retention/detention basins. Stormwater retention/detention basins
may be depressions in parking areas, excavated basins, created
through use of curbs, stabilized earth berms or dikes, rooftop
storage or any other form of grading or structure which serves to
temporarily impound and store water. The following standards shall
apply:
(a) Where retention ponds are to be provided, dual purpose
controls for storing excess stormwater runoff and for settling
suspended matter in the stormwater be provided.
§ 231-30 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-30
226:511
(b) Where applicable, a routing study shall be provided and shall
conform to Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watershed, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Engineering Division, January 1975, or
any other acceptable method.
(c) Detention areas shall be designed to contain stormwater
discharge. Peak discharge from a one-hundred-year design
stormwater development shall be controlled to a rate of
discharge equal to the peak discharge of a one-hundred-year
design storm prior to development whenever the downstreams
drainage channels and structures are shown to be adequate for
the preexisting stormflows. Whenever the downstream
drainage channels are determined to be inadequate to safely
carry the peak discharge from a one-hundred-year storm flow,
detention areas shall be designed to limit the stormwater
discharge from the site to a rate equivalent to the peak
discharge of a twenty-five-year design storm prior to
development. Such provisions shall not constitute any waiver
of the off-tract provisions contained in § 231-35 of this chapter.
Retention areas may be employed to reduce the afterdevelopment
peak discharges to the limits described above.
Retention areas shall accept the excess surface waters from a
one-hundred-year design storm and absorb these, waters
within a seven-day period. One percolation test and soil log is
required for each 1/2 acre of surface area of a proposed
retention basin.
(d) If earth berms or dikes are used to create the impounding area,
they shall be provided with an emergency spillway or outlet
structure to pass the one-hundred-year storm and shall be
adequately stabilized and the slopes protected with vegetative
cover, paving or rip-rap to protect against erosion, failure or
breaching. Spillways shall discharge into a suitable receiving
structure or drainage course.
(e) Outlet structures shall be provided at detention basins to
regulate the outflow and shall also incorporate a spillway type
overflow, capable of passing the design storm into the
downstream drainage facility. Downstream piping shall not be
smaller than fifteen-inch diameter to facilitate cleaning. Trash
racks, if required, shall be installed to prevent clogging of the
outlet pipe. Maximum bar spacing shall be six inches. Trash
racks shall have area openings totaling five times the open
area of the outlet pipe.
(f) Suitable linings of the embankment and channel bed shall be
placed upstream and downstream from principal inlets or
outlets to prevent scour and erosion.
(g) Embankments shall have side slopes not steeper than 1 to 2.
§ 231-30 NORWOOD CODE § 231-30
226:512
(h) Safety berms shall be constructed when side slopes steeper
than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal have been
specifically permitted by the Planning Board [See
§ 232-24B(2)] and where the basin is designed for a permanent
or residual pool of water. These berms shall be at least four feet
in width with one located one to 11/2 feet above and the other
located 2 1/2 to three feet below the permanent water surface.
(i) Basin bottoms shall be designed to protect against residual
water ponding to prevent mosquito and insect infestation. A
low flow channel shall be provided between inlet and outlets
structures and shall have a paved invert.
(j) Fencing and/or vegetative screening may be required around
basins at the discretion of the Planning Board and to ensure
the safety of the public.
(k) Basins shall be stabilized with suitable low maintenance plant
and natural materials consistent with the environment, as
approved by the Bergen County Soil Conservation Service and
Borough Engineer.
(l) The base of all retention and detention basins shall be
accessible to earth moving equipment and vehicles for repair
and maintenance purposes. Loop or perimeter roads shall be
constructed around the basins as necessary to obtain access to
all outlet and inlet structures.
(3) Ground-absorption systems. Ground-absorption systems, such as
drywells, porous piping systems or the like, shall be used only
where the infiltration rate of the receiving soil is acceptable as
determined by percolation test and soil logs as required for each
absorption unit and in accordance with Subsection H(2)(c) of this
section.
(4) Drainage channels.
(a) Drainage channels shall be designed utilizing the Manning
Formula. One foot of freeboard above the design storm flowline
shall be provided. Channel lining shall be suitable for the
design velocity in accordance with Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey adopted by the New
Jersey Soil Conservation Committee, as may be amended.
(b) Where channel side slopes greater than 1 to 2 are permitted or
where peak channel velocities under a ten-year storm analysis
are found to be in excess of the permissible channel velocities
as established in the aforementioned Soil Conservation Service
standards, the channels shall be armored with rip-rap.
(5) Pipe sizes.
§ 231-30 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-30
226:513
(a) The minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches and pipes shall be of
reinforced concrete. Pipe strength shall be adequate to
withstand external loading, but in no case shall it be less than
Class III strength.
(b) Slopes shall be designed for all pipes so that a minimum
velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second shall be obtained when the
pipe is flowing 1/2 full.
(c) Where pipe sizes are increased, the invert of the larger pipe
shall be dropped so that the crown of the larger pipe shall be at
the same elevation of the smaller pipe. All storm sewers shall
have a minimum cover of two feet.
(6) Inlets. Inlets or catchbasins shall be spaced so that the run of water
along any curbline does not exceed 300 feet, except that the inlet
spacing shall not be more than 250 feet on street grades between
3% and 6% and not more than 200 feet apart on street grades
greater than 6% or less than 2%. Double basin inlets shall be
provided at the low point transitions on all streets with grades 8%
or greater. Inlet spacing shall be reduced and additional basins
installed as necessary to ensure at least one eight-foot wide lane
remaining in each direction during the twenty-five-year design
storm. Inlet gratings shall be of the stream-flow type, and gratings
shall be sized to accept the entire contributory storm flow under a
maximum head of two inches and assuming a 30% clogging factor
for the gross area. Inlet gradings shall have a curb piece and back
plate unless otherwise approved. Bottom of inlets shall at the invert
of the outlet piping.
(7) Headwalls. Headwalls shall be provided at all drain pipe inlets and
outlets. Side walls and training walls shall form an angle of
approximately 30° with the axis of flow. An apron shall be provided
extending a minimum of two pipe diameters beyond the end of the
discharge pipe. Aprons and walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches
thick and shall be constructed of three-thousand-pound per square
inch air-entrained concrete.
(8) Drainageway.
(a) Where a subdivision or site is traversed by a natural stream,
watercourse or drainageway, there shall be provided a public
drainageway conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for the maintenance and clearing of the
channel and banks.
(b) The minimum drainageway width shall be 20 feet, but shall
provide at least a ten-foot width along the top of either channel
bank (wherever) for vehicular or equipment access (wherever
feasible) as required by the approving authority. The approving
§ 231-30 NORWOOD CODE § 231-30
226:514
§ 231-31. Street improvements.
authority, where it deems advisable, may require the
conveyance of such drainageway, in fee simple to the borough.
(9) Stream protection. All development applications shall provide for
the maintenance of the stream bed and its bank. Vegetation and its
subsurface root structure shall be protected. A stream buffer of at
least 20 feet measured from the top of the stream bank shall be
provided. Top of stream bank shall be considered as the flattened
area immediately bordering the stream course in which the water
normally flows.
I. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) All applications providing a disturbance of the land mass which is
equal to or more than 5,000 square feet shall have an
accompanying soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which
shall be filed with the local Conservation District of the Soil
Conservation Service. This plan shall be included in all site plan
and subdivision applications and shall be reviewed by the
approving authority based upon Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, adopted by the New Jersey State
Soil Conservation Committee.
(2) All applications meeting the minimum requirements to be classified
as a soil mining activity shall submit an application for soil mining
in accordance with Chapter 194, Soil Removal.
A. Curbing.
(1) General.
(a) Where curbing is lacking, an applicant for site plan approval
shall install curbing along the extent of all property fronting
public and private streets in accordance with municipal
standards and specifications.
(b) The Borough Engineer may require curbing within parking
areas in order to facilitate drainage and provide separation
between pedestrian and vehicular movement.
(2) Alignment and grade. Curb grading and alignment is to be
determined as established in the area unless otherwise required by
the Borough Engineer.
(3) Curbing and driveway openings. Where a proposed driveway is to
serve any land development of 50 or more parking spaces, curbing
need not be carried across the driveway opening as a depressed
curb, but rather may be swept back as curb returns. Where the
driveway is to serve land development of fewer than 50 parking
spaces, a depressed curb driveway shall be utilized.
§ 231-30 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-31
226:515
B. Street widening.
(1) The right-of-way width, measured from lot line to lot line, shall not
be less than 50 feet in width, except when shown at a greater width
in the Master Plan or Official Map or where the street constitutes
an extension of an existing street with a width greater than 50 feet.
(2) For site plans that adjoin or include existing streets which do not
conform to widths as shown in the Master Plan or the Official Map
or are at least 50 feet in width, the applicant shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of the street. If the
premises being developed is along one side only, 1/2 of the required
difference in street width shall be dedicated.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Each land development requiring site plan approval may be
required to provide a sidewalk within the street right-of-way.
(2) Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks may also be required for any
development of 50 or more parking spaces within said parking area
to provide convenient and safe access for pedestrian circulation.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, quarry tile or other
similar material and shall be at least four feet in width unless
otherwise provided in Chapter 233, Zoning.
(4) Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along
aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur
shall be raised six inches or more above the parking area except
when crossing streets or driveways. Sidewalks, when constructed
along the building, shall be located not less than three feet from the
building.
D. Street furniture. Street furniture, which shall include telephone booths,
benches, planting boxes, mailboxes, fountains and pools, drinking
fountains, trash receptacles, bicycle racks, sculpture, paving and steps,
bus shelters and similar items, when provided by the applicant, shall be
subject to the approval of the approving authority as to design, location
and size.
E. Street grades and residential driveways.
(1) Streets shall follow the natural contour of the land wherever
possible to avoid excessive land disturbance.
(2) Grades of major and minor collector streets shall not exceed 8%.
Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have
a minimum grade of less than 1%.
(3) Intersections of any street with a major or minor collector street
shall have a maximum grade of 3% within 75 feet of the street
intersections.
§ 231-31 NORWOOD CODE § 231-31
226:516
§ 231-32. Refuse collection and storage.
Provisions shall be made for the proper storage and collection of refuse. All
such storage shall be maintained within the confines of an enclosed building
or structure and shall be reasonably accessible for vehicular collection on
the site or shall be appropriately screened and landscaped where outdoor
storage is provided.
§ 231-33. Other design standards.
(4) The street grade for local street intersections with one another
shall not exceed 4% within 50 feet of the street intersection.
(5) The grade on any cul-de-sac shall not exceed 8%.
(6) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight
distance.
(7) Residential driveways intersecting with streets shall not exceed a
grade of 12% and shall not exceed a grade of 6% within 30 feet of
the right-of-way in accordance with the AASHO Standards.
A. Grading standards and retaining walls.
(1) Applicable standards. All applications shall be subject to the
provisions herein and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection where applicable.
(2) Cut or fill slopes.
(a) Cut or fill slopes for embankments outside of the graded
portion of the street shall make use of rubble walls or other
suitable material, as approved by the Borough Engineer,
wherever applicable.
(b) Cut or fill slopes exceeding a ratio of one foot vertical to two
feet horizontal require special methods of embankment
stabilization. These include seedbed preparation, adjusted
fertilization levels, supplemental irrigation, adapt seedling
plants or planting protection until vegetative cover is
established. A detailed outline of procedures and specifications
shall be submitted by the applicant.
(c) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(e) herein, cut slopes
shall be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal.
Subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for
stability.
(d) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(e) herein, fill slopes
shall be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal.
§ 231-31 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-33
226:517
(e) Cut or fill slopes exceeding a ratio of one vertical to two
horizontal shall be considered by the approving authority only
in special situations. The applicant must establish that a
physical hardship condition exists with the land and must also
indicate the special methods of embankment stabilization to be
utilized. These may include hand-placed rip-rap, existence of
exposed bedrock or other approved methods. Any request for
approval to construct slopes steeper than 1 to 2 shall be
accompanied by appropriate calculations prepared by a
licensed professional engineer which shall document the
stability of the particular soil when placed at the proposed
slope.
(3) Retaining walls.
(a) Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for
the purpose intended. The walls shall not detract from the
aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed and the
approving authority may require such retaining walls to be
fenced or landscaped.
(b) All retaining structures with a total vertical projection in
excess of four feet shall be designed as structural members
keyed into stable foundations and capable of sustaining the
design loads. Structural calculations and details shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer of the State of
New Jersey and submitted for all such retaining structures.
(c) Whenever two or more retaining walls are proposed where the
average slope from the toe of the lowest wall to the top of the
highest wall has an average slope equal to or greater than one
vertical to two horizontal an engineering analysis of the entire
sloped area shall be submitted.
B. Design standards for physically handicapped persons.
(1) Design standards, when applicable. In accordance with Chapters
220, 221 and 224 of the Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.), all
plans and specifications for construction or remodeling of any
public building, as defined therein, shall provide facilities for the
physically handicapped.
(2) Design standards for buildings. All public buildings shall contain at
least one principal entrance accessible to and usable by physically
handicapped persons, which shall be either ramped or at ground
level; on each floor open to the public, at least one water closet
shall be provided for each sex, in general toilet rooms, to
accommodate wheelchair occupants which shall include adequate
stall door width, grab rails, sufficient space and appropriate height;
a drinking fountain of suitable height and extension for wheelchair
occupants on every floor open to the public shall be provided; in
any multistory building, an elevator sufficient in size to
§ 231-33 NORWOOD CODE § 231-33
226:518
accommodate a wheelchair shall be provided; and at least one
public telephone at a height accessible to wheelchair occupants
shall be provided.
(3) Parking lot design.
(a) A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but
not less than two parking spaces, shall be designed and
designated for physically handicapped persons. Said spaces
shall be the most accessible and approximate to the building or
buildings which the parking spaces serve.
(b) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the international symbol of access along
with the following wording: "these spaces reserved for
physically handicapped drivers."
(c) Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in and out of either
side of the automobile onto a level, paved surface suitable for
wheeling and walking.
(d) Wherever possible, such spaces shall be located so that
persons in wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not
compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles.
(e) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit
handicapped persons access from parking areas to sidewalks.
(4) Sidewalks. Any sidewalk hereafter constructed or reconstructed on
public or private property for public use shall be constructed in a
manner so as to facilitate use by physically handicapped persons.
At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines of
travel and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt changes
in grade, sidewalks shall slope gradually to street level so as to
provide an uninterrupted line of travel.
§ 231-33 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-33
226:519

ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 231-34. On-tract improvements.
A. Before granting final site plan approval, the approving authority may
require that the applicant shall have installed or shall have furnished
performance guaranties for the installation of on-tract improvements in
accordance with municipal specifications, including streets, street
signs, grading, pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, walkways, lighting,
shade trees and landscaping materials, water mains, fire hydrants,
standpipes, retaining walls, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
drainage structures, erosion and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space, surveyor's monuments as required by the
Map Filing Law N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. and other off-tract
improvements as may be required by this chapter.
B. Performance guaranties.
(1) The performance guaranties shall be furnished in favor of the
borough in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of the installation
of improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate as specified
in Subsection A above.
(2) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon, the Borough Engineer
shall inspect all improvements of which such notice has been given
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements, with a statement of reasons for any rejection.
(3) The cost of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set
forth.
(4) The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements, on the basis of the report of the Borough
Engineer, and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail,
of the contents of said report and the action of the approving
authority with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt
of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall
he released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty,
except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of
the improvements not yet improved, provided that 30% of the
amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to
insure completion of all improvements.
§ 231-34 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-34
226:521
(5) Failure of the governing body to send or provide such notification
to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval
of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty
for such improvements.
(6) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the borough for the reasonable cost
of improvements not completed or corrected, and the borough may
complete such improvements prior to or after receipt of the
proceeds of the performance guaranty.
(7) If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete such
improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
(8) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Borough Engineer or the governing body.
(9) The obligor shall reimburse the borough for all reasonable
inspection fees paid by the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspections of improvements, provided that the borough may
require of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonable anticipated fees to be paid to the Borough Engineer for
such inspection.
(10) In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this
subsection shall be applied by stage or section.
(11) The performance guaranties shall be approved by the governing
body as to form, sufficiency and execution, and such performance
guaranties shall run for a period to be fixed by the approving
authority. However, with the consent of the obligor and surety, if
there be one, the governing body may, by resolution, extend the
term of such performance guaranties for an additional period not to
exceed one year.
C. Maintenance guaranties. Prior to the acceptance of any on-tract
improvement herein, a maintenance guaranty shall be furnished in
favor of the borough for a period not exceeding two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the improvement.
D. Other governmental agencies or public utilities. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities will automatically own the
utilities to be installed, or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
§ 231-34 NORWOOD CODE § 231-34
226:522
§ 231-35. Off-tract improvements.
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be,
shall be required by the borough for such utilities or improvements.
A. Off-tract improvements; when required.
(1) Any site plan requiring off-tract improvements, as defined herein,
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(2) An off-tract improvement shall be one or more required
improvements which are necessary for the successful completion of
a development in the interest of furthering the public health, safety
and general welfare and where said improvements are located offtract.
(3) An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the
existing facilities serving the area or subarea are already operating
at a deficient level of service, or the inclusion of the new
development will make such present level of service deficient
according to engineering standards utilized in determining such
levels of service.
(4) The proportionate contribution of any such off-tract improvement
to the applicant shall be reasonably related to the relative benefit
or use of the total area so served.
(5) Under the conditions of this chapter, off-tract improvements shall
be limited to new or improved water distribution; sanitary
sewerage disposal system; stormwater and drainage system and
facilities and all necessary appurtenances thereto; all public
utilities, including required easements, new or improved street and
right-of-way widths; traffic regulation and control devices;
intersection improvements; public utility relocation; and
improvements required by solutions to traffic, circulation and
safety factors which are related to the property or properties being
developed.
(6) Off-tract improvements shall not include the improvement cost for
an entire utility system or street system or major segment thereof,
including sewerage treatment plants, water supply or treatment
facilities or substantial street construction or improvements or
other similar undertakings unless said improvements are
significantly affected by the property and properties in question or
are required for proper development of such property or
properties.
B. Approving authority determination. Each site plan requiring approving
authority approval shall be subject to a determination and findings as
follows:
§ 231-34 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-35
226:523
(1) That certain off-tract improvements are or are not necessary to
implement such site plan.
(2) That, in instances where off-tract improvements are required, the
terms and conditions which shall be imposed upon the applicant
shall ensure the successful and reasonable implementation of the
requirement.
(3) In the event that the approving authority determines that one or
more improvements constitute an off-tract improvement, the
approving authority, by resolution, shall notify the governing body
of such determination, specifying the approving authority's
recommendation relative to the estimated cost of the improvement,
the applicant's pro rata share of the cost, other property owners
who may benefit from such off-tract improvement and the
approving authority's recommendations concerning how such offtract
improvement can be made, what the borough's
responsibilities should be and what performance or maintenance
guaranties, cash contributions, agreements and other forms of
surety should be required of the applicant.
(4) Action by an approving authority relating to off-tract improvements
shall be deferred until the governing body has had the opportunity
to review the recommendation of the approving authority and has
made a determination as to whether the borough will accept any
obligations concerning such off-tract improvement. The borough
shall not be responsible to construct, install or provide off-tract
improvements to accommodate the development of an applicant's
lands.
(5) When an applicant pays the amount determined as its pro rata
share of the cost of an off-tract improvement under protest, the
applicant shall institute legal action within one year of such
payment in order to preserve the right of judicial determination as
to the fairness and reasonableness of such pro rata share. No
building permit shall be issued until the expiration of said one year
period or until such time as the applicant has waived the right to
seek such a judicial determination under the provisions of this
chapter.
(6) The approving authority shall not take any final action concerning a
preliminary site plan approval until the applicant and the governing
body have entered into an agreement providing for such off-tract
improvement and the obligations of the applicant and a copy of the
agreement and action of the governing body has been filed with the
approving authority.
C. Methods of implementation.
(1) Performance and maintenance guaranties. Where a performance or
maintenance guaranty or other surety is required, concerning an
off-tract improvement, the applicant shall be required to follow the
§ 231-35 NORWOOD CODE § 231-35
226:524
same procedure and requirements as set forth in § 231-34 of this
chapter.
(2) Development agreement. Where a development agreement is
required concerning off-tract improvements or other conditions as
may be required by this chapter or the approving authority, the
developer's agreement shall be made pursuant to § § 231-10 of this
chapter. The agreement may specify the amount of cash
contributions, if any, the method of payment of such contributions
and the time of such payments in relation to any obligations to be
undertaken by the borough.
(3) Cash contributions.
(a) When not required. Cash contributions for off-tract
improvements shall not be required under the following
conditions:
[1] Where state or county agencies or a utility authority have
jurisdiction over such off-tract improvement and require a
cash contribution, guaranty or other surety of the
applicant in lieu of such conditions as the borough may
impose; or
[2] Where a benefit assessment or other similar levy is
imposed upon the applicant and other land owners
benefited by such off-tract improvement; or
[3] Where the applicant may legally install such improvements
in lieu of the borough pursuant to standards and
conditions imposed by the borough.
(b) Method of payment. Where a cash contribution is required, the
contribution shall be deposited with the Borough Treasurer
and proof of deposit filed with the approving authority,
governing body and Borough Engineer.
(c) All such contributions received by the Borough Treasurer shall
be deposited into an escrow account for the purpose of the
specific off-tract improvement. In the event that such
improvements are not initiated or provided for within a period
of 10 years from the date of such contribution, the contribution
shall be returned to the applicant pursuant to the terms of the
applicant's agreement with the borough or, in the event that
there is no such agreement, to the owner or owners of the
lands being subdivided. In the event that the applicant made a
cash contribution and it is later determined that such a
contribution should not have been required under the
provisions of Subsection C of this section, the contribution
shall be returned to the applicant upon such determination.
§ 231-35 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-35
226:525
D. Pro rata formula in determining applicant's share of off-tract
improvements. Where an off-tract improvement is required, the
following criteria shall be used in determining the applicant's
proportionate share of the cost of such improvement:
(1) Street improvements. New streets, street widening, alignment,
correction, channelization of intersections, construction of
barriers, new or improved traffic simulization, signs and curbs,
street trees and landscaping utility improvements or relocations
and other similar street or traffic improvements: the applicant's
proportionate share shall be in the ratio of the estimated peak-hour
traffic generated by the development of the applicant's land to the
sum of the present deficiency in peak-hour traffic capacity of the
present road facilities and the estimated peak-hour traffic
generated by the applicant's proposed development. The
applicant's calculated proportionate share shall then be increased
by 10% for contingencies.
(2) Sanitary distribution facilities. Sanitary sewer distribution
facilities, including the installation, relocation or replacement of
collector and interceptor sewers and the installation and relocation
or replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith: the
applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated
daily flow of effluent (in gallons) from the proposed development of
applicant's lands to the sum of the present deficiency in capacity
for the existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily flow
from the applicant's proposed developed lands. In the case where
the peak flow from the proposed development may occur during the
peak flow period from the existing system, the ratio shall be the
estimated peak flow rate from the proposed development in gallons
per minute to the estimated present peak flow deficiency in the
existing system or subsystem and the estimated peak flow rate
from the proposed development. The greater of the two ratios thus
calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies and shall be
the ratio used to determine the cost to the applicant.
(3) Stormwater and drainage improvements. Stormwater and drainage
improvements, including the installation, relocation or replacement
of pipes, culverts, catch basins, other appurtenances and retention
basins: the applicant's proportionate share shall be determined in
the ratio of the estimated peak surface runoff from applicant's
developed lands into the existing drainage system measured in
cubic feet per second to the sum of the existing peak flow in cubic
feet per second deficiency for the existing system and the
estimated peak flow from the applicant's lands. The ratio thus
calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
§ 231-35 NORWOOD CODE § 231-35
226:526
ARTICLE VII
Appeals and Penalties; Interpretation
§ 231-36. Appeal to governing body.
A. Notice of appeal. Any interested party may appeal to the governing
body as to the final decision of the approving authority. Such appeal
shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final
decision as provided by law. The appeal to the governing body shall be
made by serving the Borough Clerk personally or by certified mail with
a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the name and address
of the appellant and the name and address of the appellant's attorney, if
represented by an attorney. Such appeals shall be decided by the
governing body only upon the record established before the approving
authority.
B. Notice of meeting. Notice of meeting to review the record of the
approving authority shall be given by the governing body by personal
service or service by certified mail to the appellant and those entitled to
notice of the decision and to the approving authority at least 10 days
prior to the date of the meeting. The parties may submit oral or written
argument on the record of the approving authority at such meeting.
C. Decision by governing body. The governing body shall conclude a
review of the record below not later than 45 days from the date of
receipt of the transcript of the hearing unless the appellant consents, in
writing, to an extension of such time period. The appellant shall arrange
for a transcript, or otherwise, for the use of the governing body. Failure
of the governing body to hold a hearing and conclude a review of the
record below and to render a decision within the specified time period,
without written consent to an extension in time by the appellant, shall
constitute a decision affirming action of the approving authority.
D. Action of governing body. The governing body may reverse, remand or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the final decision of the
approving authority. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the governing body shall be necessary to
reverse, remand or modify any final action of the approving authority.
E. Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
decision appealed from was made unless the approving authority
certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with the approving authority, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by
order of the Superior Court of New Jersey on application upon notice to
the approving authority from whom the appeal is taken and on good
cause shown.
§ 231-36 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-36
226:527
§ 231-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each
offense. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 231-38. Interpretation and validity.
F. Copy of decision; notice. The governing body shall mail a copy of the
decision to the appellant or, if represented by an attorney, to his
attorney, without separate charge, and to any interested party who may
have requested the decision upon payment of such fees as the borough
may require, not later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A
brief notice of the decision of the governing body shall be published in
the official newspaper of the borough. Such publication shall be
arranged for by the appellant. The period in time within which appeal to
a court of competent jurisdiction may be made shall run from the date
of the first publication of said notice of decision.
A. Interpretation. In the interpretation and the application of the
provisions of this chapter, these rules, regulations and standards shall
be considered the minimum requirements for the promotion and
protection of public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the borough. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances provided that where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply.
B. Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter.
§ 231-36 NORWOOD CODE § 231-38
226:528
Chapter 232
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 189.
Soil removal — See Ch. 194.
Shade trees — See Ch. 202, Art. IV.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 230.
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 231-38 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 231-38
226:529

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 232-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of The Borough of Norwood."
§ 232-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. Promote orderly development. To protect the character and maintain
the stability of all areas within the borough and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas.
B. Promulgate rules and procedures. To provide rules, regulations and
procedures to guide the appropriate development of lands within the
borough in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
C. Location and design of streets. To encourage the location and design of
streets and roadways which will promote the free flow of traffic while
discouraging the location of such facilities and routes which will result
in congestion or hazardous conditions, for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
D. Prevent overcrowding. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
E. Secure safety from hazards. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other natural and man-made disasters.
F. Limit congestion. To limit congestion in the public streets and so
protect the public health, safety, convenience and the general welfare
by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the loading
and unloading of vehicles.
G. Promote appropriate densities. To promote the establishment of
appropriate population densities and concentrations that will
contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities
and regions and preservation of the environment.
H. Provide sufficient space. To provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations for a variety of agricultural, residential, recreational,
commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and
private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens.
I. Creation development techniques. To promote a desirable visual and
aesthetic environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangements.
§ 232-1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-2
226:531
§ 232-3. Approving agency.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Norwood
Planning Board in accordance with Section 14 of Chapter 433 of the Laws
of 1953.55
§ 232-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and controlled discharge of this water to
a receiving drainage system.
J. Efficient use of land. To encourage coordination of the various public
and private procedures and activities shaping land development with a
view of lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land.
K. Promote conservation of open space. To promote the conservation of
open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl
and degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
L. Reduce hazards in steep-sloping areas. To reduce the hazards which
exist in steep-sloping areas by reason of erosion, siltation, flooding,
surface water runoff, pollution of water supplies from point and
nonpoint sources.
M. Preserve water supply. To preserve and protect the quality and quantity
of ground- and surface water supply from pollution and diminution of
their safe yield.
N. Protect from inappropriate development. To preserve and protect areas
of high water table, floodway and flood hazard areas from inappropriate
development.54
O. Preserve in natural state. To preserve streams, watercourses and
wetlands in their natural state wherever possible.
P. Control runoff. To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges; to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical; to lessen nonpoint pollution; to maintain the integrity of
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage
and the means necessary for water supply, preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.
Q. Protect flood hazard areas. To preserve and protect development within
areas of high water table floodways and flood hazard areas.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 232-2 NORWOOD CODE § 232-4
226:532
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.56
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with these
regulations and which if approved shall be filed with the proper County
Recording Officer.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas subject to inundation of the event of the design flood of a onehundred-
year-frequency storm. These areas include the floodway and flood
fringe areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary Maps, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
and as adopted by the Borough of Norwood.
FLOODWAYS — The rivers or other watercourses and the adjacent land
areas to be reserved in order to discharge the design flood of a onehundred-
year-frequency storm without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than 0.2 feet.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes and
bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the borough which shall have
been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than six lots
fronting on an existing improved street, not involving any new street or
road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Chapter 233, Zoning, or this chapter; provided, however, that a subdivision
which is in conflict with the requirements of Chapter 233, Zoning, shall be
considered a minor subdivision so long as it does not contain more than two
lots and in all other respects complies with this section.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and
Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953,57 or any prior act
authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive
with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks and
playgrounds and drainage right-of-way shown thereon.
56.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 232-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-4
226:533
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commerce and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted in
lieu of a requirement that certain improvements may be made before the
Planning Board or other approving body approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Borough Clerk for Planning
Board consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements
of Article III, Plat Details of this chapter.
RETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and absorption of this water into the
ground.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to
be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the
requirements of Article III, Plat Details of this chapter.
SLOPE — The ratio or rise of land to horizontal separation of this rise. For
the purpose of this chapter, a slope shall be determined by dividing vertical
elevation difference on adjacent contour lines by the scaled horizontal
distance perpendicular to these adjacent contour lines. For the purpose
of measurement or calculation on any map, plat, plan or other document
required by the Borough of Norwood, or any agency or Board thereof, slopes
shall be measured from a topographic map upon a scale of one inch equals
100 feet or larger.
STEEP SLOPE — A land area where at least 10% of a given site of one acre
or more has land surface gradients of 15% or greater. Steep slopes shall
also mean steep topography.
STREAM — Any natural body of water flowing continuously or
intermittently, whether designated as a stream, spring, brook, river or
otherwise and consisting of a bed, bank and water, but not including lakes
or ponds.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter streets shall be classified as follows:
§ 232-4 NORWOOD CODE § 232-4
226:534
A. Arterial streets are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
B. Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
C. Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
D. Marginal access streets are streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
E. Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development, except that the
following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions; provided,
however, that no new streets or roads are involved: divisions of land
for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are three acres
or larger in size, divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions or divisions of property upon court order. Subdivision also
includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to
the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and such other duties relating to land subdivision which
may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
TREE — Any woody perennial plant with one main trunk, such trunk
having a diameter of at least eight inches when measured four feet
above the level of the existing grade.
WATERCOURSE — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes and all
other bodies of water, whether public or private, excluding piped
drainage systems, which are contained within, flow through or border
on the Borough of Norwood and which receive or conduct surface water
runoff.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated by surface or ground
water with a frequency sufficient to support and under normal
circumstances does or would support a prevalence of vegetative or
aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil
§ 232-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-4
226:535
condition for growth and reproduction. Wetlands include, but are not
limited to swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, such as sloughs,
potholes, wet meadows, river overflow, mud flats and natural ponds.
Wetlands shall include, but not be limited to, those shown on the
United States Department of the Interior Wetland Maps or similar maps
published by t e New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 232-4 NORWOOD CODE § 232-4
226:536
ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 232-5. Submission of sketch plat.
A. Any owner of land within the borough shall, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land, as defined in this chapter, submit to the Secretary of
the Planning Board or other designated official at least two weeks prior
to the regular meeting of the Board a sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision for purposes of classification and preliminary discussion,
which plat shall contain a certification that the applicant is the agent or
owner of the land or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement. Thirty-five dollars shall be paid at the time of the filing of
the sketch plat. Upon receipt of a preliminary plat the Borough Clerk
shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Planning Board.
B. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action
of the Subdivision Committee, a notation to that effect will be made on
the sketch plat and lot numbers will be assigned by the Tax Assessor.
Where County Planning Board approval is required, it will be forwarded
to that Board for its consideration. The plat will then be forwarded to
the Chairman of the Planning Board and the Borough Clerk for their
signatures and returned to the subdivider within one week following
the next regular meeting of the Planning Board. No further Planning
Board approval shall be required.
C. Before the Borough Clerk returns any approved sketch plat to the
subdivider, the Clerk shall have sufficient black on white copies made to
furnish one copy to each of the following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Construction Official or Zoning Officer.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(6) County Planning Board.
D. Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 195358 shall be filed by the subdivider with
the County Recording Officer within 90 days from the date of return of
the approved sketch plat.
(1) If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that
effect shall be made on the plat which will be returned to the
subdivider for compliance with the procedure in §§ 232-6 and 232-7
of this section.
58.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1960, c. 141. See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 232-5 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-5
226:537
§ 232-6. Tentative approval of preliminary plat of major subdivision.
(2) If a subdivision classified as a minor subdivision involves a conflict
with Chapter 233, Zoning, or such a conflict is suspected, the full
Planning Board shall consider the subdivision and, if the
subdivision complies with this chapter in every other respect, the
Planning Board shall approve the subdivision and refer the zoning
conflict to the Board of Adjustment for interpretation or variance,
as the case may be. In connection with such referral to the Board of
Adjustment the Planning Board, upon the affirmative vote of a
majority of its full membership, may forward a communication to
the Board of Adjustment expressing the nonbinding opinion of the
Planning Board as to the proposed interpretation or variance.
A. At least six black on white prints of the preliminary plat, together with
three completed application forms for preliminary approval, shall be
submitted to the Borough Clerk at least three weeks prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which consideration is desired. At the time
of filing, a fee of $60 plus $15 for each lot shown on the preliminary plat
shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the costs of engineering fees and
incidental legal expenses pertaining to the subdivision. The Clerk shall
immediately notify the Secretary of the Planning Board upon receipt of
a preliminary plat.
B. The applicant shall notify by mail, at least five days prior to the hearing,
all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
subdivision as their names appear on the municipal tax record and
furnish proof of such notice to the Planning Board at the time of
hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of hearing, a brief
description of the subdivision and that a copy of the subdivision has
been filed with the Borough Clerk for public inspection. The Secretary
shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the borough at least
10 days prior to the hearing.
C. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
the Planning Board prior to the hearing to the following persons:
(1) Secretary of County Planning Board.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Secretary of Board of Health.
(4) Such other municipal, county or state officials as directed by the
Planning Board.
D. The Planning Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90 days
after submission to the Borough Clerk, but in no case before the
expiration of the twenty-five-day period within which the County
Planning Board may submit a report on the subdivision. In all cases the
recommendations of the County Planning Board shall be given careful
§ 232-5 NORWOOD CODE § 232-6
226:538
§ 232-7. Improvement or guaranties prior to final approval.
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have
installed the improvements required under Article VII, Improvements, or
the Planning Board shall require the posting of adequate performance
guaranties to assure the installation of the required improvements.
§ 232-8. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
consideration in the final decision of the local Planning Board. If the
County Planning Board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-12,59 its action shall be noted on the plat, and if disapproved,
two copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the
plat. If either the Planning Board or County Planning Board disapprove
a plat, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of the Planning Board within 90 days of its submission. If
approval is required by any other officer or public body, the same
procedure as applies to submission and approval by the County
Planning Board shall apply.
E. If the Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall affix his signature to the plat with
a notation that it has received preliminary approval and returned to the
subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements.
F. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
(2) That the applicant may submit on or before the expiration date the
whole or part or parts of the plat for final approval.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk for forwarding to
the Planning Board for final approval within three years from the date
of preliminary approval. The Clerk shall immediately notify the
Secretary of the Planning Board upon receipt of a final plat, and the
Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after the
date of submission for final approval to the Clerk.
B. The original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth
prints, four black on white prints and three copies of the application
form for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board at least five days prior to the date of a regular Planning
Board meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without
changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or
modifications required by the Planning Board.
59.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1968, c. 285. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37.
§ 232-6 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-8
226:539
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations.
(2) A performance guaranty has been posted with the Borough Clerk in
sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
D. Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-12,60 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board for
its action prior to final approval by the Planning Board.
E. If the Planning Board approves the final plat, a notation to that effect
shall be made on each plat and shall be signed by the Chairman and the
Secretary of the Planning Board.
F. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the Clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect.
G. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board,
appeal in writing to the Borough Council may be taken within 10 days
after the date of the action of the Planning Board. A hearing thereon
shall be had on notice to all parties in interest, who shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the Borough Council may
affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board by a recorded vote of
a majority of the total members thereof. The findings and reasons for
the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the
Council, and the applying party shall be given a copy.
H. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
Planning Board with the following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board.
(6) Official issuing certificates for approved lots.
I. The final plat, after final approval by the Planning Board, shall be filed
by the subdivider with the County Recording Officer within 90 days
60.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1968, c. 285. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37.
§ 232-8 NORWOOD CODE § 232-8
226:540
from the date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within this
period, the approval shall expire.
J. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer
unless it has been duly approved by the Norwood Planning Board and
signed by the Chairman.
§ 232-8 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-8
226:541

ARTICLE III
Plat Details
§ 232-9. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch to
enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or include
the following information:
§ 232-10. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed and drawn by a licensed land surveyor of the State of New
Jersey or by a planner holding full or associate membership in the American
Institute of Planners. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the
provisions of Article V, Design Standards, of this chapter and shall show or
be accompanied by the following information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of the subdivider.
(3) Name and address of person who prepared map.
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
D. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
E. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes and any natural
features, such as wooded areas and rock formations.
§ 232-9 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-10
226:543
§ 232-11. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than
one inch equals one hundred feet and in compliance with all the provisions
of Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953.61 The final plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
F. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or sewage
disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have tests
made as prescribed by the Board of Health and submit the results with
the preliminary plat. Any subdivision or part thereof which does not
meet with the established requirements of this chapter or other
applicable regulations shall not be approved. Any remedy proposed to
overcome such a situation shall first be approved by the appropriate
local, county or state health agency.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered as designated by the Borough Assessor.
E. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of plat.
I. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
61.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1960, c. 141. See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 232-10 NORWOOD CODE § 232-11
226:544
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Borough
Engineer, shall be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
M. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 232-11 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-11
226:545

ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 232-12. Required improvements.
A. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the
ultimate installation of the following when indicated by the subdivision
plan:
(1) Streets shall be paved as follows:
(a) The area to be paved shall be graded and compacted as
specified in Section 2.9.3 of the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications, 1941 Edition, as amended.
(b) The first course of pavement shall be a four-inch-thick
macadam base course. Material and workmanship shall comply
with Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 of the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications, 1941 Edition, as amended.
(c) The second course shall be a two-inch-thick layer of modified
penetration macadam intermediate course. Material and
workmanship shall comply with applicable sections of the New
Jersey State Highway Specifications, 1941 Edition, as
amended.
(d) The third and final course shall be a one-and-one-half-inchthick
layer of hot bituminous concrete, Type SM surface
course. Material and workmanship shall comply with all
applicable sections of the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications, 1941 Edition, as amended, with the exception
that the fine aggregate shall be asphalt sand.
(e) The minimum grade on pavement shall be 1%, and the
maximum grade shall be 10%, except that the grades of
arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 6%.
(2) Street signs shall be placed at all intersections conforming to street
signs now installed in the borough.
(3) One streetlight shall be provided for every 400 to 500 linear feet of
street. Each light shall be mounted on an eight-foot bracket and
shall be of 1,000 lumen size.
(4) Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as not to interfere
with utilities or sidewalks and shall be one of the following types:
Norway maple, sugar maple or plane trees.
(5) No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so
as to provide a cover of uniform depth to all areas of this
subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
§ 232-12 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-12
226:547
(6) Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by Section 4 of
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 195362 and shall be placed in
accordance therewith.
(7) Water mains, fire hydrants, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary
sewers shall be properly connected with an approved system and
shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
(8) Sanitary sewers shall be installed in areas which are accessible to a
public sewer system in accordance with specifications by the
Planning Board, the Board of Health of the Borough and the
Borough Engineer. If a public sewer system is not accessible, a
sewerage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the State Department of Health and subject to the
approval of the Board of Health. If such public sewer facilities are
not accessible, but will become accessible within a reasonable
time, as determined by plans developed by the borough, sanitary
sewers, together with all necessary laterals extending from the
main sewer to the street curb, shall be installed and capped. In
such event, the subdivider shall also install on-site disposal units,
subject to the requirements and approval of the Board of Health of
the borough and the State Department of Health, where applicable,
which shall be so located as to permit the easiest and least
expensive connection to the sewer when it becomes usable. All
such facilities shall be approved by the Planning Board and the
Borough Engineer.
(9) Utilities.
(a) For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall arrange with
any serving utility for the underground installation of all utility
distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable Standard Terms and
Conditions incorporated as a part of the tariffs as the same
were then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners.
(b) The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board prior to
granting of final approval a written instrument from each
serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines have heretofore
been installed on any portion of the streets involved may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from such
overhead lines, but the service connections from the utility's
overhead lines shall be installed underground.
62.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1960, c. 141. See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-11.
§ 232-12 NORWOOD CODE § 232-12
226:548
§ 232-13. Performance guaranty.
(c) The location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the
proposed subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with
and as part of the complete subdivision plan.
(d) Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way,
an appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width
shall be provided.
(e) The Mayor and Council may waive any of the aforesaid
requirements upon recommendation of the Planning Board.
B. All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Borough Engineer who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
completion of all such required improvements has been certified to the
Planning Board by the Borough Engineer, unless the subdivision owner
shall have filed with the borough a performance guaranty sufficient in
amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted
portions thereof as estimated by the Borough Engineer and assuring
the installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an
agreed date. Such performance guaranty may be in the form of a
performance bond which shall be issued by a bonding or surety
company approved by the Borough Council; a certified check,
returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any other type of
surety approved by the Borough Attorney.
B. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the Borough Attorney
as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guaranty shall
run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board but, in no case, for a
term of more than three years. However, with the consent of the owner
and the surety, if there be one, the Borough Council may by resolution
extend the term of such performance guaranty for an additional period
not to exceed three years. The amount of the performance guaranty
may be reduced by the Council by resolution when portions of the
required improvements have been installed.
C. If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be liable
thereon to the borough for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
installed and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof the borough shall
install such improvements.
§ 232-12 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-13.1
226:549
§ 232-13.1. Maintenance guarantee. [Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No.
16:23]
Before the Borough accepts any on tract improvements and releases any
performance guarantees furnished by a developer, the developer will
furnish a maintenance guarantee in favor of the Borough for a period not
exceeding two years after the final acceptance of the improvements, in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvements as determined
by the Borough Engineer in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law.63
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 232-13.1 NORWOOD CODE § 232-13.1
226:550
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 232-14. Requirements and principles.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
§ 232-15. General design standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the borough. Where either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainage, rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown
on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered
in approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map
exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 195364 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
borough and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the design
standards in this section.
§ 232-16. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designated as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine appropriate.
D. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
(1) Arterial streets: 60 feet to 80 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(4) Marginal access streets: 40 feet.
E. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 232-14 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-16
226:551
§ 232-17. Street grades and residential driveways.
to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs
and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
F. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved, except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the Borough Council under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
G. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street
width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width
along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along
one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 45° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 60
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a
dead-end street is of temporary nature and the portion of the street to
be immediately improved is more than 400 feet in length, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
N. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Streets shall follow the natural contour of the land wherever possible to
avoid excessive land disturbance.
§ 232-16 NORWOOD CODE § 232-17
226:552
§ 232-18. Blocks.
§ 232-19. Lots.
B. Grades of major and minor collector streets shall not exceed 8%.
Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1%.
C. Intersections of any street with a major or minor collector street shall
have a maximum grade of 3% within 75 feet of the street intersections.
D. The street grade for local street intersections with one another shall not
exceed 4% within 50 feet of the street intersection.
E. The grade on any cul-de-sac shall not exceed 8%.
F. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves or sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
G. Residential driveways intersecting streets shall not exceed a grade of
12% and shall not exceed a grade of 6% within 30 feet of the street
right-of-way in accordance with the AASHO Standards.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Chapter 233,
Zoning, and provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 233, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, the side lot line shall be at right angles to
straight streets and fronting on streets described in §§ 232-16D, 232-18
and 232-19.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots radial to curved streets.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors, such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
§ 232-17 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-19
226:553
§ 232-20. Public use, service area and stormwater drainage.
Except where otherwise indicated, the standards set forth in this section
shall be deemed mandatory.
investigation, note that such lots in their present condition shall not be
used for building purposes.
A. Utility easement. Easements along rear or side property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required by the approving
authority if deemed necessary. Such easements, if required, shall be at
least 15 feet wide and located after a consultation with public utility
companies or agencies concerned.
B. Preservation of natural features. Natural features, such as trees,
brooks, hilltops and views, shall be preserved wherever possible in
designating any subdivision containing such features. No trees eight
inches or larger in diameter shall be removed from the subdivided plot
unless the same shall interfere with the construction of a building or
buildings or utilities and unless approval for such removal is received
from the approving authority.
C. Mandatory stormwater drainage standards. The drainage systems shall
be designed in conformance with accepted engineering standards. A
report on storm drainage calculations shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of New Jersey, in
sufficient detail for a review of these calculations. Included shall be
maps, plats or other materials necessary to establish areas tributary to
the site as well as areas within the site tributary to a specific
watercourse of drainage structure, methodology for selection of design
variables and capacities of the proposed and existing systems.
D. Design storms.
(1) All stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance
with the following schedule of design storms:
Draninage Facilities Return Frequency Storm
Street inlets, catchbasins,
connecting storm drains
25 years
Drainage channels, major
culverts, piped watercourses,
detention/re- tention basins and
associated piping
100 years
(2) Hydraulic designs utilizing the Rational Formula and Runoff
Coefficients shall be based upon the Intensity Duration Curves
shown on Tables IX-A and IX-B.65
65.Editor's Note: Tables IX-A and IX-B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 232-19 NORWOOD CODE § 232-20
226:554
(3) Hydraulic designs employing the Soil Conservation Service method
shall use the following twenty-four-hour precipitation totals (Type
II storm) for the indicated return frequency storm:
Ten-year: 5.1 inches.
Twenty-five-year: 5.7 inches.
One-hundred-year: 7.2 inches.
E. Stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities include but are not limited
to drywells, swales, basins, porous pavement watercourse drainage
pipes and structures or a combination of these or other methods.
F. Maintain present runoff rate. All applications for subdivision and site
plan approval shall be required to maintain the rate of stormwater
runoff from the property to no more than the rate of runoff from the
lands in its present state, both during and after construction, except as
hereinafter provided under Article VIII, Design Standards, relating to
detention areas.
G. Methodology. Methodology for determining runoff shall conform to one
of the following:
(1) Soil Conservation Service Runoff Equation, runoff curve numbers
and dimensionless unit hydrograph as described in National
Engineering Handbook - Section 4 - Hydrology, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation 55 - Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds, United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Engineering Division, January 1975.
(2) The Rational Formula and Runoff Coefficients, published in the
Handbook of Applied Hydrology, Ven Te Chow, Editor, McGraw-Hill,
1964.
H. Storm drainage facilities. The following are mandatory design
standards for storm drainage facilities, where required:
(1) Interceptor ditches. Interceptor ditches shall be established above
all cut and fill slopes where required by the Borough Engineer to
prevent erosion of the new slopes or excessive concentrations of
storm flows into preexisting developed areas. The intercepted
water shall be conveyed to a stable channel, watercourse or
drainage structure of adequate capacity.
(2) Retention/detention basins. Stormwater retention/ detention
basins may be depressions in parking areas, excavated basins,
basins created through use of curbs, stabilized earth berms or
dikes, rooftop storage or any other form of grading which serves to
temporarily impound stormwater. The following standards shall
apply:
§ 232-20 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-20
226:555
(a) Where retention ponds are to be provided, dual purpose
controls for storing excess stormwater runoff and for setting
suspended matter in the stormwater shall be provided.
(b) Where applicable, a routing study shall be provided and shall
conform to Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Engineering Division, January 1975, or
any other acceptable method.
(c) Peak discharge.
[1] Detention areas shall be designed to contain stormwater
discharges. Peak discharge from a one-hundred-year
design storm after development shall be controlled to a
rate of discharge equal to the peak discharge of a onehundred-
year design storm prior to development
whenever the downstream drainage channels and
structures are shown to be adequate for the preexisting
storm flows. Whenever the downstream drainage channels
are determined to be inadequate to safely carry the peak
discharge from a one-hundred-year storm flow, the
detention areas shall be designed to limit the stormwater
discharge from the site to a rate equivalent to the peak
discharge of a twenty-five-year design storm prior to
development. Such provisions shall not constitute any
waiver of the off-tract improvements provisions contained
in Chapter 231, Site Plan Review, § 231-35.
[2] Retention areas may be employed to reduce the after
development peak discharges to the limits described
above. Retention areas shall accept the excess surface
waters from a one-hundred-year design storm and absorb
these waters within a seven-day period. One percolation
test and soil log is required for each 1/2 acre of surface
area of a proposed retention basin.
(d) If earth berms or dikes are used to create the impounding area,
they shall be provided with an emergency spillway or outlet
structure to pass the one-hundred-year storm and shall be
adequately stabilized and the slopes protected with vegetative
cover, paving or riprap to protect against erosion, failure or
breaching. Spillways shall discharge into a suitable receiving
structure or drainage course.
(e) Outlet structures shall be provided at detention basins to
regulate the outflow and shall also incorporate a spillway-type
overflow, capable of passing the design storm into the
downstream drainage facility. Downstream piping shall not be
smaller than 15 inches diameter to facilitate cleaning. Trash
racks, if required shall be installed to prevent clogging of the
§ 232-20 NORWOOD CODE § 232-20
226:556
outlet pipe. Maximum bar spacing shall be six inches. Trash
racks shall have area openings totaling five times the open
area of the outlet pipe.
(f) Suitable linings of the embankment and channel bed shall be
placed upstream and downstream from principal inlets or
outlets to prevent scour and erosion.
(g) Embankments shall have side slopes not steeper than 1 to 2.
(h) Safety berms shall be constructed when side slopes steeper
than have been specifically permitted by the Planning Board
(See Section 8C6) and where the basin is designed for a
permanent or residual pool of water. These berms shall be at
least four feet in width with one located one foot to 11/2 feet
above and the other located 21/2 to three feet below the
permanent water surface.
(i) Basins bottoms shall be designed to protect against residual
water ponding to prevent mosquito and insect infestation. A
low-flow channel shall be provided between inlet and outlet
structures and shall have a paved invert.
(j) Fencing and/or vegetative screening may be required around
basins at the discretion of the Planning Board and to ensure
the safety of the public.
(k) Basins shall be stabilized with suitable low maintenance plant
and natural materials consistent with the environment, as
approved by the Bergen County Soil Conservation Service and
the Borough Engineer.
(l) The base of all retention and detention basins shall be
accessible to earthmoving equipment and vehicles for repair
and maintenance purposes. Loop or perimeter roads shall be
constructed around the basins as necessary to obtain access
total outlet and inlet structures.
(3) Ground-absorption systems. Ground-absorption systems, such as
drywells, porous-piping systems or the like shall be used only
where the infiltration rate of the receiving soil is acceptable as
determined by percolation tests and soil logs, as required for each
absorption unit and in accordance with § 232-20H(b)[3].
(4) Drainage channels.
(a) Drainage channels shall be designed utilizing the Manning
Formula. One foot of freeboard above the design storm flowline
shall be provided. Channel lining shall be suitable for the
design velocity in accordance with Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, adopted by the New
Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee as may be amended.
§ 232-20 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-20
226:557
(b) Where channel side slopes greater than 1 to 2 are permitted or
where peak channel velocities under a ten-year storm analysis
are found to be in excess of the permissible channel velocities
as established in the aforementioned Soil Conservation Service
Standards, the channels shall be armored with riprap.
(5) Pipe sizes.
(a) The minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches and pipes shall be of
reinforced concrete. Pipe strength shall be adequate to
withstanding external loading but in no case shall it be less
than Class III strength.
(b) Slopes shall be designed for all pipes so that a minimum
velocity of 21/2 feet per second shall be obtained when the pipe
is flowing 1/2 full.
(c) Where pipe sizes are increased, the invert of the larger pipe
shall be dropped so that the crown of the pipes shall be at the
same elevation of the smaller pipe. All storm sewers shall have
a minimum cover of two feet.
(6) Inlet.
(a) Inlets or catchbasins shall be spaced so that the run of water
along any curbline does not exceed 300 feet, except that the
inlet spacing shall not be more than 250 feet on street grades
between 3% and 6% and not more than 200 feet apart on street
grades greater than 6% and not more than 200 feet apart on
street grades greater than 6% or less than 2%. Double basin
inlets shall be provided at the low point transition on all streets
with grades 8% or greater. Inlet spacing shall be reduced and
additional basins installed as necessary to ensure at least one
eight-foot-wide lane remains open in each direction during the
twenty-five-year design storm.
(b) Inlet grating shall be of the stream flow type and gratings shall
be sized to accept the entire contributory storm flow under a
maximum head of two inches and assuming a 30% clogging
factor for the gross area. Inlet gradings shall have a curb piece
and back plate unless otherwise approved. Bottom of inlets
shall be at the invert of the outlet piping.
(7) Headwalls. Headwalls shall be provided at all drain-pipe inlets and
outlets. Side walls and training walls shall form an angle of
approximately 30° with the axis of flow. An apron shall be provided
extending a minimum of two pipe diameters beyond the end of the
discharge pipe. Aprons and walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches
thick and shall be constructed of 3,000 pounds per square inch airentrained
concrete.
(8) Drainageway.
§ 232-20 NORWOOD CODE § 232-20
226:558
(a) Where a subdivision or site is traversed by a natural stream,
watercourse or drainageway, there shall be provided a public
drainageway conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for the maintenance and clearing of the
channel and banks.
(b) The minimum drainageway width shall be 20 feet, but shall
provide at least a ten-foot width along the top of either channel
bank (wherever) for vehicular or equipment access (wherever
feasible) as required by the approving authority. The approving
authority, where it deems advisable, may require the
conveyance of such drainageway in fee simple to the borough.
(9) Stream protection. All development applications shall provide for
the maintenance of the stream bed and its bank. Vegetation and its
subsurface root structure shall be protected. A stream buffer of at
least 20 feet measured from the top of the stream bank shall be
provided. Top of stream bank shall be considered as the flattened
area immediately bordering the stream course on which the water
normally flows.
§ 232-20 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-20
226:559

ARTICLE VI
Soil Protection, Grading and Retaining Wall Standards
§ 232-21. Mandatory nature of standards.
The standards set forth in §§ 232-22 to 232-24 shall be deemed mandatory
for all subdivisions within the borough.
§ 232-22. Topsoil protection.
No topsoil shall be used as spoil in the subdivision nor removed from the
site, except in compliance with the Borough Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Ordinance, § 232-23.
§ 232-23. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 232-24. Grading standards and retaining walls.
A. All applications providing a disturbance of the land mass which is equal
to or more than 5,000 square feet, shall have an accompanying soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be filed with the
local Conservation District of the Soil Conservation Service. This plan
shall be included in all site plan and subdivision applications and shall
be reviewed by the approving authority based upon Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, adopted by the New
Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee.
B. All applications meeting the minimum requirements to be classified as a
soil-mining activity shall submit an application for soil mining in
accordance with Chapter 194, Soil Removal.
A. Applicable standards. All applications shall be subject to the provisions
herein and the United States Army Corps Engineers and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, where applicable.
B. Cut or fill slopes.
(1) Cut or fill slopes for embankments outside of the graded portion of
the street shall make use of rubble walls or other suitable
materials, as approved by the Borough Engineer, wherever
applicable.
(2) Cut or fill slopes exceeding a ratio of one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal require special methods of embankment stabilization.
These include seed bed preparation, adjusted fertilization levels,
supplemented irrigation, adapted seedlings or plants and site
protection until vegetative cover is established. A detailed outline
of procedures and specifications shall be submitted by the
applicant.
§ 232-21 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-24
226:561
(3) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) herein, cut slopes shall be no
steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal. Subsurface
drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) herein, cut slopes shall be no
steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal.
(5) Cut or fill slopes exceeding a ratio of one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal shall be considered by the approving authority only in
special situations. The applicant must establish that a physical
hardship condition exists with the land and must also indicate the
special methods of embankment stabilization to be utilized. These
may include hand-placed riprap, existence of exposed bedrock or
other approved methods. Any request for approval to construct
slopes steeper than 1 to 2 shall be accompanied by appropriate
calculations prepared by a licensed professional engineer which
shall document the stability of the particular soil when placed at
the proposed slope.
C. Retaining walls.
(1) Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for the
purpose intended. The walls shall not detract from the aesthetic
beauty of the site when constructed, and the approving authority
may require such retaining walls to be fenced or landscaped.
(2) All retaining walls or facings with a total vertical projection in
excess of four feet shall be designed as structural members keyed
into stable foundations and capable of sustaining the design loads.
Structural calculations and details shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer of the State of New Jersey and submitted for
all such retaining walls and facings.
(3) Whenever two or more retaining walls are proposed where the
average slope from the top of the lowest wall to the top of the
highest wall has an average slope equal to or greater than one foot
vertical to two feet horizontal an engineering analysis of the entire
sloped area shall be submitted.
§ 232-24 NORWOOD CODE § 232-24
226:562
ARTICLE VII
Map Approval and Filing
§ 232-25. Application for map approval.
Before any map of the subdivision of any tract of land within the borough
or amendment or further subdivision of parts of layouts shown on a map
already approved and filed in the office of the Clerk of the County of Bergen
shall be approved by the Mayor and Council of the borough, the owners of
the tract or any subdivision thereof shall make application in writing to the
Borough Engineer for a preliminary checking of the layout.
§ 232-26. Setting of monuments.
The Borough Engineer shall upon receipt of such application proceed with
the checking of the map and submit the map to the Mayor and Council for
their inspection. If upon inspection such map is found acceptable, the owner
shall be directed by resolution of the Borough Council to proceed with the
setting of monuments marking the layout in the field in such locations as
the Borough Engineer may direct. All monuments must be of durable stone
(bluestone or limestone or concrete) at least four inches by four inches
square and not less than 30 inches long. These monuments are to be set in
such position that the lines which they mark can easily be checked in the
field and shall be placed so that any future grading will not disturb their
position.
§ 232-27. Final approval; map reprints.
After setting all monuments required, the owners shall submit the original
map with profiles showing proposed grades for public highways laid out on
the map to the Borough Engineer for his final approval who may thereupon
recommend the approval of the map and the proposed grades to the Mayor
and Council. Should the Mayor and Council by resolution approved the
map and the proposed grades, the Borough Engineer shall, after the map
and profiles have been properly signed and attested, cause the following
reprints to be made from the original map and furnish the municipal officers
with copies as follows:
A. One black-line print on tracing cloth for the Clerk's files.
B. One blueprint on cloth for the use of the Assessor.
C. One blueprint on cloth for the Tax Collector.
D. One black-line print on tracing cloth for the Borough Engineer.
E. One blueprint on cloth for the filing with the original in the office of the
Clerk of the County of Bergen.
F. One black-line print on tracing cloth and two blueprints on cloth for the
owner.
§ 232-25 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-28
226:563
§ 232-28. Filing map with County Clerk.
The Borough Engineer shall, upon obtaining the prints herein mentioned
file the original map and the blueprint on cloth required by the office of the
County Clerk and pay the fee charged by the office of the County Clerk.
In no case shall the original map after the same has been approved by the
Borough Council and signed by the Mayor and Borough Clerk and attested
with the Borough Seal be returned to the owners but shall immediately be
filed by the Borough Engineer as aforesaid.
§ 232-29. Highway requirements.
No map shall be approved by the Mayor and Council unless the principal
highways shown thereon, which in the opinion of the Mayor and Council
form parts of present or future main thoroughfares, are at least 60 feet in
width. No map shall be similarly approved unless all other highways shall be
at least 50 feet in width. No map shall be approved showing highways not
connecting with existing highways, nor shall any dead-end streets or courts
be approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 232-30. Releases.
No map for any subdivision showing new highways shall be approved by the
Mayor and Council unless the owners submit proof in writing to the Mayor
and Council that any mortgage or any other liens or encumbrances have
been released by the mortgagees or lien or as far as the highway areas are
concerned and the respective releases have been properly recorded.
§ 232-31. Map requirements.
No map shall be approved by the Mayor or Council showing any reservation
strips nor shall any map be approved which does not show all lot and block
numbers conforming to the Borough Assessment Map or which does not
show bearings and distances for all street or highway center lines. With the
map there shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer a copy of the field
data obtained in making the survey and the subdivision and a copy of the
computations of the traverse showing the error of closure. After checking
the map the Borough Engineer shall file these data and computations with
the Borough Clerk.
§ 232-32. Fees. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:25]
Applicants for all subdivisions will pay to the Borough with the filing of the
application for approval a fee of $600 for the preparation of revisions to
the Borough's tax map that are required by the subdivision if a subdivision
plat is filed in electronic form (CAD format or NAD83). All other subdivision
applicants will pay to the Borough with the filing of the application for
approval a minimum fee of $600 and will pay any additional fees and costs
incurred by the Borough Engineer in checking the subdivision plat and
preparing the tax map revisions to be filed and the proposed grades, subject
as to amount to the approval and control of the Mayor and Council.
§ 232-28 NORWOOD CODE § 232-32
226:564
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 232-33. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
the provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum requirement for
the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or
ordinances, provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 232-34. Violations and penalties.
A. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to
act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days and each parcel, plot or lot so
disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on the land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section Three of the Official
Map and Building Permit Act (1953),66 the municipality may institute
and maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of
1953,67 but only if the municipality has a Planning Board or a
Committee thereof with power to act and which meets regularly on
a monthly or more frequent basis and whose governing body has
adopted standards and procedures in accordance with Section 20
of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.68
C. In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled
to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price
paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after
the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of said land or within six years if unrecorded.
66.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 232-33 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-35
226:565
§ 232-35. Administration.
These rules, requirements and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the borough. Any action taken by the Planning Board under
the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the above
mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community. However,
if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one
or more of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship,
the Planning Board may permit such variance or variances as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules and
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 232-35 NORWOOD CODE § 232-35
226:566
Chapter 233
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Satellite antennas — See Ch. 185.
Sewers — See Ch. 189.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 207.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 230.
Site plan review — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 232.
§ 232-35 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 232-35
226:567

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 233-1. Purposes.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. Promote orderly development. To protect the character and maintain
the stability of all areas within the Borough and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas.
B. Provide adequate light and air. To regulate the intensity of use of zoning
lots and to determine the areas of open spaces surrounding buildings
necessary to provide adequate light and air, privacy and convenience of
access to property and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Limit congestion. To limit congestion in the public streets and so
protect the public health, safety, convenience and the general welfare
by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the loading
and unloading of vehicles.
D. Promote appropriate land use. To encourage the appropriate use or
development of lands in this Borough in a manner which will promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
E. Provide sufficient space. To provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations for a variety of agricultural, residential, recreational,
commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and
private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens.
F. Creative development techniques. To promote a desirable visual and
aesthetic environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangements.
G. Efficient use of land. To encourage coordination of the various public
and private procedures and activities shaping land development with a
view of lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land.
H. Secure safety from hazards. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other natural and man-made disasters.
I. Promote appropriate densities. To promote the establishment of
appropriate population densities and concentrations that will
contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities
and regions and preservation of the environment.
J. Promote conservation of open space. To promote the conservation of
open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl
and degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
§ 233-1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-1
226:569
§ 233-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Norwood."
§ 233-3. Definitions and word usage. [Amended by Ord. No.
93-0-22]
K. Reduce hazards in sloping areas. To reduce the hazards which exist in
steep-sloping areas by reason of erosion, siltation, flooding, surface
water runoff, pollution of water supplies from point and nonpoint
sources.
L. Protect inappropriate development. To preserve and protect areas of
high-water table, floodway and flood hazard areas from inappropriate
development.
M. Preserve wetlands. To preserve streams, watercourses and wetlands in
their natural state wherever possible.
N. Preserve water supply. To preserve and protect the quality and quantity
of ground- and surface water supply from pollution and diminution of
their safe yield.
O. Control runoff. To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges; to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical; to lessen nonpoint pollution; to maintain the integrity of
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage
and the means necessary for water supply, preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.
A. Certain words, phrases and terms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose thereof as follows: The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the
word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "zone" includes
the word "district"; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed
or intended to be occupied"; the word "use" includes the words
"arranged," "designed," or "intended to be used."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit with a separate locked
means of entrance and exit, either from within the building or from
the exterior, leading to an area that includes a kitchen with a stove,
a bathroom, and a sleeping area, and which is physically attached to
or contained within a one-family detached house, or occupies a portion
of a garage or accessory building on a lot occupied by a one-family
detached house.[Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15:12]
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building which is customarily used as an
incidental building in a principal building and located on the same lot
with such principal building.
§ 233-1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:570
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incident or subordinate to the
principal use and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ADDITION — Extension or increase in the floor area or increase in the
height of a building or increase of cubic area.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OR LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME
HOUSING — Housing for sale or rental that is affordable, according
to standards for home ownership or rental costs adopted by COAH,
occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross
household income of less than 80% of the median household income
and subject to affordability controls.
ALL-WEATHER SURFACED — A hard surface paving whose surface is
impervious to water.
ALTERATIONS — Any change, rearrangement or addition other than
repairs, to a building; any modification in the construction or equipment
of a building; any reroofing or residing; or any enlargement by moving
from one location or position to another.
BILLBOARD SIGN — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or activity conducted, sold, or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.[Added
8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
BUILDING — Any temporary or permanent structure, finished wall or
enclosure, built either above or below the ground, used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. When such structure
is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the
ground up, each part is deemed a separate building. Building shall also
include any structure having a roof supported by column piers or walls,
including but not limited to tents, lunch wagons, trailers, diners, camp
cars or other structures on wheels or having other supports and any
unroofed platform, terrace, porch or deck.
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area of a
principal building and its accessory buildings, excluding decks,
uncovered porches, terraces, patios, and steps.[Amended 4-13-2016
by Ord. No. 16:01]
BUILDING COVERAGE — That area of a lot covered by buildings
measured on a horizontal plane around the periphery of the
foundation(s) and including the area under the roof of any structure
supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured around the
extremities of the roof above the columns.[Added 2-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 04:01]
BUILDING HEIGHT — For all buildings, building height shall be
vertical distance from the average ground elevation around the
foundation to the building's highest point, exclusive of chimney,
mechanical equipment, elevator tower and flagpole, which shall not
exceed the height of the existing building by more than 12 feet, but
in no event shall it exceed the maximum building height specified
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:571
for a particular zone by more than eight feet. The average ground
elevation shall be calculated by measuring the ground elevation at
ten-foot intervals around the perimeter of the foundation.[Amended
2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
BUILDING LINE — A line extended from any wall of a building and
parallel with that wall and shall include the entire wall. If projections
occur along the wall, then the projection shall be included within the
building line.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or activity that is sold, or offered, or manufactured
on the premises on which the sign is located.[Added 8-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:14]
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing established
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-305 or successor agency of state government
responsible for comprehensive low- and moderate-income housing
planning in accordance with sound regional planning.
COMMERCIAL SIGN — Any billboard sign or business sign.[Added
8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or
receiving device, mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used
in communications, that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves,
digital signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals, or other communications signals.[Added
10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09:10]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
communications antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and
similar structures. The term shall include the structure and any support
thereof, together with other accessory structures and equipment
associated therewith.[Added 10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09:10]
CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two streets at the intersection.
A At no point around the perimeter of the building shall the height
of the building, exclusive of chimney, mechanical equipment,
elevator tower and flagpole, exceed by more than five feet the
maximum allowed in the zoning district.
(1)
Where soil or rock removal lowers the ground elevation around the
perimeter of the foundation, the building height shall be based on
the lowered composite elevation.
(2)
Where fill raises the ground elevation around the perimeter of the
foundation, building height shall be based on the elevation as it
existed prior to the use of fill.
(3)
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:572
DECK — A platform that is attached to a building, or that is directly
adjacent to a building, and which is supported by pillars or posts and
is not covered by a permanent roof.[Added 4-13-2016 by Ord. No.
16:01]
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and controlled discharge of this water
to a receiving drainage system.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use of land
for which permission may be required.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement
of property as permitted by COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:92.
DIGITAL OR ELECTRONIC SIGNS — Any sign that, in whole or in
part, rotates, moves, produces noise or smoke, gives the illusion of
movement, displays a video or other changing imagery, automatically
changes, is animated or blinking, or has any electronic digital, trivision,
or other animated characteristics resulting in an automatically
changing depiction.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS [Amended2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
—
Any establishment for the service of food and beverages, commonly
known as a "fast-food restaurant," "snack bar," "dairy bar,"
"hamburger stand," "hot dog stand" or "pizza stand," the operation
of which consists of the service of food and beverages to the
customers of the establishment for potential immediate
consumption at counters, stools or bars outside the confines of the
structure in which the business is conducted or for consumption
in vehicles parked upon the premises, whether such food and
beverages are delivered to the vehicles by the customers or by
personnel employed by the operator. An establishment for the
service of food and beverages which contains seating facilities
for the service of food and beverages within the confines of the
structure in which the business is conducted shall nevertheless be
deemed to be a drive-in restaurant if the operation of the business
substantially consists of the service of food and beverages for
immediate consumption outside the structure as hereinabove set
forth.
(1)
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:573
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for
one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same
within the one or more rooms.
EGRESS AND INGRESS — Egress is the provision of facilities for either
pedestrians or vehicles for leaving a particular lot or land. Ingress is a
provision for entering a particular lot or land.
EGRESS OPENING — An architectural feature of a building or
structure used for egress from below grade facilities, which may
include a landing and ladder providing access to the grade
level.[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21; amended 12-14-2016
by Ord. No. 16:26]
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Borough Tax Assessor through a means designed to ensure that
all property in the Borough is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost.
Final equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion
by the municipal Tax Assessor.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit on
a permanent and nontransitory basis as a single housekeeping unit,
sharing living, sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit or
nonremunerative basis, being a traditional family unit or the functional
equivalent.[Amended 9-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
FENCE — Includes any substantially vertical structure, wall, or
appurtenance, regardless of material composition, but excluding
vegetation and living fences, whether supported by a foundation,
footing, piling, stake, post, aboveground member, or whether it be self
supporting, intended as a barrier to prevent escape or intrusion, to
mark a boundary or the proximity thereof to ensure privacy, or to act as
a support for vegetation.[Added 6-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16:09]
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and
adjacent land areas subject to inundation in the event of the design
flood of a one-hundred-year frequency storm. These areas include the
floodway and flood fringe areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and Flood Boundary Maps, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and as adopted by the Borough of
Norwood.
FLOODWAY — The rivers or other watercourses and the adjacent land
areas to be reserved in order to discharge the design flood of a onehundred-
year frequency storm without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than 0.2 feet.
Any establishment for service of food and beverages from which
customers present at the premises can purchase food and
beverages without physically entering the main structure in which
the establishment is located.
(2)
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:574
FRONT YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the
street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of that lot.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant to
any governmental functions or required by any law, ordinance, or other
governmental regulation.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
HABITABLE AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of one
or more floors of the building measured between the inside face of
exterior walls, having a clear ceiling height of four feet; but no more
than 10% of the habitable floor area shall have a ceiling height less than
the prescribed ceiling height in the building code; any cellar, basement
or garage space shall not be considered in the computation of the
habitable floor area.
HOUSING REGION — The northeastern region of New Jersey
composed of Bergen, Hudson and Passaic Counties, as defined at
N.J.A.C. 5:92-2.1 or other group of two to four counties as may be
defined by COAH.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign lighted by, or exposed to, artificial light,
either by light on or in the sign or directed toward the sign, other than
neon signs.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area that is
improved with principal and accessory buildings, structures, and uses,
including, but not limited to, decks, driveways, tennis courts, parking
areas, garages, walkways, patios, terraces, loading areas, hard
surfaces, pools, or other man-made structures and improvements.
Detention or retention basins are excluded if they are constructed
of natural materials.[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21;
4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16:01]
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot.
LIVING FENCE — Plantings created by human effort consisting of the
growth or placement of hedges, trees, bushes, or any other plants,
or any combination thereof, creating a vision-impairing barrier or
boundary between properties.[Added 6-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16:09]
LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITY — An area adjacent to the main
building or storage building equal to 800 square feet (20 feet by 40 feet)
and is unoccupied at all times.
LOT — A piece, parcel or plot of land occupied or designed to be
occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such
open spaces required by this chapter as are arranged and designed to
be used in connection with such buildings.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding that area and is always expressed in terms of square
feet.
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:575
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot that is covered or occupied
by buildings measured on a horizontal planer around the periphery of
the foundation(s) and including the area under the roof of any structure
supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured around the
extremities of the roof above the columns.[Amended 9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:21]
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance measured along the
property line parallel to the street and closest to the street between the
side lot lines.[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
LOT LINE — A line of record dividing one lot from another.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot
lines measured at the minimum front yard setback from the street
line.[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
LOW INCOME — A total gross household income no greater than 50%
of the median household income.
MEAN GRADE — The grade of a lot equal to the sum of the various
grades divided by the number of measurements.
MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The median household income of
the housing region in which the Borough of Norwood is located, as
defined by COAH, adjusted for household size, based on the most recent
median income figures published by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the uncapped Section 8
income limits or other recognized standard adopted by COAH. These
median income figures may also be available from COAH.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of no
more than two lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a
planned development, any new street or the extension of any offtract
improvements, the cost of which is to be prorated in accordance with
applicable ordinance and statute. However, in the discretion of the
Board, a minor subdivision may be treated as a major subdivision in any
of the following events.[Added 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
MODERATE INCOME — A total gross household income no greater
than 80% and not less than 50% of the median household income.
NEIGHBORHOOD — Those lots or parcels of land within a radius of
500 feet in all directions from the exact midpoint of the tract to be
subdivided.[Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05:09]
NEON SIGN — A sign consisting of glass tubing, bent to form letters,
symbols, or other shapes and illuminated by neon or a similar gas
through which an electric voltage is discharged.[Added 8-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:14]
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN — Any sign other than a commercial
sign.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:576
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — Any land, building,
structure or use thereof which does not conform to the regulations of
this chapter for the zone in which it is located but which was lawfully in
existence prior to September 6, 1960.
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display,
or depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in, or
consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound
recording, live performance, or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format, or animated sensual details:[Added 4-5-2005 by
Ord. No. 05:04]
ONE-FAMILY DETACHED HOUSE — A building containing only one
dwelling unit for the exclusive use and occupation of one family, and
not containing one or more accessory apartments.[Added 9-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 15:12]
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space to the sky on the same lot with
the building.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of
one motor vehicle and which in this chapter is held to be an area 10
feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of passageways and driveways
appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto.
PATIO — A ground-level, improved surface or structure directly
adjacent to a building and not covered by a permanent roof.[Added
4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16:01]
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.[Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05:04]
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough as
established by the appropriate Borough ordinance.
PLOT PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown
topography, location of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way,
boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings and any other
information deemed necessary by the Planning Board in unusual or
special cases.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign announcing or supporting
political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state, or
local election.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
(1)
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, when
taken as a whole; and
(2)
Is a part of a work, which to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme taken
as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
(3)
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:577
PORCH — A structure, which may be in whole or in part screened,
enclosed, or covered by a roof, and which is attached to or directly
adjacent to a building.[Added 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16:01]
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE (PODS) STRUCTURES — Any
container, storage unit, shed-like container, or other portable structure
that can be used or is used for the storage of personal property of
any kind, and that is located for these purposes outside an enclosed
building other than an accessory building or shed complying with all
building codes and land use requirements.[Added 7-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 12:06]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
PRIVATE GARAGE — An accessory use not conducted as a business
designed for the storage of motor vehicles and with space for not more
than three vehicles.
PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign advertising
private sales of personal property, including, but not limited to, house
sales, yard sales, garage sales, rummage sales, or private not-for-profit
group sponsored events such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game
nights, art fairs, craft shows, and holiday tree sales.[Added 8-10-2016
by Ord. No. 16:14]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, when conducted on a residential property, shall be
conducted by a member of the family residing on that property entirely
within a residential building and shall include only the offices of doctors
or physicians, ministers, architects, professional engineers, lawyers
and such similar professional occupants which may be so designated by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment upon finding by such Board that such
occupation is truly professional, in character, training and experience
as a condition for the practice thereof and that the practice of such
occupation shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights in any zone in which it is located to a
greater extent than for the professional activities listed herein. The
issuance of a state or local license for regulation of any gainful
occupation need not be deemed indicative of professional standing.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building other than a private garage for the
storage of motor vehicles, at which filling station services and repairs of
all kinds of motor vehicles or any one of them is permitted. Any garage
conducted as a business or in which storage space is rented for more
than three motor vehicles shall be deemed a public garage.
PUBLIC ISSUE SIGN — A temporary sign supporting a position on any
public issue.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease
of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is
located.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:578
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any
building. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles to
the rear line of the lot or if the lot is not rectangular, then in the general
direction of its side lot lines.
REPAIR — Replacement of existing material with the same kind of
material used in the existing structure or building pot including
additions or structural alterations.
REQUIRED YARD — Any front, rear, or side yard that is required by the
provisions of this chapter to be maintained on lots located in any zoning
district.[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06:22]
RETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
storage of stormwater and absorption of this water into the ground.
SET-ASIDE — The percentage of low- and moderate-income housing
units in a development.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — [Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:04]
SIDE YARD — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the
yard and the nearest line to the building and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard or in the absence of either of such yards, to the
street or rear lot lines as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall
be measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
A commercial establishment that, as one of its business purposes,
offers for sale, rental, or display any of the following: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed material; computer
programs or software; or photographs, films, compact or video
disks, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations which depict or describe a specified sexual activity
or specified anatomical area; or still or motion-picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices that show images
to one or more person per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are characterized by the depiction of
a specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area; or
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with a specified sexual activity; or
(1)
A commercial establishment that features live performances
characterized by the exposure of a specified anatomical area or
by a specified sexual activity, or that regularly shows films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or any computer-generated or
electronically generated images or other photographic
representations that depict or describe a specified sexual activity
or specified anatomical area.
(2)
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:579
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures,
colors, illumination, or projected images.[Amended 8-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:14]
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area outside the street right-of-way
abutting two intersecting streets or a driveway intersecting a street.
The "sight triangle" shall be determined along the curb line or edge of
driveway 30 feet distance from the edge of pavement and permitting
a sight distance of not less than 150 feet. where roadways involved
shall have speed limits not exceeding 25 miles per hour In the case
of roadways where the speed limit is in excess of 25 miles per hour,
the minimum site distance shall be in accordance with the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (ASHTO)
standards.[Added 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
SLOPE — For the purposes of this chapter, a slope shall be determined
by dividing vertical elevation difference on adjacent contour lines by
the scaled horizontal distance perpendicular to these adjacent contour
lines. For the purpose of measurement or calculation on any map, plat,
plan or other document required by the Borough of Norwood or any
agency or Board thereof, slopes shall be measured upon a scale of one
inch equals 20 feet for parcels of less than one acre and one inch equals
30 feet for parcels in excess of one acre.[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 04:01]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — [Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:04]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — [Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:04]
STEEP SLOPE — Lot area upon which improvements are to be placed,
altered or expanded where the mean gradient is greater than
15%.[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
STORY — That part of a building between the surface of any floor and
the next floor above it or in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof
above it. A split-level story shall be considered a second story if its floor
level is five feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor
next below it, except a basement. A basement or cellar shall be counted
a story if its ceiling is more than four feet above the mean grade and if
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; or
(1)
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
The fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast; or
(1)
Any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, oral sex, or deviate sexual intercourse.
(2)
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:580
it is used for business or sleeping purposes. Any floor under a sloping
roof at the top of a building which is more than two feet below the top
plate shall be counted as a story and if less than two feet below the top
plate, it shall be counted as a half story, provided that not more than
60% of the floor area is used for rooms, baths or toilets; otherwise, it
shall be counted as that fraction of a story which its floor area in rooms,
baths or toilets bears to the entire floor area.
STREAM — Any natural body of water flowing continuously or
intermittently, whether designated as a stream, spring, brook, river or
otherwise and consisting of a bed, bank and water, but not including
lakes or ponds.
STREET — Any thoroughfare, highway or road or roadway which
affords a means of access to adjoining property and which has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-ofway,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on an
adopted Master Plan or official map forming a dividing line between the
street and any lot.[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH
approving the housing element and fair share plan of the Borough
in accordance with the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
and COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:92. A grant of substantive
certification shall be valid for a period of six years in accordance with
the terms and conditions established by COAH.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that is intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time.[Added 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
TERRACE — A raised level area with vertical or sloping front or sides
faced with masonry, turf, or the like.[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
16:21]
TERRACE — See definition of patio.[Added 4-13-2016 by Ord. No.
16:01]
TREE — Any woody perennial plant with one main trunk, such trunk
having a diameter of at least eight inches when measured four feet
above the level of the existing grade.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
WALKWAY — A ground-level, improved surface directly adjacent to a
building or other improved surface that functions to allow pedestrian
traffic movement from one improved surface or structure to
another.[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
§ 233-3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-3
226:581
WATERCOURSE — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes and all
other bodies of water, whether public or private, excluding piped
drainage systems, which are contained within, flow through or border
on the Borough of Norwood and which receive or conduct surface water
runoff.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated by surface or ground
water with a frequency sufficient to support and under normal
circumstances does or would support a prevalence of vegetative or
aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil
condition for growth and reproduction. Wetlands include but are not
limited to swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, such as sloughs,
wet meadows, river overflows, mud flats and natural ponds. Wetlands
shall include but not be limited to those shown on the United States
Department of the Interior Wetland Maps or similar maps published by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
WINDOW WELL — An architectural feature to allow light and air into
below-grade windows but not used for egress.[Added 9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 16:21]
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment as continued
under this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The Construction Official unless otherwise
designated by the Borough Council.
C. In addition, all definitions adopted by COAH in its regulations, at
N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:92, shall apply to this section.
§ 233-3 NORWOOD CODE § 233-3
226:582
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zones
§ 233-4. List of zones. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-20; Ord. No.
96-0-20]
The territory of the Borough of Norwood is hereby divided into the following
zones:
R40 One-Family Residence
R-22.5 One-Family Residence
R-10 One-Family Residence
R-7.5 One-Family Residence
B Business
LI Light Industry
LA Laboratories and Administrative
LA-5 Laboratories and Administrative - 5 Acres
PPP Park and Public Purposes
TH Planned Residential Townhouse Development
SH Senior Housing Zone
§ 233-5. Zoning Map. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-20; Ord. No.
86-0-08; Ord. No. 96-0-20]
A. The map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of Norwood, Bergen
County, New Jersey" dated July 26, 1960, and revised November 1,
1968, November 6, 1968, June 15, 1972, and subsequently revised by
the adoption of this chapter, delineating the above zone districts and
the schedule and requirements which accompany this chapter are
hereby declared part thereof and the aforesaid Zoning Map as revised
is adopted as the Zoning Map of the Borough of Norwood.
B. The Zoning Map is amended to add the following described area to
delineate the Senior Housing Zone:
§ 233-4 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-5
226:583
§ 233-6. Zoning boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
A parcel of land in the Borough of Norwood, County of Bergen, State
of New Jersey, beginning at the most northwesterly corner of the
herein described tract, said point of beginning being in the southerly
sideline of D'Ercole Court and being distant a) 115.31 when measured
along the aforementioned southerly sideline of D'Ercole Court on a
baring of south 27°-17-32 East to a point of curvature and b) still
along the same on a curve to the left in a southeasterly direction
on a radius of 90.00, an arc distance of 24.30 and c) still along
the same North 26°-50-59 East 24.36, from the intersection caused
by the aforementioned southerly sideline of D'Ercole Court and the
southeasterly sideline of McClellan Street (50 feet in width) and
running thence.
1. Along the southerly sideline of D'Ercole Court South 63°-09-01
East 655.98 to a point in the line of lands of Lot 7 Block 173;
thence
2. Along the same South 47°-19-10 West 489.04; thence
3. Along the line of other lands of the Borough of Norwood North
63°-09-01 West 484.95 to a point in the lands of Lot 3 Block 171;
thence
4. Through the same and through a portion of Lot 7.01 Block 167
and other lands of the Borough of Norwood North 26°50-59 East
458.16 to the point or place of beginning.
Said tract contains approximately 261,360 square feet or 6,000 acres.
A. The boundaries of the several respective zones are as shown on the
Zoning Map. If not shown and where such zone boundary lines are not
fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map, the zone boundary
lines are intended to follow either the center line of streets, railroad
rights-of-way, streams and road or property lines as they exist on plats
of record as of September 6, 1960.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines, and where they do not scale more than
10 feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing thereon.
§ 233-5 NORWOOD CODE § 233-6
226:584
ARTICLE III
Schedule of General Requirements
§ 233-7. Applicability. [Amended by Ord No. 84-0-20; Ord. No.
86-0-15; 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
§ 233-8. Slope modification. [Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No.
04:01]
Pursuant to the definitions provided in this chapter, in areas with steep
sloping lands, Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements shall be
modified and superseded such that the minimum lot area, minimum front/
rear yard, minimum side yards, minimum lot depth, minimum lot frontage,
maximum lot coverage, maximum improved lot coverage and maximum
disturbed land area requirements are established as set forth in Schedule B,
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulation in Areas of Steep Sloping Land,
Tables 1 through 6, annexed hereto and made a part hereof.70
§ 233-9. Flood prevention modification.
Pursuant to the definitions provided in this chapter, Schedule A, Schedule of
General Requirements71 and other applicable provisions shall be modified
and superseded by the following provisions:
A. Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements69 shall apply to the uses
of land and buildings, the yards and other open spaces to be provided
contiguous thereto and all other matters contained therein, as indicated
for the various zones established by this chapter, except as modified or
superseded by the provisions set forth in §§ 233-8 and 233-9 below.
B. The requirements listed for each zone as designated, reading from left
to right across the Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements, are
hereby prescribed for such zone, subject to the other provisions in this
chapter and shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements in every
instance of their application, unless otherwise stated.
A. Flood hazard areas and floodways.
(1) No permanent structure or building or any enlargement of a
permanent structure or building shall be permitted in a floodway or
within the flood hazard area.
(2) Within a designated floodway or flood hazard area, no filling,
grading, dredging or other development shall be permitted in
69.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter
70.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements and Schedule B, Schedule of
Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping Land, Tables 1 through 6, are
included at the end of this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Schedule of General Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 233-7 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-9
226:585
accordance with Chapter 131, Flood Damage Prevention, as finally
adopted.
(3) For all streams with flood hazard area designations, the applicable
required rear or side yard setbacks shall be 50 feet from the
floodway or 25 feet from the flood hazard area, whichever is
greater.
B. Detention/retention basins. For lots with detention/ retention basins,
the applicable required rear or side yard setbacks shall be measured
from the limits of the detention/retention basin.
C. Wetland areas. For lots with wetland areas, the applicable required rear
or side yard setbacks shall be measured from the wetland limits.
§ 233-9 NORWOOD CODE § 233-9
226:586
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 233-10. Compliance with zone regulations.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, reconstructed, rebuilt or
converted, nor shall any land or building be designed, used, or intended to
be used for any purposes whatsoever unless such building or use complies
with all other zone regulations established by this chapter for the zone in
which the building or land is located. Nor shall any open space contiguous
to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity to the yard, lot area, building location, percentage of lot
coverage and such other regulations designated in § 233-1 and all
regulations established by this chapter for the zone in which such building
or space is located.
§ 233-11. Number of buildings in certain zones restricted.
No lot in zones R-40, R-22.5, R-10, R-7.5 shall have erected upon it more
than one residential building and its accessory building(s).
§ 233-12. Frontage.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
dedicated public street.
§ 233-13. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking space shall be provided as specified herein and shall be
accessible to a street by means of necessary passageways and driveways.
All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on which the
same is situated and shall not thereafter be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner. No use, display of goods or permanent parking facilities shall
be permitted in any required front yard. No commercial vehicles of over 3/4
ton type shall be parked out of doors overnight in any residential zone and
such overnight parking by commercial vehicles of 3/4 ton or less shall be in
a driveway or garage. No commercial vehicles of any type shall be parked
on the street itself in any residential zone, except for delivery or service to
or for residences on the said street.
§ 233-14. New buildings.
Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building, such
separation shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building and all
yards and other open spaces in connection therewith. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a new building on the new lot thus created unless
it complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 233-10 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-14.1
226:587
§ 233-14.1. New streets; distance between streets; length of streets.
[Added 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01]
§ 233-15. Accessory buildings.
§ 233-16. Corner lots.
Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard requirements for the
respective zone for both intersecting streets.
§ 233-17. Yards and open spaces. [Amended 10-5-2004 by Ord. No.
04:17]
A. Any newly developed street shall be a distance of not less than 750
linear feet from any point of an existing street on the same side of the
street as the proposed new street.
B. Any newly developed street ending in a cul-de-sac shall have a
minimum length of 600 feet, measured from the intersection of the
street to be created with the existing street to the farthest part of the
cul-de-sac bulb.
A. An accessory building attached to the main building shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main
building.
B. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed or placed on
any lot unless the principal building is first constructed or placed upon
the lot.
C. When the rear yard of a corner lot adjoins the front yard of a lot to the
rear, no accessory building on such corner lot shall be located nearer to
the street line of the street on which the lot to the rear faces than a
distance equal to the depth of front yard required on such lot to the
rear.
A. General regulations.
(1) No building, structure or any part thereof shall project into any
required front, side or rear yard except as provided hereafter.
When used in this section, "required yard" means front, side and
rear yards as required by this chapter.
(2) No required yard or open space in connection with any building or
use shall be considered as providing a required yard or open space
for any other building on the same or any other lot.
B. Projections into required yards - general exceptions.
(1) The projection of parapets, windowsills, doorposts, rainwater
leaders, roof gutters, and similar ornamental or structural fixtures
may project a maximum distance of not more than six inches into
required yards. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:26]
§ 233-14.1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-17
226:588
(2) Cornices, canopies, bay windows, window wells, balconies,
landings, and other similar architectural features may project a
maximum distance of not more than two feet into required yards.
Egress openings no larger than 27 square feet may project into any
required yards. Front steps may project a distance of not more than
four feet into a required front yard. A sidewalk, not wider than five
feet, is permitted from the front steps or door to the driveway or to
the street. The encroachments listed above are permitted only if
the improvements on the lot otherwise comply with all of the other
applicable regulations, including, but not limited to, maximum lot
coverage and improved lot coverage, set forth in this Code.
[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21; 12-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:26; 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17:06]
(3) Chimneys or flues may project a maximum distance of not more
than three feet into required yards.
(4) Swimming pools shall be located according to the provisions of
§ 207-9 of this Code.
(5) Fences and walls may project into any required yard, subject to the
applicable regulations set forth in this Code.
(6) Patios may project into any required rear yard of any residential lot
located in the R-7.5 and R-10 Zoning Districts for a distance that is
the lesser of one-third of the required depth of the rear yard or onethird
of the depth of the rear yard when measured from its
narrowest point, provided that the structures on the lot otherwise
comply with all of the other applicable regulations set forth in this
Code. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21;; amended
4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16:01]
(7) Walkways of any residential lot located in the R-7.5 and R-10
Zoning Districts may project a maximum distance of not more than
three feet into required yards, provided that the walkways are no
wider than three feet, are not covered by a permanent roof, and all
improvements on the lot otherwise comply with all of the other
applicable regulations, including, but not limited to maximum lot
coverage and improved lot coverage, set forth in this Code. [Added
9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
(8) Driveways may project into front or side yards from the face of the
primary structure or detached garage to the R.O.W., provided that
all improvements on the lot otherwise comply with all of the other
applicable regulations, including, but not limited to maximum lot
coverage and improved lot coverage, set forth in this Code. The
width of a driveway will be approximately sized based on the size of
the garage it services, but not driveway may be wider than 10 feet
for each car that can fit in the garage, excluding tandem parking.
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
§ 233-17 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-17
226:589
§ 233-18. Obstructions to vision at street intersections.
At the intersection or interception of two or more streets no hedge or wall
higher than three feet above curb level, nor any obstruction to vision other
than a post not exceeding one square foot in cross-section area shall be
permitted to be installed on any lot within the triangular area formed by
the intersecting street lines bounding the lot or the projection of such lines
and by a line connecting a point in each street line located 25 feet from the
intersection of the street lines.
§ 233-19. Permitted incidental uses.
C. Front yard requirements affected by Master Plan or Official Map. If any
lot fronts upon a street or right-of-way that is proposed to be widened
as indicated on an Official Map or an adopted Master Plan of the
Borough, then the front yard shall be measured from the proposed
future right-of-way line.
D. Front yard requirement affected by future widening. If any lot fronts
upon a street or right-of-way that is proposed to be widened by a
proposed dedication of land for a right-of-way widening or a proposed
easement for road widening purposes, then the front yard shall be
measured from the proposed future right-of-way or easement line.
A. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the following
accessory and incidental uses in addition to those specified in the
schedule in § 233-7 and to the regulations in this chapter:
B. Customary recreational and service uses and buildings in a public park,
playground, beach or other recreational areas, incidental to the
recreational use of such area.
C. In all zoning districts, a trailer or modular unit may be temporarily
located at a construction site to be used as a sales or rental office open
to the public, provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17:01]
(1) The trailer or modular unit is used for the sale or lease of
residential and/or nonresidential buildings built or to be built on
the site on which the trailer or modular unit is to be located.
(2) The trailer or modular unit is not used to store construction
materials.
(3) Prior subdivision or site plan approval has been obtained for the
residential and/or nonresidential development for which the trailer
or modular unit will be used.
(4) In order to obtain a zoning permit for a sales trailer or a modular
unit, the applicant must provide proof that the sales trailer or
modular unit design and location has been approved by the
Construction Code Official and the Zoning Officer.
§ 233-17 NORWOOD CODE § 233-19
226:590
§ 233-20. Professional offices.
A professional office, when conducted in a residential zone, shall be
incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, shall be
conducted by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises
and entirely within the residential building, and in no case shall the number
of employees in any such professional office exceed two in addition to the
professional residing on the premises. The practice of the profession shall in
no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of the property
rights in the zone.
§ 233-21. Permit required for mechanical and automatic machines.
No coin-operated dispenser, including mechanical and automatic machines,
in which a product is dispensed or a service rendered, will be permitted,
except to dispense staple food items. Machines must be attached to a
principal building and located only in the Business B Zone. The location of
all such machines must not interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular
traffic; such determination is to be made by the law enforcing officials of
the Borough. A permit must be secured from the Construction Official for
all such installations. The fee for a permit shall be $5 for each and every
dispenser.
§ 233-22. Water and sewage systems.
Facilities for the provision of water or sewage systems to the uses permitted
in the Borough shall comply in all respects with the statutes relating to
waters, water supplies and sewage systems of the Board of Health of
Norwood and the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey.
§ 233-23. Public utility uses. [Amended 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01:01]
The Planning Board may authorize at its discretion, the issuance of a special
permit in residential zones for any of the following buildings or uses: a
telephone exchange, a substation or other public utility building, except
a storage yard, garage or workshop. Such special permits may be issued
however, only upon compliance with the following regulations:
(5) No trailer or modular unit will remain on the premises for more
than two years after the date on which the first construction permit
is issued, or seven days after the date on which a certificate of
occupancy is issued for the last residential or nonresidential unit
built and occupied on the premises, whichever occurs first.
A. Detailed site plans and specifications and a statement setting forth the
need and purpose of the installation shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The design of any structure or building shall conform to the general
area and shall not adversely affect the safe and comfortable
employment of property rights of the zone in which it locates.
§ 233-19 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-23
226:591
§ 233-23.1. Conditional uses. [Added 10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09:10]
The following are conditional uses that are permitted uses only on the
conditions set forth herein:
C. Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices shall be
provided as determined by the Planning Board and also sufficient
landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn shall be provided and
maintained.
D. Satisfaction of such other conditions as to general character, height and
use of the structure as in the opinion of the Planning Board may be
necessary to safeguard public health, comfort and convenience and as
may be required for the preservation of the general character of the
neighborhood in which such building is to be placed or such use to be
conducted.
A. Communications towers are permitted subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Communications towers with communications antennas shall be
permitted only on property that is located in the Light Industrial
Zone and the Laboratory Administrative Zone. Communications
towers with communications antennas are prohibited uses in all
other zoning districts in the Borough; [Amended 12-30-2009 by
Ord. No. 09:13]
(2) The Mayor and Council of the Borough must give its consent before
Borough property may be used for a communications tower. This
consent shall be in the form of a resolution of approval adopted by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough;
(3) No communications tower shall be erected or operated on Borough
property, except pursuant to a license issued by the Mayor and
Council or a lease entered into between the operator of the facility
and the Borough; [Amended 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(4) Communications towers shall either have a galvanized steel finish
or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), be painted a neutral color so as to reduce
visual obtrusiveness;
(5) Communications towers shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the FAA or any other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternative and design chosen must cause the
least disturbance to the surrounding properties;
(6) No signs shall be allowed on a communications tower;
(7) The minimum lot area for any lot on which a communications tower
is located is two acres; [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
§ 233-23 NORWOOD CODE § 233-23.1
226:592
(8) The maximum permitted height of a communications tower is 100
feet; [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(9) Communications towers will be set back a distance that is at least
100% of the height of the tower, except that the setback will be at
least 200 feet or 300% of the tower's height, whichever is greater,
from all lot lines that are adjacent to any residential use, residential
zone, park, school, or house of worship; [Added 12-30-2009 by
Ord. No. 09:13]
(10) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces (10 feet by 20 feet in
size for each space) will be provided; [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord.
No. 09:13]
(11) All communications towers will be enclosed by security fencing
that is at least six feet high. The fencing will be equipped with anticlimbing
devices; [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(12) The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding communications towers for which site plan approval is
required: [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(a) The lot on which a tower is located will be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the
communications tower and any related structures from any
adjacent property used as a residence. The standard buffer
shall consist of a landscaped strip, at least four feet wide,
outside the perimeter of the communications tower and related
compound;
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the Board may determine that the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived; and
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
will be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient
buffer;
(13) The equipment cabinets or structures used in association with
communications towers will be located in accordance with the
following: [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(a) In a front or side yard, the cabinet or structure will be no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor
area, and the cabinet/structure will be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 inches
to 48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches;
(b) In a rear yard, the cabinet or structure will be no greater than
eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
§ 233-23.1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-23.1
226:593
§ 233-23.2. Fences. [Added 6-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16:09]
cabinet/structure will be screened by an evergreen hedge with
an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least
48 inches;
(c) In all other instances, structures or cabinets will be screened
from view of all properties that abut or are directly across the
street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight
feet and a planted height of at least 72 inches;
(d) Emergency generators will be located below grade with
suitable soundproofing so that noise volumes measured at all
property lines do not exceed ambient levels. A nighttime
restriction of 50 decibels measured at all lot lines shall be
imposed; and
(e) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets will comply with all
applicable building codes;
(14) The development application for a communications tower must
indicate the proposed flight safety illumination; and [Added
12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
(15) The development application for a communications tower must
demonstrate appropriate means to camouflage the tower and
antennas so that the structure and color match the background
area as much as possible. [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No.
09:13]
A. All fences erected on residential property in the Borough of Norwood
are subject to the following requirements:
(1) A fence permit is required to be issued by the zoning officer for all
fences, except living fences, erected in the Borough.
(2) No fence erected on or around a residential lot or parcel of land
may exceed six feet in height. Preconstructed fences of a standard
six-foot height must be installed as close to the ground as possible.
The total height of the fence will not include any slight undulations
of the ground, provided that 80% of the fence does not exceed the
maximum height of six feet.
(3) No fence may be erected on a front yard of any lot in residential
zone or along a public right-of-way unless the fence is less than
50% solid and is not more than four feet in height.
(4) Fences must be constructed with the face of the finished side facing
away from the subject residential property and the structural side
toward that property.
§ 233-23.1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-23.2
226:594
(5) Fences that are painted will be painted in only one color that is
harmonious with the surrounding area. Multicolor fences are
prohibited.
(6) Fences must be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of
natural drainage and may not cause surface water to be blocked or
dammed to create ponding.
(7) Fences higher than the six feet, including but not limited to those
required around a tennis court, may be permitted in a residential
zone by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. However, these fences
will be considered structures, requiring building permits, and will
comply with the minimum side and rear yard requirements for
accessory buildings.
(8) Fences required around a swimming pool must comply with § 207-8
of the Code of the Borough of Norwood.
(9) The following fences and fencing materials are prohibited: barbedwire
fences; short pointed fences; canvas, cloth and electrically
charged fences; poultry netting; fences constructed of woven,
interwoven or laced plastic material; temporary fences, such as
snow fences; expandable fences; and collapsible fences at any
location on the lot upon which a dwelling or structure is situated,
except during construction on such property.
(10) Every fence must be maintained in a safe, sound, and upright
condition and in accordance with the approved plan on file with the
Zoning Officer.
(11) All fences must be erected within the property lines. No fences may
be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or to
interfere with the vehicular or pedestrian traffic or with visibility on
corner lots.
(12) Minimum distance to any property line, except for the front
property line, will be one foot, provided that common fences may
be located on the rear side property lines with the consent of the
adjacent owner. The minimum distance to the front property line
will be 10 feet.
(13) A fence must be placed on the property owned by the person
erecting that fence, unless a written mutual agreement is made by
both adjoining property owners involved, allowing the fence to be
placed on the property line between the two adjoining properties.
(14) No fence may be erected where it creates a traffic vision barrier.
B. No fence may be constructed except upon an application filed with and
approved by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer may grant a permit
only after the applicant provides the Zoning Officer with a set of plans
or a description of the proposed fence and a sketch or survey showing
§ 233-23.2 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-23.2
226:595
§ 233-23.3. Signs in all zoning districts. [Added 8-10-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:14]
the proposed location of the fence. The proposed fence must be
constructed in conformity with the plans or description and must be
located as shown on the sketch or survey.
C. All living fences planted or maintained on residential property in the
Borough are subject to the following requirements:
(1) Living fences may be planted up to three feet from any property
line.
(2) Living fences must be kept in reasonably neat and trim manner and
may not be planted within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet
of the intersection of any roadways, in accordance with Norwood
Code §§ 202-7 to 202-9.
A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any section of the Code to the
contrary, any commercial sign with a commercial message may, at the
option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message including a
message that is unrelated to any business located on the premises
where the sign is erected. The noncommercial message may occupy the
entire sign face or any portion of the sign. The sign face may be
changed from commercial to noncommercial messages or from one
noncommercial message to another as frequently as desired by the
owner of the sign, provided that the sign is not a prohibited sign or signtype
and provided that the size, height, setback, and other dimensional
criteria contained in this Code have been satisfied, or the sign is a
nonconforming structure as defined in this Code and the applicable law.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code to the contrary, no
sign or sign structure is subject to any limitation based upon the
content (viewpoint) of the message contained on the sign or displayed
on the sign structure.
C. No person may place any sign other than a governmental sign in the
public rights-of-way or on public property in the Borough.
D. Billboard signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
E. All non-temporary signs that are permitted in the Borough and contain
letters, numbers, or symbols in a language other than English also must
include Roman lettering, symbols in an English translation, and Arabic
numbers of sufficient visibility and substance to allow the reasonable
identification of the location and means of egress and ingress from and
to the premises, and the nature of the activity conducted therein, which
is readily apparent to the public, emergency personnel, law
enforcement personnel, and other municipal personnel.
F. All political signs will be removed no later than 11:59 p.m. of the third
day after the election to which the signs apply.
§ 233-23.2 NORWOOD CODE § 233-23.3
226:596
G. All private sale or event signs will be removed no later than 11:59 p.m.
of the third day after the sale or event.
H. All real estate signs will be removed no later than 11:59 p.m. of the
third day after the closing of any sale or the execution of any lease for
the premises.
I. All of the provisions of this Code regulating signs are intended to be
severable. If any part of these provisions is declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid by any court, the remaining parts will remain
in full force and effect.
§ 233-23.3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-23.3
226:597

ARTICLE V
Residential Zones
§ 233-24. Compliance required.
Within the R-40, R-22.5, R-10 and R-7.5 Zones, no premises, lot, building
or structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected
or altered to be used in whole or in part for any other than the following
specified purposes.
§ 233-25. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 233-26. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the permitted
dwelling unit shall not include a business but may include:
A. One-family detached house used as residence by not more than one
family.
B. Church or any place of worship, including parish house and Sunday
School building.
C. School or other nonprofit educational institution, including playgrounds
and accessory buildings.
D. Public library, public park, public museum, Borough municipal
building(s).
A. The use of a portion of a one-family residence as a professional office
shall be restricted to the first floor of the building and shall not exceed
25% of the total floor area of the building.
B. Toolsheds.
C. Private garages, the capacity of which may not exceed three
automobiles; provided, however, that in the R-40 Zone a maximum of
two double garage doors, or one double garage door and two single
garage doors with tandem parking, shall be permitted. [Amended
5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05:09]
D. Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard, and shall
be set back at least 10 feet from the principal building. [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06:22]
E. No accessory building shall exceed the height of 25 feet or the highest
point of the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower. [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06:22]
F. No accessory building may be used for human habitation, and no
accessory building in any residential zoning district may be used for
§ 233-24 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-26
226:599
business or commercial purposes. [Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
06:22]
G. Portable on-demand storage (PODS) structures are permitted only if
they meet the following standards: [Added 7-11-2012 by Ord. No.
12:06]
(1) One portable on-demand storage structure may be utilized on a lot
as a temporary structure within all residential zones when in
compliance with the standards of this subsection. Any use of
portable on-demand storage structures within the Borough that is
not in compliance with this subsection is prohibited.
(2) Before the initial delivery of a portable on-demand storage
structure, the property owner, applicant, or the portable ondemand
storage structure supplier must register the placement of
the portable on-demand storage structure with the Construction
Official. The registration with the Construction Official requires:
(a) Completing the application;
(b) Presenting an active Building Department permit for that
property if the portable on-demand storage structure is to be
used for the storage of building materials; and
(c) Payment of a nonrefundable registration fee of $50 if the
applicant does not have an active building department permit.
(3) Portable on-demand storage structures may not be located in the
front yard area except for the driveway area. The portable ondemand
storage structure's location and placement must comply
with the front, side, and rear yard requirements applicable to
accessory buildings and structures on the lot, except that a
portable on-demand storage structure may be located within the
driveway area of the lot.
(4) A permit for a portable on-demand storage structure may not
exceed 180 days, provided that a permit has been issued by the
Building Department for the property on which the portable ondemand
storage structure is located. If a building permit has not
been issued, the maximum time period for which a permit may be
issued for the use of a portable on-demand storage structure is 30
days.
H. Stationary electric generators are permitted only if they meet the
following requirements: [Added 7-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12:08]
(1) The generators must be located in the side or rear yards, and not in
the front yard.
(2) The generators must not exceed 10 square feet in size.
§ 233-26 NORWOOD CODE § 233-26
226:600
§ 233-27. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking requirements shall be as follows:
§ 233-28. Signs permitted. [Amended 3-7-2000 by Ord. No. 00:02;
8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
(3) If located in a side yard, the generator may be no more than three
feet from the residential dwelling being serviced by the generator.
(4) Generators must be at least five feet from any operable window or
door.
(5) The generator must be maintained in good working order
consistent with manufacturer specifications, may only be powered
by natural gas or propane, and may not exceed a noise level of 85
dba.
(6) The generator must be screened by landscaping so that it is not
visible to adjoining properties.
A. Residential: one off-street parking space for each one-family house.
B. Churches: 1 1/2 spaces for each four seats.
C. Schools: 1 1/2 spaces for each teaching or administrative staff member.
D. Professional offices: one space for each 200 square feet of floor area
used for such purpose.
A. The following signs are permitted in all residential zoning districts:
(1) A sign stating the name of the principal occupants and the street
address of any private residential dwelling, not exceeding six
square feet in area.
(2) A sign stating the name, street address, use, and profession of any
person with a professional office that is permitted in a residential
zone, not exceeding six square feet.
(3) A sign identifying a building address and legally permitted use
other than a residential use and professional office not exceeding
16 square feet in area.
(4) Real estate signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(5) Public issue signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(6) Political signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(7) Private sale or event signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(8) Governmental signs not exceeding six square feet in area.
§ 233-26 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-28
226:601
§ 233-28.1. Subdivision of existing lots. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 05:09; amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05:13]
(9) Business signs for businesses lawfully operating in a residential
zoning district, which will comply with the requirements for
business signs in § 233-33, except that the prohibitions in
§ 233-28B will apply to these signs.
B. The following signs are prohibited in all residential zoning districts:
(1) Illuminated signs.
(2) Neon signs.
(3) Digital or electronic signs.
A. No parcel or tract of land under single ownership fronting on an
accepted street in any residential zone shall be subdivided into two or
more lots unless the proposed subdivided lots conform to the provisions
of this section as hereinafter set forth.
B. The lot area and lot frontage of any proposed lot shall not be less than
the lot area and lot frontage as set forth on the applicable limiting
schedule as referenced in § 233-7 or the average lot area and lot
frontage of the lots in the neighborhood in which the lot to be
subdivided is located, whichever is greater. When computing the
average lot area and lot frontage of the lots in the neighborhood, the
following lots shall be excluded from the computation: the lot proposed
to be subdivided, tracts or lots that have been vacant for more than five
years, and lots containing conforming nonresidential or multifamily
uses.
§ 233-28 NORWOOD CODE § 233-28.1
226:602
ARTICLE VI
Business Zone
§ 233-29. Compliance required.
Within the Business B Zone, no premises, lot, building or structure shall be
used, and no building or structure shall be erected or altered to be used in
whole or in part for any other than the following specified purposes.
§ 233-30. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. Retail business activities of and similar to the following types may be
permitted:
(1) Groceries and food stuffs.
(2) Package liquors.
(3) Drugs and pharmaceuticals.
(4) Confectionery.
(5) Dry goods and notions.
(6) Stationery.
(7) Hardware and paints.
(8) Radio and television service.
(9) Books and tobacco.
(10) Periodicals and newspapers.
(11) Antiques.
(12) Barber and beauty shops.
(13) Tailoring and dressmaking.
(14) Dry cleaning collection but not processing.
(15) Shoe repairing.
(16) Retail florist.
(17) Retail bakery.
(18) Uses similar to those listed above.
B. Business and professional offices, banks and fiduciary institutions.
C. Parking lot for private passenger vehicles, but not for the storage of
used or new motor vehicles for sale or hire.
§ 233-29 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-30
226:603
§ 233-31. General requirements.
D. Restaurant, tavern, grill and other eating establishments, but not
including transient or mobile structures or drive-in restaurants.
E. Mortuary or funeral homes.
F. Assembly hall, bowling alley and other similar commercial recreational
activity, provided that it is carried on within a building.
G. Sexually oriented businesses, as a conditional use, subject to the
conditions set forth in § 233-34.1. [Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:04]
H. Notwithstanding the above, the following uses are not permitted in the
business zoning district: [Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06:22]
(1) Massage parlors or establishments.
(2) Tattoo parlors or establishments.
(3) Automobile junkyards, automobile, bus, truck, and other motor
vehicle storage yards.
(4) Building material storage yards.
(5) Carting, express, hauling, or storage yards for solid waste and/or
recycling collection and disposal.
(6) Livery or boarding stables for animals, but veterinary hospitals
providing short-term stays for animals receiving medical treatment
in a stand-alone building are permitted.
(7) Metal or woodworking shops.
A. Each business use shall provide loading and unloading facilities which
must be located on the same lot and shall not be located in the required
front yard and shall not be closer than 10 feet to the lot line of any
property zoning for residential purposes.
B. Where a business structure locates adjacent to an existing business
structure, the side yard adjacent to the existing business need not be
required, provided that there is vehicle access to the rear yard or some
other location; however, all other requirements pertaining to the
business must be complied with.
C. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes
outside of the structure in which such activity is carried on.
D. No storage of any kind is permitted in this zone other than with an
enclosed roofed building.
E. No building or premises shall be used and no building erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used for any kind of
§ 233-30 NORWOOD CODE § 233-31
226:604
§ 233-32. Off-street parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 88-0-22]
manufacturing or treatment of products, except that any kind of
manufacturing or treatment of products not included within the
prohibition of this section may be carried on if it is customarily
incidental to the conduct of a retail business conducted on the
premises. However, the space used for such manufacturing or
treatment of products shall not exceed 25% of the total floor space
occupied by such retail establishment on the premises.
F. Any trade, industry or use prohibited in Light Industrial and Laboratory
Administrative Zones are prohibited in the Business Zone.
A. The term "floor area" as used herein is defined as that area used or
intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, patients or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and
equipment and used for the display or sale of merchandise but not
including storage area.
(1) Retail stores: one space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
(2) Business, professional offices and banks: one space for each 250
square feet of floor area.
(3) Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments, and catering
halls: one space for each 2 1/2 seats. [Amended 8-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 09:06]
(4) Mortuary or funeral home: one space for each car used in
connection with the business, plus one space for each 40 square
feet of assembly room floor area.
(5) Assembly halls, theaters and so forth: one space for each five seats
provided for its patrons (based on maximum seating capacity).
(6) Bowling alley: four spaces for each alley.
B. (Reserved)72
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective
provision of off-street parking facilities by two or more buildings or uses
located on adjacent lots, provided that the total of such off-street
parking facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for
the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the
standards contained in this section, and further provided that the land
is owned by one or more of the collective users.
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, permitting the inclusion of off-site, off-street parking
on lots within 200 feet of the property that is the subject of a development application,
was repealed 7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07:27.
§ 233-31 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-32
226:605
§ 233-33. Signs permitted. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-12; Ord. No.
87-0-10; Ord. No. 89-0-08]
D. Parking facilities may be located in any required yard space but shall
not be less than 10 feet from any street line or 10 feet from any lot line
which is zoned residentially.
E. The required parking space shall be paved with an all-weather surface
paving and shall be accessible from similarly paved areas herein called
"aisles" or from similarly paved driveways, either or both of which must
be connected directly or by means of similarly paved driveways to a
public street. All such paving shall be maintained in a good usable
condition. A two-way driveway shall not be less than 18 feet wide and a
one-way driveway not less than 10 feet wide, in addition to any space
included for parking space. Driveways and parking areas shall be
illuminated during operating hours if such hours occur after sunset.
Illumination shall be shielded from streets and adjoining residential
properties. Driveways shall be free of all hazardous conditions at all
times.
F. No certificate of occupancy for any building shall be issued by the
Construction Official until the parking space and access facilities
required by this chapter have been completed. Where by reason of the
adverse weather conditions, it is impractical to complete the parking
space and access facilities, the certificate of occupancy may be issued
upon the posting of a performance guaranty approved as to form by the
Borough Attorney and as to sufficiency by the Borough Engineer. The
performance guaranty will run for a period not to exceed three months.
A. Nonilluminated business signs, which shall not project more than 15
inches beyond the building line, shall each have an area of not more
than 20 square feet, provided that such business signs shall in no case
exceed in the aggregate 10% of the area of the street wall surface,
including window and door area of the building on which or in front of
which they are displayed.
B. Illuminated business signs.
(1) Illuminated business signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in area
and shall not project more than 15 inches beyond the building line,
provided that such signs shall in no case exceed in the aggregate
5% of the area of the wall surface, including window and door area
of the building on which or in front of which they are displayed, and
that no such sign shall be so placed as to interfere with a highway
traffic light, traffic vision or similar safety factors. No signs shall be
illuminated by lighting of intermittent or varying intensity.
(2) Business signs may be illuminated but shall not be erected, painted
or composed of neon, fluorescent, phosphorescent or similar
material. Illuminated signs shall have sources of illumination
shielded in such a manner that the same are not visible from the
§ 233-32 NORWOOD CODE § 233-33
226:606
street or adjoining properties. No sign shall be illuminated by
lighting or intermittent or varying intensity, nor shall any
illumination be of any color light other than white. There shall
be no external fluorescent spot, flood or other decorative lights
illuminating any sign. All illuminated signs shall have a white
background.
(3) No business sign shall be in whole or in part moving, flashing,
animated, mobile or revolving.
C. Placement of signs on facades and windows.
(1) Only one sign for each business shall be permitted on any facade of
a building facing the public street. In the event the side of the
building is visible from the public street this too shall be considered
a facade facing the public street. Each business sign shall be
erected parallel to the face of the facade. The bottom of each sign
shall be at least eight feet above the highest point of the finished
grade along the applicable facade.
(2) Advertising and/or identification of membership in the retail or
professional association or credit card, credit association or plan or
manufacturer's identification or legally required licenses when
attached to or painted on a window or windows of any structure,
alone or in combination with a permitted sign placed upon the
same window or windows shall not exceed 30% of the square
footage of the total glass area or glazing area.
D. Freestanding signs or pole signs.
(1) Freestanding signs or pole signs are a conditional use in the B Zone
only. All applications for freestanding or pole signs shall be made to
the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
application for the sign applying the same criteria as applicable to a
site plan. The application for a freestanding or pole sign shall be
considered a site plan application and be subject to all the
conditions and requirements Chapter 231, Site Plan Review.
(2) The following further conditions shall be applicable to any
freestanding or pole signs:
(a) A freestanding sign shall only be permitted if it is the only sign
advertising a business. It shall not be permitted in conjunction
with any facade signs.
(b) Not more than one freestanding sign shall be erected for each
150 feet of frontage on a public street.
(c) The aggregate area of the sign's two sides shall not exceed 30
square feet.
(d) No freestanding sign shall be located within 30 feet of the
boundary line of the property where it adjoins a public street
§ 233-33 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-33
226:607
and within 30 feet of a public or private off-street parking
or interior driveway or within 50 feet of the boundary of a
residential district.
(e) The bottom of a freestanding sign shall be no less than four
feet above the finished base of the sign, and the top of the
freestanding sign shall be no greater than 12 feet above the
finished base of the sign.
E. All refuse and papers shall be kept constantly removed from ground
spaces at least five feet in all directions around the sign, and
vegetation, except trees and shrubs, shall be kept trimmed to not more
than six inches in height.
F. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, no sign shall
project beyond the building line. No part of any sign shall extend above
the top or beyond the ends of the wall surface on which it is placed. No
sign, except such directional devices as may be required by federal
aeronautical authorities, shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon
the roof or upon any building, which sign extends above the roof of any
adjacent building, and no sign shall be placed as to interfere with the
opening of any exit door or to obstruct the view from any window
opening to a room to be used for dwelling purposes. Permits must be
obtained from the Construction Official for sign erection.
G. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Freestanding traffic control signs are permitted in addition to signs
affixed to the building facade or freestanding business signs,
provided that:
(a) The signs provide traffic directions only.
(b) The top of the traffic control sign shall be no greater than six
feet above the finished grade at the base of the sign.
(c) The size, color and sign of such sign shall conform with the
latest Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, United States Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration.
(2) Noncommercial exterior signs are permitted, not exceeding two
square feet, including but not limited to the designation of rest
rooms, telephone location, restrictions on smoking and exitways.
(3) All illuminated signs shall be shielded so as to prevent glare, and no
sign shall be illuminated by lighting of intermittent or varying
intensity, nor shall any sign be of any color light other than white.
(4) One sign illuminated by white light only shall be permitted
identifying a school, house of religious worship, public building or
any other such public or quasi-public use, affixed to a suitable post
or upon the facade of the building, located not less than 10 feet
§ 233-33 NORWOOD CODE § 233-33
226:608
§ 233-34. Prohibited uses.
The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in the Business
B Zone:
from any street or property line and not exceeding four feet in
length on any one side.
(5) Streamers, flags, spinners, bunting and similar devices, commonly
used for grand openings and special events, are prohibited, except
in conjunction with the opening of a business, in which event such
display shall not exceed 14 days from the opening date of said
business.73
H. The following temporary signs are permitted: [Added 3-7-2000 by
Ord. No. 00:02; amended 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14]
(1) Real estate signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(2) Public issue signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(3) Political signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(4) Private sale or event signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
(5) Governmental signs not exceeding six square feet in area.
A. Dance hall, billiard room.
B. Used car lot.
C. Trailers and trailer parks.
D. Gasoline stations and auto-repair shops.
E. Theaters, including outdoor and temporary.
F. Drive-in restaurants.
G. Businesses that depict, sell, present, or display, in any manner, any
obscene form of expression or material. [Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
05:04]
H. Sexually oriented businesses are permitted, but only as a conditional
use, subject to the requirements of § 233-34.1. [Added 4-5-2005 by
Ord. No. 05:04]
I. Communications towers. [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
73.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(6), regarding temporary signs for political candidates,
was repealed 8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16:14.
§ 233-33 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-34.1
226:609
§ 233-34.1. Sexually oriented businesses as conditional uses.
[Added 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05:04]
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted as conditional uses in the
Business Zone, provided that the following conditions are complied with:
A. No sexually oriented business may be located on any lot that is within
1,000 feet of the lot on which there is located any existing sexually
oriented business; any church, synagogue, temple, or place of worship;
any elementary or secondary school or school bus stop; any municipal
or county playground or place of public resort or recreation; any
hospital or child-care center; or any area zoned for residential use.
B. Every structure used by a sexually oriented business shall be
surrounded by a perimeter buffer of at least 50 feet in width, with
plantings, fencing, or other physical dividers along the outside of the
perimeter sufficient to impede the view of the interior of the premises in
which the business is located.
C. No sexually oriented business shall display more than two exterior
signs, consisting of one identification sign and one sign giving notice
that the premises are off limits to minors. The signs shall be in
compliance with the requirements for signs in the zone, except that the
identification sign shall be no more than 40 square feet in size.
D. No obscene material may be depicted, sold, presented, or displayed in
or by any sexually oriented business.
E. Every sexually oriented business shall comply with the area and bulk
requirements of the zone, except as otherwise provided in this section.
§ 233-34.1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-34.1
226:610
ARTICLE VII
Light Industrial Zone
§ 233-35. Compliance required.
Within the Light Industrial LI-Zone, no premises, lot, building or structure
shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered to be
used in whole or in part for any other use, except light industrial. No light
industrial use shall be permitted unless the following standards are met.
§ 233-36. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 233-36.1. Conditional uses. [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
Conditional uses are as follows:
§ 233-37. General regulations.
A. The manufacturing, compounding, packing, processing or treatment of
beverages, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, ice and toilet supplies.
B. Metal working, tool and die shop, machine and welding shop, excluding
drop hammer and similar machinery of a nuisance producing character.
C. The finishing or assembling of articles made from previously prepared
or refined materials.
D. Other uses permitted upon approval of the Zoning Board, after referral
to the Planning Board for review and report.
E. Indoor racket recreational facilities, such as indoor tennis courts,
squash courts, racketball courts, etc.
F. Industrial uses not expressly permitted herein but, which by their
nature and intensity of operations involved or conducted in connection
with the use, are such that the use will conform to the requirements set
forth in this article.
A. Communications towers, pursuant to the provisions of § 233-23.1.
A. Uses permitted in the LI Zone shall be only those which are normally
such that at no time will such use cause or result in any:
(1) Dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, obnoxious gas, fumes or odors
or other atmospheric pollution, noise or vibration beyond the
boundaries of the zone in which it is located.
(2) Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any adjacent
building or to any plant growth on any land adjacent to the site of
the use.
§ 233-35 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-37
226:611
§ 233-38. Off-street parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-0-07]
(3) Hauling of materials, goods or products to or from the site of such
use in a volume or manner materially incongruous with the normal
traffic on the streets in the neighborhood.
B. No noise shall be audible nor shall vibrations be felt at a distance
greater than 100 feet from the building line of any industrial building.
The operation of an industry is deemed to be a nuisance by reason of
noise when the level of noise as measured at the above distance is in
excess of 60 decibels above the reference level. The reference level for
noise measurement shall be the American Standards Association (ASA)
standard sound pressure reference level of 0.0002 dyne per square
centimeter at 1,000 cycles. Instrumentation and methods of
measurement shall be based upon the ASA standards.
C. No burning of materials in open fires shall be permitted.
D. No discharge into any disposal system or stream or into the ground of
any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any
water supply or cause the emission of any discernible odor shall be
permitted.
E. Loading and unloading facilities on the same lot with the principal
building shall be provided to meet estimated normal demand for such
facilities incidental to respective industrial uses. The area shall not be
located in the required front yard space and shall not be less than 10
feet from any street or lot line.
F. No storage of any kind is permitted in this zone other than within a
roofed building so as to obscure storage from view along any road or
from any residential or business zone.
A. Minimum requirements; exceptions.
(1) There shall be a minimum of three parking spaces for each two
persons occupying each building, but in no event shall there be
fewer than 30 parking spaces for each building.
(2) Parking exceptions shall be as specified for the Business B Zone as
provided in § 233-32B and C.
B. Off-street parking spaces shall in no case be located less than 30 feet
from any street line or less than 25 feet from any residentially zoned
property.
C. No certificate of occupancy for any building shall be issued by the
Construction Official until the parking space and access facilities
required by this section have been completed. Where by reason of the
adverse weather conditions, it is impractical to complete the parking
space and access facilities, the certificate of occupancy may be issued
upon the posting of a performance guaranty approved as to form by the
§ 233-37 NORWOOD CODE § 233-38
226:612
§ 233-39. Signs permitted.
§ 233-40. Prohibited uses.
The following activities and uses are specifically prohibited uses in the LIZone:
Borough Attorney and as to sufficiency by the Borough Engineer. The
performance guaranty will run for a period not to exceed three months.
A. All signs permitted as in the Business B Zone shall be permitted.
B. All of the requirements that apply to signs in § 233-33 shall apply to this
zone.
A. The manufacture of heavy chemicals, such as but not limited to acids or
other corrosives, ammonia, caustic soda and sulfuric acid; the
manufacture of basic or semi-finished chemicals, such as cellulose
products, resins, dyestuffs, glue, vegetable, animal or mineral fats or
oils, explosives, combustible gases, soaps and detergents, fertilizers,
asphalt and tar products; the manufacture or production of metals and
alloys in ingot form; the manufacture or production of cement, plaster,
cork and their constituents; matches, paints, oils, varnishes, lacquer,
rubber or rubber products; the slaughtering or processing of animals,
fowl or fish; the processing, sale, storage or reclamation of junk of all
kinds, including automobile wrecking and storing.
B. Junkyards.
§ 233-38 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-40
226:613

ARTICLE VIII
Laboratory Administrative Zone
§ 233-41. Compliance required.
Within the LA Zone and the LA-5 Zone, no premises, lot, building or
structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected or
altered to be used in whole or in part for any other use, except the following
specified purposes:
§ 233-42. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 233-42.1. Conditional uses. [Added 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09:13]
Conditional uses are as follows:
§ 233-43. General regulations.
The specified uses shall not be permitted unless the following standards are
met:
A. Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
B. Scientific or research laboratories devoted to research, design and/or
experimentation and processing and fabricating incidental thereto,
provided that no materials or finished products shall be manufactured,
processed or fabricated on the premises for sale, except such as are
incidental to research, design or experimentation conducted on the
premises.
C. Nursing homes, which is defined for the purpose of this chapter to
mean a building designed for the reception or care of persons who are
dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves and shall be
understood to include homes for the aged or infirm, or where
chronically ill or incurable persons are housed or lodged and furnished
with food and nursing care for compensation. Nursing homes shall be
permitted in LA Zone only and not in LA-5 Zone.
D. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above.
A. Communications towers, pursuant to the provisions of § 233-23.1.
A. No use shall be established, maintained or conducted so that the same
will cause:
(1) Dissemination of smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor or any
atomospheric pollutant beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied
by such use.
(2) Discharge of any waste material whatsoever into any watercourse,
except in accordance with existing state and local requirements.
§ 233-41 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-43
226:615
§ 233-44. Off-street parking.
§ 233-45. Signs permitted.
(3) Dissemination of glare, noise or vibration beyond the immediate
site or lot on which such use is conducted. See § 233-37B for
standards that apply to this zone also.
(4) Physical hazard by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or similar
cause to property in the same or adjacent zones.
B. Each laboratory or office building use shall provide loading and
unloading facilities which must be located on the same lot and shall not
be located in the required front yard area and shall not be closer than
50 feet to the lot line of any property zoned for residential purposes or a
street line.
C. At least 25% of the entire lot shall be landscaped and seeded and used
for no other purpose.
A. All of the requirements of § 233-38A and C pertain to this zone.
B. Parking areas shall not be permitted less than 150 feet from any street
line or less than 50 feet from any residential zone.
A. Signs permitted shall be all signs as in the Business B Zone.
B. All of the requirements that apply to signs in § 233-33 shall apply to this
zone.
§ 233-43 NORWOOD CODE § 233-45
226:616
ARTICLE IX
Mount Laurel Zone
[Added by Ord. No. 86-0-02; amended by Ord. No. 92-0-04; Ord. No.
93-0-22]
§ 233-46. Compliance required.
Within the ML Zone, no premises, lot, building or structure shall be used,
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered to be used in whole
or in part for any other use, except the following specified purposes.
§ 233-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a lower income housing zone
(ML) of the townhouse or garden apartment development to be constructed
by the Housing Development Corporation of Bergen County (HDC) or the
Borough itself or whoever the Borough may select or designate as the
developer or builder. This article is being adopted for the purpose of
resolution of Norwood Easthill Associates, et al v. Borough of Norwood, et
al, L-24219-83, L-16258-80 and L-00491-83, insofar as the case involves the
Borough of Norwood in accordance with the revised Settlement Agreement
dated October 16, 1985, as may be further amended or revised from time
to time as required by the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey and
to help the Borough satisfy the conditions and obligations imposed on it
by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). The purposes of this article
constitute the reasons for deviation with the land use plan element of
the Master Plan of the Borough of Norwood in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62a.
§ 233-48. Permitted uses.
Multifamily garden apartment, townhouse or condominium developments
shall be permitted in the ML zone in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
§ 233-49. Development constraints.
A. Development under the terms of this section shall be permitted in the
ML zone, except:
(1) Where the bedrock is within four feet of the ground surface and the
topography makes it impossible to construct water and sewer lines
without extensive blasting.
(2) On slopes in excess of 25%.
(3) In areas where residential development is prohibited by state or
federal law.
(4) In areas where residential development would create a significant
danger to public health or safety which cannot reasonably be
§ 233-46 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-49
226:617
§ 233-50. Design standards. [Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
16:21]
The following design standards shall apply to the ML Zone:
Minimum lot size 4 acres
Maximum gross density (dwelling
units/acre)
12.5 units/acre
Front setback requirement (feet) 25
Rear setback requirement (feet) 20
Side yard setback (feet) 10
Lot coverage 40 percent
Maximum building height 3 stories 40 feet
Usable open space 20 percent
§ 233-51. Recreation.
Multifamily developments in the ML Zone shall provide space in a usable
configuration for play lots or a shaded area for the elderly or other space
for recreation which is appropriate for that development, distributed
throughout the development so as to be convenient to residents.
§ 233-52. Off-street parking.
substantially ameliorated by actions of the developer or the
municipality.
(5) Within 25 feet of features of unique cultural or historical
significance which cannot be otherwise adequately protected
through site layout and design or other reasonable measures by the
developer.
B. Nothing in this article shall limit the discretion of any municipal agency
to require the reasonable steps to be taken to ameliorate problems of
drainage, soil erosion or other substantial environmental problems that
may be caused by development under the terms of this article.
C. Land which may not be developed under this article may be included in
a development under the terms of this article for purposes of
calculating lot coverage, gross density, open space and setbacks.
[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
A. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows for townhouse units,
garden apartments or condominiums:
(1) For each three-bedroom unit: 2 spaces.
(2) For each two-bedroom unit: 1.75 spaces.
(3) For each one-bedroom unit: 1.5 spaces.
§ 233-49 NORWOOD CODE § 233-52
226:618
§ 233-53. Street widths, shoulders and rights-of-way.
Street widths, shoulders and rights-of-way shall be provided as follows:
§ 233-54. Additional standards.
B. Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 19 feet.
A. Paved widths.
(1) Collector:
(a) Thirty-six feet for two lanes in each direction and emergency
street parking only.
(b) Thirty-six feet for one lane in each direction and parking either
side.
(2) Minor streets:
(a) Thirty feet for two lanes and parking on two sides.
(b) Twenty-two feet for two lanes and parking on one side or culsde-
sac over 300 feet long.
(c) Twenty feet for culs-de-sac up to 300 feet long.
(d) Eighteen feet for short one-way loops serving up to 15 dwelling
units or for culs-de-sac serving five to seven dwellings.
B. Shoulders. A planted shoulder of at least 8 1/2 feet shall be provided on
either side of the paved roadway.
C. Right-of-way. The total right-of-way to be reserved shall be computed by
adding the shoulder requirement to the paved roadway width required.
D. Curbs. Curbs shall be provided as follows:
(1) Collector streets. A masonry curb of at least six inches shall be
provided.
(2) Minor streets. A straight, battered curb of asphalt shall be
provided.
E. Road gradients. Road gradients shall not be less than 0.5% for any road.
The maximum gradient shall be 15% for minor streets and 10% for
collector streets.
F. Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac shall serve a maximum of 25 units or shall not
be longer than 1,000 feet, whichever is less. The paved right-of-way of a
cul-de-sac turnaround shall be at least 80 feet in diameter and the rightof-
way radius shall not be less than 50 feet.
A. There shall be no minimum project size requirement.
§ 233-52 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-54
226:619
§ 233-55. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
At least 50% of the total number of dwelling units in each development
in the Mount Laurel Zone shall be made affordable to and sold or rented
to low-income households and the remainder shall be made affordable to
and sold or rented to moderate-income households, as defined in Article XI,
Affordable Housing Requirements.
§ 233-56. Municipal cooperation.
The municipality shall take all reasonable steps to foster development of the
units affordable to low- and moderate-income households in the ML Zone,
including but not limited to:
B. There shall be no minimum requirements for dwelling unit sizes or
occupancy-based size requirements, other than contained in the State
Housing Code and Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law.
C. There shall be no requirements concerning:
(1) Architectural uniformity.
(2) Facade materials or color type.
(3) Maximum building lengths or staggering of units.
(4) Mandatory storage areas.
(5) Enclosed garages.
(6) Varied building heights or uniform roof lines.
(7) Separate entrances.
(8) Superintendent occupancy, except as required in subsidized
projects.
A. Adoption of such resolutions of need, execution of payment-in-lieu-oftaxes
resolutions or public housing cooperation agreements with the
Bergen County Housing Authority as may be necessary to facilitate a
developer in obtaining public subsidies for the construction of housing
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
B. Providing for expedited disposition of site plan applications and
municipal approvals by the developer.
C. Cooperation with the developer in securing sewage and water
connections.
D. Cooperation with the needs of the developer and the requirements of
relevant state and federal agencies concerning the administration of
resale price controls.
§ 233-54 NORWOOD CODE § 233-56
226:620
§ 233-57. Boundaries.
A parcel of land lying in the Borough of Norwood described as follows:
Being known and designated as Lot 1, Block 177 and portions of Lot
1, Block 176 and Lot 7, Block 167 and a portion of Grant Avenue in
the Borough of Norwood, Bergen County, New Jersey and being more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point formed by the intersection of the southerly sideline
of Williams Avenue and Feitner Street running; thence
1. Southerly, along the said westerly sideline of Feitner Street 285 feet
more or less to a point therein; thence
2. Westerly by a new line through Lot 1.01, Block 176 and Lot 7.01, Block
167, parallel with the said southerly sideline of Williams Avenue, 727
feet more or less to the easterly sideline of McClellan Street; thence
3. Northerly, along the various courses of the said easterly sideline of
McClellan Street 351 feet more or less to the southerly sideline of
Williams Avenue produced westerly; thence
4. Easterly, along the said southerly sideline of Williams Avenue, parallel
with the second course herein, 528 feet more or less to the said
westerly sideline of Feitner Street and the point of Beginning.
Contains 4.02 acres more or less.
E. Waiver of the following fees for lower income units in the affordable
housing developments:
(1) Subdivision and site plan application fees in the development.
(2) Building permit fees, except state fees.
(3) Certificate of occupancy fees.
(4) Engineering fees in the development.
§ 233-56 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-57
226:621

ARTICLE X
Special Overlay Zone in LI Zone
[Added by Ord. No. 86-0-07]
§ 233-58. Special overlay zone established.
There is hereby created and established within the Borough of Norwood a
special overlay zone consisting of the following properties: Lots 1 and 7 in
Block 145 which is presently in the LI zone.
§ 233-59. Permitted uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 93-0-22]
A. The following uses are permitted within the special overlay zone:
(1) Principal permitted uses:
(a) All uses permitted in the LI zone;
(b) Public playgrounds.
(c) Parks and recreation areas.
(d) Private parks.
(e) Public purpose facilities necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(f) Garden apartment dwelling units, subject to the provisions of
Article XI, Affordable Housing Requirements.
(2) Accessory uses permitted:
(a) Retention and detention facilities.
(b) Public utilities and essential services pertinent to and
necessary for any principal use.
(c) Off-street parking areas.
(d) Garages and private storage buildings, including maintenance
buildings and garbage and trash collection enclosures to
service principal use.
(e) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities including tennis
courts, swimming pool and clubhouse facilities, provided that
same are designed and intended for the use of residents of the
garden-apartment development.
B. No garden-apartment development shall be constructed or used in the
Special Residence Zone unless 20 units are designated for a period of
no less than 25 years from the date of initial occupancy of the
development, for use by low- and moderate-income households as
defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
of the United States government for the statistical area in which the
§ 233-58 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-59
226:623
§ 233-60. Area, yard and bulk requirements. [Amended by Ord. No.
86-0-07]
Borough of Norwood is situated and as further defined by Mount Laurel
II. A developer shall have the option of subsidizing construction of
no more than 20% of its obligation for low- and moderate-income
units at the Borough's Mount Laurel building site through the Housing
Development Corporation of Bergen County on terms and conditions
satisfactory to the Borough and the Housing Development Corporation,
which terms will reasonably guarantee construction of the units.
A. Lot area. The minimum tract shall be eight acres.
B. No building shall exceed 320 feet in length on any one axis.
C. The maximum number of stories shall be two, and the maximum
building height shall be 35 feet. The height shall be measured from the
average ground elevation surrounding the building.
D. No building shall contain less than eight or more than 24 dwelling units.
Buildings may be attached.
E. Buildings, the sides of which are parallel, shall be at least 25 feet apart.
Where an access drive is located between the buildings, the buildings
shall be at least 45 feet apart.
F. Cellars may be permitted, but the use of any cellar must be specified in
detail in the site plan. No dwelling units shall be permitted in cellars or
basements. A "cellar" is defined as that area below the first floor level
when the first floor level is at ground level. A "basement" is defined as
that area below first floor level when the floor level is up to but not
including four feet above ground level.
G. All principal buildings shall provide not less than two exterior common
exposures for each unit, each of which shall be properly placed so as to
provide through ventilation or cross ventilation for each unit.
H. No air-conditioning unit shall project more than six inches from the face
of the wall of the building in which it is installed and no window-type
air-conditioning units shall be permitted.
I. All principal buildings shall have television antenna equipment built
into the building to eliminate individual antennas being erected upon
the roof. In lieu thereof, CATV or its equal may be provided. This section
shall not apply to a common antenna tower, subject to Planning Board
approval.
J. The number of living units per building and general site plan of building
must be approved by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment in
accordance with Borough site plan review standards.
K. Gross density limit. The gross density of a garden apartment project
shall not exceed 17 units per acre.
§ 233-59 NORWOOD CODE § 233-60
226:624
L. Lot coverage limit. The base footprint floor area of all structures shall
not exceed 20% of the total site area. [Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 16:21]
M. Two bedroom units shall not exceed 40% of total number of units
provided.
(1) Dwelling unit requirements:
(a) Gross floor area minimum.
[1] One-bedroom unit: 600 square feet.
[2] Two-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(2) Off-street parking and circulation. Off-street parking facilities shall
be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Parking space requirement:
[1] Minimum spaces per unit: 1 1/2.
[2] Minimum dimensions: nine by 20 feet; compact spaces
eight by 18 feet in dimension may be provided for not more
than 30% of the total parking provided.
[3] Minimum distance to buildings: five feet.
[4] Minimum distance to property line: five feet.
(b) Garages. A garage, if provided, shall constitute one parking
space.
(c) General requirements. Parking areas and access drives shall
be paved and curbed and provided with adequate systems of
storm drainage. Furthermore, each parking space is to be
properly maintained and policed at all times.
(d) Access drives:
[1] Minimum width: 24 feet.
[2] Minimum distance to any building: five feet; to property
line: five feet.
[3] Access drives shall be so located and arranged as to
provide safe and efficient movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(3) General requirements:
(a) Sidewalks:
§ 233-60 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-60
226:625
[1] Concrete sidewalks, to be constructed in accordance with
the Borough's specification ordinance to a paved width of
not less than four feet, shall be provided:
[a] To and from buildings and parking areas.
[b] To and from buildings and roads or accessways.
[c] To all service areas.
[2] No sidewalks, except those leading to and from building
entrances and exits, shall be placed closer to a building
than 10 feet, but sidewalks may be placed in landscaped
areas and within required yard setback areas.
(b) All areas of a garden apartment site not used for the
construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking areas or
sidewalks shall be fully and attractively landscaped with trees,
shrubs and grass lawns. Any trees or shrubs in a healthy state
at the time the development begins shall remain and be
protected during construction, provided that they are within
areas designated as "open space" and not subject to extreme
grading. At least 10% of the gross site shall be devoted to
common open space for use of residents.
(c) Exterior garbage containers shall be so located as to efficiently
service all apartments, but shall be clustered so as to have a
minimum number of areas. All such areas shall be provided
with sufficient screening on all sides by wood or other similar
materials so as to prevent access to the same by animals; said
screening shall be at least six feet in height and designed so as
to harmonize with the other architectural elements on the site.
Garbage containers shall be a minimum of 25 feet from all
property lines or fenced and enclosed.
(d) Interior roads, driveways, private thoroughfares, parking
areas, building entranceways and pedestrian walks shall be
provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to
pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same and shall,
where necessary, be shielded to avoid glare to occupants of
buildings and adjoining areas. Lighting shall be arranged as to
reflect away from any adjoining properties.
(e) If recreational equipment shall be provided in such locations as
shown on the approved site plan, at no time shall such
equipment be permitted in front or side yards.
(f) All apartment dwellings, stairways, furnace rooms, laundry
rooms and garages in apartment dwellings shall have installed
fire, smoke and heat detection as required and approved by the
Fire Prevention Bureau of the Borough.
§ 233-60 NORWOOD CODE § 233-60
226:626
(g) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure,
including fences, roofs and gutters, shall be maintained in
good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted when
necessary for the purpose of preservation and appearance. The
same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling of paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance to the end that the property itself may be
preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and the adjoining
properties and neighborhood protected from blighting
influences.
(h) Interior walls, ceilings, stairways and entrances shall be free
from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and other hazards to health
and safety.
(i) Where there are holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow, excretions of pets
and other animals on paths, walks, driveways and other parts
of premises which are accessible to and are used by persons on
the premises, all such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions
removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
(j) All parking spaces and fire lanes, parking areas and lines on
pavement shall be painted and maintained so as to be visible at
all times.
§ 233-60 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-60
226:627

ARTICLE XI
Affordable Housing Requirements
[Added by Ord. No. 93-0-22; amended by Ord. No. 94-0-02]
§ 233-61. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide an administrative mechanism
and regulations for assuring the affordability of low- and moderate-income
housing developed for purchase or rental in the Mount Laurel Zone (Article
IX) and the Special Overlay Zone in the LI Zone (Article X), in conformance
with the regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH). These requirements shall apply in all zones where affordable
housing is required by this section or has been developed in accordance
with the revised Settlement Agreement dated October 16, 1985, and the
Order dated March 25, 1986, in the Mount Laurel litigation entitled
Norwood Easthill Associates, et al. v. Borough of Norwood, et al.,
L-24219-83 and consolidated cases.
§ 233-62. Required bedroom distribution.
§ 233-63. Low-income split by unit size.
At each development that includes affordable housing units, at least 50% of
all units in each bedroom distribution type shall be available for low-income
households.
§ 233-64. Affordable housing shelter cost components.
In computing the shelter cost of affordable housing units, only the following
components shall be included:
A. At a minimum, 35% of all affordable housing units in a development
shall have two bedrooms.
B. At a minimum, 15% of all affordable housing units in a development
shall have three bedrooms.
C. No more than 20% of all affordable housing units in a development may
be efficiency units (i.e., a unit with not more than one habitable room
and with kitchen and sanitary facilities).
A. Rental housing: rent, including an allowance for utilities (sewer, water,
electricity and gas) and fees, if any, for parking at least one car.
B. Sales units: the cost of principal, interest, property taxes, homeowner
(fire, theft and liability) insurance, private mortgage insurance, sewer
and water charges and condominium or homeowners' association fees,
if any. Principal and interest shall be determined on the basis of a 10%
down payment and a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage realistically
obtainable from at least two major lenders active in the housing region.
§ 233-61 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-65
226:629
§ 233-65. Maximum monthly shelter costs.
The maximum monthly shelter cost for affordable housing units of the
appropriate unit size for the household size shall be 28% of the household's
gross annual income for sales units and 30% of the household's gross
monthly income for rental units.
§ 233-66. Household size and unit size for determining maximum
rents and sales prices.
Maximum sales prices and maximum rents of affordable housing units
shall be determined on the basis of the following criteria on occupancy of
dwelling units by household size:
§ 233-67. Condominium and homeowner association fees.
Condominium and homeowner association fees shall be fairly assessed
based on the square footage of units for both market-priced and affordable
housing units. The master deed for all affordable housing units developed
as a condominium or cooperative shall specify that all condominium and
homeowner association fees for affordable housing units shall be assessed
at 100% of the rate for market-priced units.
§ 233-68. Age restrictions prohibited.
There shall be no age restrictions upon the occupants of affordable housing,
except for publicly subsidized senior citizen housing.
§ 233-69. Controls on affordability.
A. Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households.
B. One-bedroom units shall be affordable to two-person households.
C. Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person households.
D. Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to five-person households.
E. Four-bedroom units shall be affordable to seven-person households.
A. All conveyances and deeds of affordable housing units shall be subject
to covenants running with the land which control the resale of sales
units, the sublease of sales units, the rerental of rental units, and the
conversion of rental units for a period of not less than 25 years from
either the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the affordable
housing unit or the date of closing and transfer of title for initial
ownership of the unit, whichever is later.
B. The deed restriction shall be approved by the Borough Attorney as to
form and shall follow the standard restrictive covenant and mortgage
lien adopted by COAH (Affordable Housing Agreement, Second
Repayment Mortgage, and Second Mortgage Repayment Note, N.J.A.C.
5:92-12 - APPENDIX), or if amended, as approved by COAH.
§ 233-65 NORWOOD CODE § 233-69
226:630
§ 233-70. Certificate of reoccupancy required.
§ 233-71. Purchase options upon expiration of affordability
controls; seller repayment option.
C. The Borough shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for initial
occupancy of an affordable housing unit unless the Borough Affordable
Housing Board certifies in writing that the unit is to be controlled by a
deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted or approved by COAH.
D. The initial affordability and continuing affordability of all affordable
housing units shall be governed by the COAH Substantive Rules on
Controls on Affordability, N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.
A. A certificate of reoccupancy must be issued by the Borough before the
occupancy of an affordable housing unit resulting from the resale of an
affordable housing unit, and the Borough shall not issue such a
certificate unless there is a written determination by the Borough of
Norwood Affordable Housing Board, established by this article, that the
unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as
adopted or approved by COAH.
B. Purchasers of sales affordable housing units shall execute the deed
restriction prior to issuance of a certificate of reoccupancy regardless
of whether the seller had executed the deed restriction and mortgage
lien adopted or approved by COAH upon acquisition of the property.
C. The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required for sales of the
units for which the affordability controls are allowed to expire or for
which the repayment option is being exercised by the seller of an
affordable housing unit, under COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.3.
A. After expiration of the initial period of controls on affordability
(minimum of 20 years), either the Borough, the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency or a qualified nonprofit organization designated by COAH shall
have, at the time of the first nonexempt sale, a ninety-day option to
purchase an affordable housing unit at the maximum restricted price.
B. A governmental agency that exercises the purchase option may then
either:
(1) Extend further the period of controls on affordability by selling or
renting the unit to another qualified low- or moderate-income
household selected by the Borough of Norwood Affordable Housing
Board established by this article; or
(2) Sell the unit at fair market value and use the permitted proceeds
(difference between the fair market value and the restricted unit
price, after reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid) to
create, rehabilitate or maintain low- and moderate-income housing
in the Borough or housing region.
§ 233-69 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-71
226:631
§ 233-72. Range of affordability for purchased and rental housing.
C. A nonprofit organization that exercises the purchase option shall sell or
rent the affordable unit to a qualified low-or moderate-income
household selected by the Borough of Norwood Affordable Housing
Board.
D. If the option is not exercised by an eligible governmental agency or
nonprofit organization, then the seller may either:
(1) Sell the unit to another low- or moderate-income household at the
controlled unit sales price; or
(2) Exercise the repurchase option and sell the unit to any purchaser at
market value, provided that 95% of the difference between the
controlled unit price and the fair market value, after reasonable
real estate broker fees have been paid, is paid to the Borough
Affordable Housing Board at closing, in order to recapture any
windfall and deposited in the Borough Affordable Housing Trust
Fund. These recaptured funds shall be used for the sole purpose of
creating, rehabilitating or maintaining low- and moderate-income
housing in the Borough and housing region, according to a plan
approved by COAH.
E. The notice and other administrative provisions of COAH regulations,
N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.3 through 5:92-12.9, effective as of the date of the
adoption of this article shall govern this purchase option and repayment
option for affordable units whose period of affordability controls has
expired.
A. The average price or rent of affordable housing units shall be, as best as
practicable, affordable to households at 57 1/2% of the medianhousehold
income.
B. Affordable housing units shall be priced or rented so that for every 20
low- and moderate-income units containing the same number of
bedrooms sold or rented at a development, the units are affordable to
low- and moderate-income households, as best as practicable, in the
nine categories of median-household income, as follows:
Low Income
1 unit at 40% through 42.5% of median income
3 units at 42.6% through 47.5% of median income
6 units at 47.6% through 50% of median income
1 unit at 50.1% through 57.5% of median income
1 unit at 57.6% through 64.5% of median income
1 unit at 64.6% through 68.5% of median income
1 unit at 68.6% through 72.5% of median income
2 units at 72.6% through 77.5% of median income
§ 233-71 NORWOOD CODE § 233-72
226:632
§ 233-73. Annual indexed increases in rents or sales prices.
The price of an owner-occupied affordable housing unit and the rents of
affordable housing units may be increased annually based on the annual
percentage increase in the median household income.
§ 233-74. Affordable Housing Board established.
§ 233-75. Duties of the Affordable Housing Board.
4 units at 77.6% through 80% of median income
A. Members.
(1) There is hereby established the Borough of Norwood Affordable
Housing Board which shall be composed of five members appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council:
(a) One municipal employee.
(b) One member of the Borough Council.
(c) Three 3 citizens of the Borough.
(2) Members shall serve for two-year terms with two of the initial
appointments, as determined by the Mayor, to be for one year.
B. The Mayor shall appoint the Chairperson of the Board from among its
members. The Board shall organize and conduct its activities under the
supervision of the Mayor.
A. The Board shall be the administrative mechanism responsible for
assuring that affordable housing units developed or rehabilitated in the
Borough continue to remain affordable to low- and moderate-income
households, as required by COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.11.
B. The Board shall design and implement an affirmative program to
market the designated affordable housing units to eligible households
in the Borough and its housing region, or the developer of the
affordable housing units may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement
with a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency to perform this
duty.
C. The Board shall issue, on an as-needed basis but at least annually, a call
for applications for prospective purchasers and tenants of affordable
housing in Norwood, particularly for resales and rentals.
D. The Board shall screen and qualify prospective purchasers and tenants
of designated affordable housing units, or the developer of the
affordable housing units may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement
with a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency to perform this
duty.
§ 233-72 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-75
226:633
§ 233-76. Municipal Housing Officer.
The Municipal Housing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall
serve as staff to the Affordable Housing Board. The Municipal Housing
Officer may be a municipal employee or the Borough may enter into an
agreement with a nonprofit organization, governmental agency, consultant
or private entity to assist the Board in the performance of its duties.
§ 233-77. Affirmative marketing program.
E. The Board shall review and comment to the Planning Board on the
Developer's Affordable Housing Plan submitted with an application for
development that provides for affordable housing units.
F. The Board shall enforce the controls on resales and rerentals of
designated affordable housing units.
G. The Board shall, at a minimum, provide an annual written report to the
Mayor, Borough Council and Planning Board on its activities and the
progress and problems, if any, in providing affordable housing and
assuring the continued affordability of this housing. The Board shall
also prepare and submit the reports required by COAH, including the
progress and summary reports on the actual experience of the Board's
affirmative marketing program, as required by N.J.A.C. 5:92-15.2(g) and
(h) and the annual monitoring report on the local housing rehabilitation
program, as required by N.J.A.C. 5:92-17.2.
H. The Board shall meet quarterly and may meet more frequently as
needed. The Chairperson of the Board may call special meetings of the
Board.
I. The Board may adopt its own rules and guidelines, consistent with the
provisions of this article and the regulations adopted by COAH, N.J.A.C.
5:92-1 et seq.
A. The Affordable Housing Board shall provide for the affirmative
marketing of all affordable housing units, or the developer of the
affordable housing units may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement
with a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency to perform this
responsibility by taking all appropriate steps which shall include but
not be limited to:
(1) Identifying representative groups operating in the Borough and its
housing region, including community-based and civic
organizations, councils of religious organizations, welfare and
social service agencies, etc.
(2) Marketing actively the affordable housing units with the assistance
of these representative groups.
(3) Ensuring that low- and moderate-income persons of all races and
ethnic groups are informed of the affordable housing opportunities
§ 233-75 NORWOOD CODE § 233-77
226:634
in the development, feel welcome to buy or rent such housing and
have the opportunity to buy or rent such housing, subject only
to the purchaser and tenant selection procedures defined in this
article.
B. The affirmative marketing program shall include publishing notices and
display advertisements announcing the availability of the designated
affordable housing units in newspapers of general circulation in the
Borough and its housing region. It shall also include preparation and
distribution of appropriate brochures. Notices shall also be published in
newspapers, periodicals and other media aimed at black and Hispanic
populations.
C. The affirmative marketing program shall include advertising and other
outreach activities realistically designed to reach:
(1) Low- and moderate-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
in municipalities in the Borough's housing region that have higher
than statewide average proportions of blacks, Hispanics or lowand
moderate-income households.
(2) Low- and moderate-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
who work in Bergen County but do not live within Bergen County.
D. The affirmative marketing program shall begin at least 90 days before
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy for
an affordable housing unit and shall continue until all affordable
housing units are under contract of sale or lease.
E. The affirmative marketing program shall specify that applications for
affordable housing units be submitted to the Board or to the designated
nonprofit organization or governmental agency responsible for
affirmative marketing for a specific development. The Board shall
promptly transmit copies of any applications it receives to such an
affirmative marketing entity.
F. The Board shall develop and maintain a register of applicants for
purchase or rental of affordable housing in Norwood. At least annually,
the Board shall conduct an affirmative marketing program, as specified
in this article, to establish and update this pool of applicants for
affordable housing units that may become available through initial
sales, initial rentals, resales or rerentals. The Board shall require
annually in writing that applicants file with the Board, by a specified
deadline (at least 30 days from the date of the Board's notice), current
information on gross household income, in order for the Board to
maintain its register of eligible applicants. The Board shall promptly
notify all applicants in writing of their eligibility or ineligibility, with
stated reasons for a finding of ineligibility.
§ 233-77 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-78
226:635
§ 233-78. Occupancy preferences.
Affordable housing units shall be available to all income-eligible households,
without any preference for place of residence or work.
§ 233-79. Purchaser and tenant selection procedures.
§ 233-80. Developer's affordable housing plan.
The developer shall submit to the Planning Board and the Affordable
Housing Board a developer's affordable housing plan that demonstrates
compliance with the affordable housing requirements of this article,
including the affirmative marketing, purchaser and tenant selection
procedures and controls on affordability.
A. The Affordable Housing Board shall screen and determine whether
prospective purchasers and tenants qualify and are eligible for the
designated affordable housing units built in a development within the
Borough, unless the developer of the affordable housing units, at its
discretion, enters into an agreement with a nonprofit organization or a
governmental agency to perform this responsibility. The qualification
criterion shall be gross household income.
B. The Board or an entity performing this task on behalf of a developer
shall also prequalify prospective purchasers of affordable housing units
prior to submission of applications for mortgages and provide credit/
debt counseling as needed.
C. Prospective purchasers and tenants of affordable housing units shall be
selected from the pool of eligible applicants on a random basis, and
applicants shall be matched with available units appropriate to the
household's size and income, within the constraints of the range of
affordability of this article.
D. The Board shall recommend eligible prospective purchasers to the
developer of affordable housing units for purchase, unless the
developer of the affordable housing units, at its discretion, enters into
an agreement with a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency
to perform this responsibility. The Board shall recommend eligible
prospective tenants to the owner-manager of affordable housing units
for rental. In any case, the purchaser and tenant selection mechanism
shall be independent of the developer of sales units or owner of rental
units.
E. A housing applicant who declines three offers to lease or purchase units
appropriate to the applicant's household size and income shall lose all
preference and must submit a new application to the Board to again
become eligible to purchase or lease affordable housing units.
§ 233-78 NORWOOD CODE § 233-81
226:636
§ 233-81. Conversion of rental affordable housing.
Rental affordable housing units may be converted to condominium or
cooperative units for sale after 10 years, but the prices of the converted
units shall be established following the pricing procedures and standards
of this article. Low-income rental units shall be converted to low-income
sales units; moderate-income rental units may be converted to low-income
or moderate-income sales units. Resale restrictions shall apply for at least
a total of 25 years from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy of the
unit or the date of closing and transfer of title for initial ownership of the
unit, whichever is later.
§ 233-82. Procedures for resales.
A. Persons wishing to sell affordable housing units after initial occupancy
and during the period of controls on affordability shall notify the
Borough Affordable Housing Board of the intent to sell and shall offer a
contract of sale to the housing applicant selected by the Board, which
shall follow the purchaser selection procedures of this article.
B. If the housing applicant selected by the Board fails to enter a contract
to purchase the unit at the permitted price within 10 days after being
offered such a contract, then the seller shall request that the Board
select randomly another eligible housing applicant. The seller may not
independently obtain an income-eligible purchaser until the Board has
exhausted its pool of eligible applicants.
C. If no eligible buyer enters a contract of sale within 90 days of notice of
intent to sell, the seller may apply to the Board for a hardship waiver
and the Board shall have the option to purchase the affordable housing
unit for the maximum price permitted based on the percentage increase
in the median household income since the previous transfer of
ownership. If the Board does not sign an agreement to purchase the
unit within 30 days after the ninety-day notice period expires, the seller
may apply to the Board for permission to offer the unit to a nonincome
eligible household at the maximum price permitted. The Board may
transfer this option to the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency or a
qualified nonprofit organization designated by COAH. The seller shall
document efforts to sell the unit to an income eligible household as part
of this application for a hardship waiver. If this request is granted, the
seller may offer a low-income unit to a moderate-income household and
may offer a moderate-income unit to households with incomes in excess
of 80% of the median income. In no case shall the seller be permitted to
receive more than the maximum price permitted. In no case shall a
resale under this section eliminate the resale controls on this unit or
permit any subsequent seller to convey the unit, except in full
compliance with the terms of this article and COAH regulations,
N.J.A.C. 5:92. In all cases, the seller shall file a copy of the contract of
sale with the Board within 10 days of its signing and shall file a copy of
the deed with the Board within 10 days of the closing of title.
§ 233-81 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-83
226:637
§ 233-83. Price increase for eligible capital improvements.
§ 233-84. Transfers of ownership or leases exempt from resales and
rerental procedures.
§ 233-85. Procedures for rerentals.
A. Property owners of single-family, owner-occupied housing may apply to
the Board for permission to increase the maximum resale price to
account for eligible capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall only be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household. In no event shall the maximum price of an improved
affordable housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the larger
household.
B. At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the unit
and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted as to price
(for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher and wallto-
wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale
price. Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the Board at the time of the
signing of the purchase agreement. Only the purchase of central air
conditioning installed after the initial sale of the unit may be made a
condition of the unit resale.
A. Five types of transfers of ownership or leases of an affordable housing
unit shall be exempt from the resales and rerental procedures of this
section:
(1) Transfer between spouses.
(2) Transfer between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of separation or divorce, but excluding transfers to third
parties.
(3) Transfer, upon death of the owner or tenant, to a family member
who had resided in the unit by will or intestate succession.
(4) Transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to any person.
(5) Transfer of ownership by court order, if such order expressly
renders the transfer exempt from these procedures.
B. An exempt transfer of ownership or lease shall not, however, terminate
the resale or rerental restrictions or existing liens on the property for
any future transfers for the full term of the affordability controls.
A. Owners of rental affordable housing units shall promptly notify the
Borough Affordable Housing Board, in writing, of vacancies and
prospective vacancies of designated affordable housing units. The
Board shall then follow the tenant selection procedures of this section,
§ 233-83 NORWOOD CODE § 233-85
226:638
§ 233-86. Reporting requirements for rental affordable units.
§ 233-87. Rental of affordable units purchased and owned by lowand
moderate-income households.
Designated affordable housing units purchased by low- and moderateincome
households may not be rented without the prior written permission
of the Board. Such affordable housing units may only be rented to eligible
low or moderate-income household tenants selected and recommended by
the Board.
§ 233-88. Location and design of affordable housing units.
§ 233-89. Construction phasing of market-priced and affordable
housing units.
select randomly and recommend a qualified prospective tenant to the
owner within 30 days.
B. Owners of low- and moderate-income rental units shall not offer rental
units to nonincome eligible households without prior written approval
of COAH and compliance with the requirements and procedures of the
COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.15(c), effective as of the date of
adoption of this article.
A. The owner of rental affordable housing units shall notify the Borough
Affordable Housing Board of the address of each affordable housing
unit rented and the name of each new tenant within 10 days of making
any lease for a unit.
B. The owner of rental affordable housing units shall file with the Board an
annual report no later than January 15 of each year, listing the following
information for each unit, as of January 1 of such year:
(1) Address of the unit and number of bedrooms.
(2) Name of tenant and household size.
(3) Actual monthly rent, parking fees, if any, and actual, if known, or
estimated average utilities.
A. Affordable housing units shall be located at the same site as marketpriced
units in a development, equally and fairly interspersed
throughout the entire development, not isolated from the market-priced
units in any manner and situated in locations equally accessible to
common open space, recreation and community facilities as marketpriced
units.
B. The exterior design of affordable housing units shall be harmonious in
scale, texture and materials with the market-priced units in a
development and shall minimize any difference in their physical
appearances.
§ 233-85 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-89
226:639
§ 233-89.1. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Added 10-3-2006 by Ord.
No. 06:16]
A. Affordable housing units shall be built in accordance with the following
phasing schedule in developments that combine market-priced and
affordable housing units:
Minimum Percentage of Low
and Moderate Units Completed
Percentage of Market-Priced
Units Completed
0 25%
10 25% + 1 unit
50 50%
75 75%
100 90%
-- 100%
B. A unit is deemed completed when its certificate of occupancy has been
issued.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of Norwood's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair
Housing Act of 1985.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for the Borough to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Borough.
C. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
(1) There is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison for the Borough.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council and may be a full- or part-time municipal
employee.
§ 233-89 NORWOOD CODE § 233-89.1
226:640
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Borough, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(a) Serving as the Borough's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Borough's Fair
Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in the Borough as described in
Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the Mayor and Council, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of
the Borough. If the Borough contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing Plan,
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Mayor and
Council at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison.
(a) Affirmative marketing.
[1] Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with
the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
[2] Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
§ 233-89.1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-89.1
226:641
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/
tenant law.
(b) Household certification.
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
(c) Affordability controls.
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's register of
deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
(d) Resale and rental.
§ 233-89.1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-89.1
226:642
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(e) Processing requests from unit owners.
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(f) Enforcement.
[1] Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowledgement of
the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
§ 233-89.1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-89.1
226:643
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust
fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
[6] Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
[7] Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for
administering such affordability controls; and
[8] Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(g) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
§ 233-89.1 NORWOOD CODE § 233-89.1
226:644
ARTICLE XII
Affordable Housing Development Fees and Trust Fund
[Added by Ord. No. 93-0-22; amended 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08:12;
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17:0374]
§ 233-90. Purpose.
§ 233-91. Basic requirements.
§ 233-92. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project, or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
"FHA"), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject
to the Council on Affordable Housing's ("COAH's") adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7) ("Development Fee Act"), COAH was authorized to
adopt and promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring, and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities, such as the Borough of Norwood, that were or are under
the jurisdiction of COAH, or a court of competent jurisdiction, and that
have approved spending plans, are authorized to retain fees collected
from nonresidential and residential development.
C. This article ratifies and confirms the standards for the collection,
maintenance, and expenditure of development fees in the Borough after
the expiration of the COAH regulations. All fees collected pursuant to
this article will be used only for the purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing or otherwise advancing the Borough's
compliance with its affordable housing obligations.
A. This article is to be effective retroactively to the expiration of the
regulations approved by COAH pursuant to the Development Fee Act
and the FHA.
B. The Borough will continue to spend development fees in accordance
with its approved plan for spending these fees.
74.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it “is intended to be in effect retroactively to
the expiration date of the applicable regulations at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.”
§ 233-90 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-92
226:645
BOROUGH — The Borough of Norwood.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
CONSTRUCTION — New construction and additions, but does not include
alterations, reconstruction, renovations, and repairs as those terms are
defined under the State Uniform Construction Code promulgated pursuant
to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.).
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Funds paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company, or corporation for the improvement of property in the
Borough pursuant to the Development Fee Act, this article, and the FHA.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5,
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety,
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — Any development which includes both
a nonresidential development component and a residential development
component, and shall include developments for which:
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT —
There is a common developer for both the residential development
component and the nonresidential development component, provided
that for purposes of this definition, multiple persons and entities may
be considered a common developer if there is a contractual relationship
among them obligating each entity to develop at least a portion of
the residential or nonresidential development, or both, or otherwise to
contribute resources to the development; and
A.
The residential and nonresidential developments are located on the
same lot or adjoining lots, including but not limited to lots separated by
a street, a river, or another geographical feature.
B.
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, including but not limited
to any appurtenant improvements, which is designated to a use group
other than a residential use group according to the State Uniform
Construction Code promulgated to effectuate the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.),
including any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto;
A.
§ 233-92 NORWOOD CODE § 233-92
226:646
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE — The fee authorized to be
imposed pursuant to the Development Fee Act.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPER — Any person obtaining approval for a
residential development in the Borough.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any development in the Borough that
includes one or more residential dwelling units and that is not a mixed-use
development.
§ 233-93. Residential development fees.
B. Hotels, motels, vacation timeshares, and child-care facilities; and
The entirety of all continuing care facilities within a continuing care
retirement community which is subject to the Continuing Care
Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act, P.L.
1986, c. 103 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.).
C.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the R-40, R-22.5, R-10, R-7.5, and TH Zoning Districts, or in
any other zoning district in which a developer is granted variance
approval under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d for the construction of a
building or buildings, including a residential dwelling or dwellings,
residential developers shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided no increased
density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced with new construction, or is expanded by an addition
to an existing structure, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt
from the development fee requirement.
(4) Fees for the construction of new buildings not existing will be
based on the equalized assessed value of the land and
improvements.
(5) Fees for the construction of additions to existing buildings will be
based on the increase in the equalized assessed value resulting
from the additions.
§ 233-92 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-93
226:647
§ 233-94. Collection procedures for residential development fees.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for
the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions, and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of the Borough's Development Fee
Ordinance on November 5, 2008, will continue to be exempt from
development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial change
in the approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning
and/or building permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or
final site plan approval for this purpose. The fee percentage is
vested on the date that the building permit is issued.
A. Upon the grant of a preliminary, final, or other applicable approval for a
residential development, the approving authority will direct its staff to
notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a residential development that is subject to a
development fee.
C. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the residential development.
D. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy will notify the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property that is
subject to a residential development fee.
E. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the residential development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
§ 233-93 NORWOOD CODE § 233-94
226:648
§ 233-95. Nonresidential development fees.
F. If the Borough fails to determine or notify the residential developer of
the amount of the residential development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the residential developer may
estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent
with the dispute process set forth in Subdivision b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c.
46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
G. Fifty percent of the residential development fee shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the
fee calculated at building permit issuance and that determined at
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy
may be issued until the developer pays the required residential
development fee.
A. In all zoning districts, developers obtaining approval for the
construction of nonresidential developments and mixed-use
developments will pay to the Borough the nonresidential development
fee of 2.5% required by the Development Fee Act.
B. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted by
the Development Fee Act, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the
equalized assessed value of the land and improvements for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted by the Development Fee Act,
shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures
to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time the final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
C. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions, and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate
development will be exempt from the nonresidential development
§ 233-94 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-95
226:649
§ 233-96. Collection procedures for nonresidential development
fees.
fees, but the nonresidential portion is subject to the nonresidential
development fee of 2.5%, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, changes in use within existing
building footprint, reconstruction, renovations, and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property will remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. The Borough's officials, including the Construction Official and
Assessor, will calculate and collect the nonresidential development fee
in accordance with the Development Fee Act.
B. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final, or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit. The developer will also be provided with a copy of
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption," which the developer will complete as per the
instructions provided.
C. The Construction Official shall verify the information submitted by the
nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the Form
N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
D. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 233-95 NORWOOD CODE § 233-96
226:650
§ 233-97. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
E. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
F. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy will notify the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
G. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
H. If the Borough fails to determine or notify the developer of the amount
of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final
inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that
estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth in
Subdivision b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
I. The nonresidential development fee shall be collected before the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy
may be issued until the developer pays the required residential
development fee.
J. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees imposed by
filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending
a review and determination by the Director, which shall be made within
45 days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited
to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby ratified and confirmed a separate, interest-bearing
housing trust fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for
the purpose of depositing residential development fees and
nonresidential development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers in the Borough and the proceeds from the
sales of units with extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
§ 233-96 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-97
226:651
§ 233-98. Use of funds.
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of a
three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank, and
COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).75
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH, or otherwise
consistent with the Borough's affordable housing spending plan and
obligations.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to the Borough's approved
spending plan. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used
for any activity addressing the Borough's fair share obligation and may
be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include,
but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the
purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls,
rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and related
costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential buildings
to create new affordable units, green building strategies designed to be
cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or state
standards, purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of
land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or improvements of
roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial
assistance designed to increase affordability, administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any
other activity as previously permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7
through 5:97-8.976 and specified in the approved spending plan.
75.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 97,
Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period
Beginning June 2, 2008, expired on June 2, 2015. See 43 N.J.R. 1203(a).
§ 233-97 NORWOOD CODE § 233-98
226:652
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough for past housing
activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner shall entitle
the Borough to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.77
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Borough may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.78
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
76.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 97,
Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period
Beginning June 2, 2008, expired on June 2, 2015. See 43 N.J.R. 1203(a).
77.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 96,
Procedural Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period
Beginning on June 2, 2008, expired on June 2, 2015. See 43 N.J.R. 1203(a).
78.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 96,
Procedural Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period
Beginning on June 2, 2008, expired on June 2, 2015. See 43 N.J.R. 1203(a).
§ 233-98 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-98
226:653
§ 233-98.1. Monitoring.
The Borough shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in the annual monitoring report related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, and funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Borough's housing program, as well as to
the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by
COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by
COAH.
objecting to the COAH's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 233-98 NORWOOD CODE § 233-98.1
226:654
ARTICLE XIII
Parks and Public Purposes Zone
§ 233-99. Compliance required.
Within the Parks and Public Purposes Zone (PPP), no premises, lot, building
or structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected
or altered to be used in whole or in part for any other than the following
specified uses.
§ 233-100. Permitted uses.
Public library, public park, public museum, Borough municipal building(s),
public school(s), municipally operated swimming club facilities and
privately operated swimming club facilities, provided that same are
operated by a nonprofit, publicly owned, private membership swimming
club, the majority membership therein being limited to residents of the
Borough and; provided, further, that not more than 40 family memberships
are permitted to nonresidents of the Borough and; provided, further, that
the officers and trustees of the private swim club are limited to residents of
the Borough.
§ 233-100.1. Zoning requirements. [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No.
05:09]
Any privately owned parcel in the Parks and Public Purposes Zone (PPP)
may only be developed with a single-family residential use, and such lot
shall be required to adhere to the bulk and zoning standards consistent with
the parcel's size; provided, however, that if such parcel is contiguous to a
lot within another residential zone, the bulk standards applicable to such
residential zone shall apply.
§ 233-101. Permits.
A. Application for a building permit for the construction of any privately
operated swimming club facility as defined by this article shall be made
directly to the Construction Official of the Borough, on such forms as
shall be supplied by the Borough Clerk for this purpose, which
application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a plot plan, drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, prepared by a licensed
civil engineer and surveyor of the State of New Jersey, which plot plan
shall set forth the proposed location of all facilities, including but not
limited to structures, pools, bathhouses and other appurtenances
thereto pertaining, which the applicant proposes to erect or install upon
the premises shown on the aforesaid plot plan. The plot plan shall also
disclose the location of all parking facilities, fences, screening,
landscaping, sanitary facilities, lighting facilities, showing the manner
in which these facilities shall be constructed and located on the lot. A
copy of the building specifications shall be attached to the plot plan.
§ 233-99 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-101
226:655
§ 233-102. Applicable standards.
In determining whether the application shall be granted, the Mayor and
Council shall consider those factors with regard to the proposed use which
could or may affect the health, welfare and safety of the community and due
consideration to the orderly development of the community so as to provide
adequate provisions for circulation of traffic and services.
§ 233-103. General requirements.
B. The applicant shall also, simultaneously, with the filing of the aforesaid
plot plan and specifications with the Construction Official, forward a
copy thereof to the Borough Engineer and to the Board of Health of the
Borough. The Board of Health shall examine same to ascertain whether
there has been compliance with the applicable sanitary codes of the
Borough. The Borough Engineer shall examine same to ascertain
whether the drainage facilities and other such improvements are in
compliance with Borough requirements. The Board of Health and the
Borough Engineer shall thereafter submit a written report on the
proposed application to the Construction Official within 30 days from
the date of the request thereof.
C. Following the receipt of all the reports mentioned above, the
Construction Official shall make specific findings of fact and report
same to the Borough Council.
D. The Mayor and Council, upon receipt of the report of the Construction
Official, and if all the requirements have been met, shall, by resolution,
approve the application. If approval shall be granted and all other
municipal requirements are complied with, the Mayor and Council shall
instruct the Construction Official to issue a permit for such structures
or use, subject to the requirements of this section.
A. Private swimming club facilities shall be located on a lot having an area
of not less than six acres.
B. There shall be no facilities for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic or
intoxicating liquor or beverages and none shall be dispensed or sold.
C. There shall be a minimum of one off-street parking space for each
member family.
D. The maximum land coverage by all structures, including swimming
pool(s), shall be 20% of the total area of the lot.
E. Where the property in question directly abuts a residential zone, all
structures shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any
neighboring property line, and parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any neighboring property line.
F. Where the property in question does not directly abut a residential
zone, all structures shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
§ 233-101 NORWOOD CODE § 233-103
226:656
§ 233-104. Fees.
The operator of any private swimming club, as defined by this article, shall
be required to pay the same fees for the procurement of a building permit
as is provided in the appropriate ordinance of the Borough and shall, in
addition thereto, pay to the Board of Health of the Borough, an annual
neighboring property line and parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any neighboring property line.
G. There shall be appropriate ingress and egress to the property and to
parking facilities located thereon for both pedestrian and motor vehicle
traffic.
H. The lot shall be appropriately landscaped and there shall be
appropriate screening by the use of landscaping and fencing, so that
the structures and pool(s) on the lot shall not be visible from any public
street.
I. There shall be appropriate lighting provided for the safe operation and
use of parking area and pedestrian walks.
J. Although public-address systems may be employed, their use must be
such that they are not audible from a position off the lot in question, and
the hours of operation of public address systems shall be limited to the
hours of 10:00 am. to 8:00 p.m.
K. The facilities on the lot may be used only between the dates of May 30
to and including September 30 in each year, except upon special
permission of the Mayor and Council following appropriate application
when special permission may be granted for a one-day permission.
L. The sale or dispensing of food shall not be permitted, except upon
special permission granted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough,
upon application, for one day.
M. The hours of operation of the swimming club shall be limited to the
hours of 10:00 am. to 1/2 hour after sunset.
N. The number of persons permitted on the premises at any one time shall
not be greater than one person for each 150 square feet of property
covered by the application, except that special permission to exceed
this limit may be granted by issuance of a one day permit, upon
application to the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
O. The applicant shall comply with all ordinances of the Borough,
including but not limited to the Building Code,79 and those dealing with
health and sanitary matters and shall comply, in addition thereto, with
the provisions of any ordinance regulating the use, construction or
operation of swimming pools within the Borough.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Building Construction.
§ 233-103 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-104
226:657
inspection fee of $100, which shall be used by the Board of Health for the
purpose of defraying the cost of inspecting the premises by the Board of
Health or the Borough Health Officer and/or the Construction Official of the
Borough.
§ 233-105. Abandonment.
In the event the use of the property as applied for hereunder is abandoned,
the applicant and/or owner of the premises shall, within six months
thereafter, cause all structures and facilities to be removed from the
premises and shall cause any tank-type pool or other excavations in the
ground to be filled with clean earth so that the premises will, as nearly
as possible, be restored to its original condition as vacant land. Failure
to operate the bathing facilities for a period of one year shall constitute
abandonment within the meaning of this section, unless the failure results
from action or permission of any lawful governmental authority.
§ 233-104 NORWOOD CODE § 233-105
226:658
ARTICLE XIV
Planned Residential Townhouse Development (TH) Zone
[Amended by Ord. No. 84-0-20]
§ 233-106. Compliance required.
Within the TH Zone, no premises, lot, building or structure shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered to be used in whole
or in part for any other than the following specified purposes.
§ 233-107. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows: One-family attached- and semi-attached
townhouse units.
§ 233-108. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 233-109. Off-street parking required.
At least three off-street parking spaces shall be parked per townhouse
unit on the site. A vehicular garage shall be counted as one such offstreet
parking space. An accessory driveway providing direct access to a
townhouse unit shall be counted as one off-street parking space, provided
that it has a length of at least 20 feet.
§ 233-110. Maximum density.
The maximum density shall not exceed six townhouse units per acre.
§ 233-111. Required yards.
Required perimeter yard space shall be suitably landscaped, except where
penetrated by streets, drives or walkways. Accessory off-street parking shall
not be located closer to any property line than 50 feet.
§ 233-112. Townhouse units per building.
No building shall contain less than three nor more than six attached- or
semi-attached townhouse units.
A. Other accessory buildings customarily incidental to any use permitted
by this article, provided that such accessory building shall be on the
same side with the building to which it is accessory and also, provided
that such accessory building shall not be used for residential purposes.
B. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis courts,
basketball courts, swimming pools, community center buildings, garden
areas, common open space areas, provided that same is owned and
operated as established pursuant to this chapter.
§ 233-106 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-113
226:659
§ 233-113. Space between buildings.
§ 233-114. Space between townhouse units and interior vehicular
circulation facilities.
Each townhouse unit shall be set back at least 20 feet from any common
drive providing vehicular access to such unit and at least 30 feet from the
primary means of vehicular circulation into and through the site.
§ 233-115. Developers and owners maintenance responsibilities.
A. Where a primary wall of a townhouse building (length of a building) is
opposite another primary building, such buildings shall be separated by
at least 40 feet.
B. Where the end wall of a townhouse building abuts the end wall of
another townhouse building, such buildings shall be separated by at
least 20 feet.
C. In any other case such townhouse buildings shall be separated by at
least 20 feet.
A. Wherever in this Zone, a site plan or subdivision is required or
accessory recreational facilities or roadways are proposed, the
developer shall provide an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any open space, accessory recreational facilities and
roadways for the benefit of owners or residents of the development, if
said open space is not dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or
other governmental agency. Such organization shall not be dissolved
and shall not dispose of any open space by sale or otherwise, except to
an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
open space for the benefit of such development, and thereafter such
organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space
without first offering to dedicate the same to the governing body.
B. In the event such organization shall fail to maintain the open space in
reasonable order and condition, the Chief Building Official may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Chief Building Official may modify the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of
time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they may be cured. If the
deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof
shall not be cured within said 35 days or any permitted extension
thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve the open space and maintain
the same for a period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such
land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights
§ 233-113 NORWOOD CODE § 233-115
226:660
to use the open space, except when the same is voluntarily dedicated
to the public by the owners. Before the expiration of said year, the
governing body shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the open
space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and the owners of the development to be held by the
governing body, at which hearing such organization and the owners
of the development shall show cause why such maintenance by the
Borough shall not, at the election of the Borough, continue for a
succeeding year. If the governing body shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in
reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to maintain said open
space at the end of said year. If the governing body shall determine
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space
during the next succeeding year, it may enter upon and maintain such
land subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the governing body in any case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
C. The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed value at the
time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien and a tax on said
properties and added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
D. No certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy will
be applied for or issued by the Borough unless and until all proposed
accessory recreational facilities, such as but not limited to tennis courts
and swimming pools are completed and certified operational by the
Chief Construction Official of the Borough.
§ 233-115 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-115
226:661

ARTICLE XV
Senior Housing Zone
[Amended by Ord. No. 96-0-20]
§ 233-116. Compliance required.
Within the SH Zone, no premises, lot, building or structure shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered to be used in whole
or in part for any other use, except the following specified purposes.
§ 233-117. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement the Land Use Plan element of
the Master Plan Reexamination by establishing a Senior Citizen Housing
Overlay Zone (SH) for the development of senior citizen housing on Borough
owned land leased to a nonprofit housing developer. The purpose of this
article is to constitute the reasons for any possible deviation from the land
use element of the Master Plan of the Borough of Norwood in accordance
with N.J.S.A, 40:55D-62a.
§ 233-118. Permitted uses.
Multifamily apartment, townhouse or condominium developments for senior
citizen housing shall be permitted in the SH Zone in accordance with the
requirements of this article. The SH Zone shall be defined by the metes and
bounds description set forth in § 233-5.
§ 233-119. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Housing built or to be built on Borough
property that is leased to nonprofit entity subject to the terms of the lease
from the Borough.
§ 233-120. Permitted development.
A. Development under the terms of this article shall be permitted in the
SH Zone, except:
(1) In areas where residential development is prohibited by state or
federal law.
(2) In areas where residential development would create a significant
danger to public health or safety which cannot reasonably be
substantially ameliorated by actions of the developer.
B. Nothing in this article shall limit the discretion of an municipal agency
to require the reasonable steps to be taken to ameliorate problems of
drainage, soil erosion or other substantial environmental problems that
may be caused by development under the terms of this article.
§ 233-116 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-120
226:663
§ 233-121. Design standards. [Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
16:21]
C. Land which may not be developed under this article may be included in
a development under the terms of this article for purposes of
calculating lot coverage, gross density, open space and setbacks.
[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
A. The following design standards shall apply to the SH Zone:
Minimum lot size 4 acres
Maximum gross density (Dwelling
units/acre)
17 units/acre
Front setback requirements (feet) 5
Rear setback requirements (feet) 20
Side yard setback (feet) 10
Lot coverage 40 percent
Maximum building height 4 stories
Usable open space 20 percent
B. Recreation. Multifamily developments in the SH Zone shall provide
space in usable configuration for recreation which is appropriate for
that development, distributed throughout the development so as to be
convenient to residents.
C. Off-street parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows for apartments or
condominiums for each unit: one space, plus an additional 10% of
the per-unit requirement for visitors' parking.
(2) Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet.
D. Streets.
(1) Paved widths of minor streets:
(a) Twenty-four feet for two lanes and ninety-degree parking on
two sides.
(b) Twenty-two feet for two lanes and parallel parking on one side.
(2) Curbs shall be provided as follows: A straight, battered curb of
asphalt shall be provided.
(3) Road gradients shall not be less than 0.5% for any road. The
maximum gradient shall be 15% for minor streets and 10% for
collector streets.
§ 233-120 NORWOOD CODE § 233-121
226:664
§ 233-122. Additional zoning standards for the SH Zone.
§ 233-123. Municipal cooperation.
The municipality shall take all reasonable steps to foster development of the
units in the SH Zone, including but not limited to:
(4) Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 1,000 feet. The paved right-ofway
of a cul-de-sac turnaround shall be at least 80 feet in diameter
and the right-of-way radius shall not be less than 50 feet.
A. No apartment or condominium unit may have, as residents, more than
four persons per unit.
B. There shall be no minimum requirements for dwelling unit sizes or
occupancy-based size requirements, other than contained in the State
Housing Code and Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law.
C. There shall be no requirements concerning:
(1) Architectural uniformity.
(2) Facade materials or color type.
(3) Maximum building lengths or staggering of units.
(4) Mandatory storage areas.
(5) Enclosed garages.
(6) Varied building heights or uniform rooflines.
(7) Separate entrances.
A. Providing for expedited disposition of site plan applications and
municipal approvals by the developer.
B. Cooperation with the developer in securing sewage and water
connections.
C. Waiver of the following fees for senior citizen housing developments:
(1) Subdivision and site plan application fees in the development.
(2) Building permit fees, except state fees.
(3) Certificate of occupancy fees.
§ 233-121 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123
226:665

ARTICLE XVI
Uses Permitted in Accordance with State Law
[Added 9-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98:09]
§ 233-123.1. Residential zones.
§ 233-123.2. Nonresidential zones.
Child-care centers for which, upon completion, a license is required from
the Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-1 et seq.), shall be a permitted use in all nonresidential districts. The
floor area occupied in any building or structure as a child-care center shall
be excluded in calculating: any parking requirement otherwise applicable to
that number of units or amount of floor space, as appropriate, under state
or local laws or regulations adopted thereunder; and the permitted density
allowable for that building or structure under any applicable provision of
this chapter, all as mandated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6
A. The following group homes, community residences and child-care
facilities shall be permitted uses in all residential zones as required by
state law:
(1) Group Homes for no more than 12 children shall be permitted in all
residential zones as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66c.
(2) Licensed community residences for no more than 15
developmentally disabled persons, state-approved community
shelters for no more than 15 victims of domestic violence,
community residences for no more than 15 terminally ill persons
and community residences for no more than 15 persons with head
injuries shall be permitted uses in all residential zones as required
by and defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
(3) Family day-care homes are defined by and subject to the terms of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5a and 40:55D-66.5b shall be permitted uses in
all residential zones.
B. Permitted uses in all residential zones shall include the rental or leasing
of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by a
senior citizen, as long as the senior citizen owns and also occupies the
single-family dwelling. For the purposes of this section, "senior citizen"
means any person who has attained the age of 62 or the spouse or
surviving spouse of a senior citizen if the surviving spouse is 55 years of
age or older, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.4 to 40:55D-68.6.
§ 233-123.1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.2
226:667

ARTICLE XVIA
Soil Movement
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:19]
§ 233-123.3. Purpose and findings.
The purpose of this article is to prevent the unregulated and uncontrolled
relocation, filling, excavation, and removal of soil by any person, which
may result in conditions that are detrimental to the public safety, health,
and general welfare, substantially hampering and deterring the efforts
of the Borough to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
The continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling,
excavation, and removal of soil, and filling with unsuitable material, may
cause serious and irreparable damage to the public welfare by causing
soil erosion by water and wind; inadequate and improper surface water
drainage; decrease in or destruction of the fertility of soil; removal of lateral
support of abutting streets, lands and premises; creation of dust storms
and mosquito breeding places; creation of dangerous depressions or pits;
deterioration of property values; rendering of lands unfit or unsuitable to
their most appropriate uses; and the creation of other factors and elements
hampering and deterring the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
physical development of the Borough.
§ 233-123.4. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms will have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Norwood Planning Board or the Norwood Zoning Board of
Adjustment having jurisdiction over a development application requiring a
major soil moving permit.
LOT — Any parcel of land, or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either, in the
office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the Bergen
County Clerk. For the purposes of this article, a lot includes any contiguous
parcels of land under common ownership that can be ascertained by
reference to the maps and records, or either, in the office of the Tax
Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the Bergen County Clerk.
MAJOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — Any soil moving permit other than a
minor soil moving permit as herein defined.
MINOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the movement of soil
between 15 cubic yards and 500 cubic yards. Further, on a certified
application to the Building Department, the Construction Official may grant
a waiver for the movement of any amount of soil less than 15 cubic yards
if any soil being brought to the site is clean and is being furnished by
an individual or company that regularly deals in the provision of soil and
can provide a certification that the material meets NJDEP standards for
the application. The Borough Engineer or Construction Official also may
waive the permit requirements if less than 15 cubic yards will be disturbed
§ 233-123.3 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.4
226:669
in the building or demolition of any structure and the Borough Engineer
or Construction Official determines that this disturbance will not create
drainage or grade deterioration.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade,
level, transport, or otherwise alter or change the location or contours.
This term does not include plowing, spading, cultivating, harrowing of
soil, or any other operation usually and ordinarily associated with the
tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes, landscaping, and
gardening by homeowners or agents of homeowners, provided that it does
not substantially alter existing drainage patterns.
OWNER — Any person owning any lot or having another interest therein
permitting the exercise of effective possession thereof, including contract
purchasers of any lot.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock, or similar matter,
including any synthetic substance used as a substitute for or in conjunction
with soil.
SOIL — Earth, sand, clay, lawn, gravel, humus, rock, or dirt, without regard
to the presence or absence therein of organic matter, including any
synthetic substance used as a substitute or in conjunction with soil.
SOIL MOVEMENT — The total combined volume of any soil removed and
disposed of off-site; imported to the site from an off-site source, including
topsoil, and redistributed within the site. This volume excludes soil
excavation within the building footprint, provided the soil is either removed
and disposed of off-site or redistributed on site to not raise the elevation of
the site by more than 12 inches in any location and the Borough Engineer
or Construction Official determines this disturbance does not adversely
affect grading, drainage, or environmentally sensitive areas.[Amended
12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:24]
SUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer will determine whether the fill is
suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. Suitable materials include
but are not limited to earth, clay, gravel, stone, dirt, etc.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
UNSUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer will determine whether the
fill is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. Unsuitable materials
include, but are not limited to peat moss, organic material vegetation,
leaves, tree stumps, wood chips, sawdust, chemical waste, tires, wooden
logs, etc.
§ 233-123.5. Permit required.
A. No person may move, cause, allow, or permit to be moved any soil in or
upon any lot in the Borough unless and until application has been made
for a soil moving permit and the permit has been issued in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 233-123.4 NORWOOD CODE § 233-123.5
226:670
§ 233-123.6. Minor soil moving permits.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a minor soil moving permit
is as follows:
B. All applicants for minor or major site plan approval and minor or major
subdivision approval in the Borough must comply with and be subject to
this article.
C. An application for soil movement from within the Borough or from
outside of the Borough to a site in Norwood will be preceded by a
certified analysis of the material by a laboratory licensed in the State of
New Jersey and on an approved laboratory list to be maintained by the
Borough's construction office. The testing laboratory will also certify
that the laboratory, its employees or agents physically went to the
source site and took samples themselves for testing. The number and
amount of samplings taken, as well as the designated location from
where they are taken, will be subject to the review and supervision of
the Borough Engineer.
D. All testing will be performed and analyzed under the Priority pollutant
+ 40 analysis reduced deliverable and will include testing for the
following:
(1) Volatiles organics.
(2) Base neutrals and acid extractables (petroleum products).
(3) Pesticides and PCBs.
(4) Cyanide and phenols.
(5) Metals: antimony, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chrome, copper,
lead, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver, thallium, and zinc.
E. Once the certified testing laboratory indicates that the above tests were
positive and do not exceed the NJDEP maximum limits, an applicant
may make application for the movement of soil as outlined above.
F. This provision applies to both minor and major soil moving permits.
A. Applications for minor soil moving permits will be filed with the
Borough Clerk and will be accompanied by the fee prescribed herein.
Applications will be made in duplicate and will be forwarded, upon
receipt by the Borough Clerk, to the Borough Engineer for his or her
review and approval. The application will include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The lot and block numbers of the subject property, including a
street address.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the subject property.
§ 233-123.5 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.6
226:671
§ 233-123.7. Major soil moving permits.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a major soil moving permit
is as follows:
(4) The purpose or reason for the moving of the soil.
(5) The estimated quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved, including
the volume of import, volume of export, and volume of soil moved
within the site.
(6) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
(7) An impact statement regarding the effects that the proposed
movement of soil will have on drainage and erosion.
(8) Provide length, width, and depth dimensions for each area of
excavation in feet.
B. The Borough Engineer, upon receipt of the application, will make a field
investigation and will issue or deny the permit, giving his or her reasons
for any denial in writing. The Borough Engineer will forward a copy of
the approval letter to the Construction Department, Borough Clerk, the
applicant, and will retain one copy on file. The Borough Engineer will
classify any minor soil moving application as a major soil application if
he or she determines that the application poses a substantial drainage
or soil erosion problem or adversely affects the development of the
abutting lot or lots. This determination will require the applicant to
comply with all provisions governing major soil moving permits.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the Borough Engineer may, in his or her
discretion, require other data pertinent to the application.
D. No stormwater improvements are required if:
(1) No substantial change to grading within building setbacks is
proposed.
(2) All runoff is directed to the interior of the site.
(3) All roof runoff is captured by leaders.
(4) Improved lot coverage increases 500 square feet or less.
E. If stormwater improvements are required, the applicant will:
(1) Construct an on-site stormwater management system to
accommodate two inches of runoff for the area of the proposed
improvements.
(2) Ensure that no increase in runoff occurs on any adjoining property.
§ 233-123.6 NORWOOD CODE § 233-123.7
226:672
A. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Board, the applicant will set
forth, in duplicate to the Board, with a copy to the Borough Engineer
and Construction Department:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The lot and block numbers of the subject property, including street
address.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the subject property.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it will be
done in connection with a proposed subdivision or site plan; if so,
the date the application for subdivision/site plan was made with the
Board.
(5) A detailed statement of the method or process to be employed for
the proposed soil movement.
(6) The proposed hours and time periods encompassing the soil
movement.
(7) The type and quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be moved.
(8) In the case of removal or replacement of soil, the place to which the
soil is to be removed, the quantity of soil to be removed or filled
within and the proposed transportation route to be used within the
Borough.
(9) A signed affidavit by the applicant that he has placed or caused to
be placed stakes at each corner of the subject premises, and that he
has placed or caused to be placed grade stakes at the existing
elevation points designated on the required topographical map
clearly marked to indicate proposed soil cuts or fill.
(10) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
B. Signatures. Applications will be signed by the applicant and the owner
of the subject property indicating the owner's consent to the proposed
soil movement.
C. Topographical map. Applications will be accompanied by eight prints of
a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soil moving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands within 100
feet of the perimeter of the lot, but not beyond the far side of an
abutting street right-of-way, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor of the State of New Jersey. The
map will be prepared on a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet,
will refer to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey data, and will
show:
§ 233-123.7 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.7
226:673
§ 233-123.8. Fees.
All of the following fees will be paid to the Municipal Clerk.
(1) The dimensions of the lot, including distance and bearings, lot and
block number of the lot and each lot in the surrounding lands
within 100 feet.
(2) The existing elevations of all lands on a one-hundred-foot grid
layout.
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water, and natural or artificial watercourses.
(4) All existing surface and subsurface water drainage conditions.
(5) All wooded areas with references to all trees having a diameter of
six inches or more at the base.
(6) The limits of the area or areas within the lot in question within
which the soil moving operations are to be conducted, with the
existing elevations within these limits at intervals of not more than
100 feet.
(7) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations are to be altered.
(8) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the soil moving
area.
(9) Proposed provisions and facilities for surface water drainage and,
where applicable, channels of any streams, natural or artificial
bodies of water and watercourses, including detailed cross sections
showing proposed channel widths, bank slopes, grade, and method
of erosion control.
A. Application fee.
(1) Minor soil moving application fee, 15 cubic yards to 500 cubic
yards: $50. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:24]
(2) Major soil moving application fee, over 500 cubic yards: $100.
[Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:24]
(3) The application fee will be nonrefundable, whether a permit is
issued, denied or withdrawn.
B. Professional escrow fees.
(1) Minor soil moving escrow fee is $500, but if review for stormwater
management improvements are necessary, an additional $500
escrow is required.
(2) Major soil moving escrow fee: $1,000.
§ 233-123.7 NORWOOD CODE § 233-123.9
226:674
§ 233-123.9. Escrow for site plan review and drainage.
Whenever application is made to construct or reconstruct a building or
structure within the Borough, and the Building Inspector determines that
the grade and drainage are in apparent need of review by the Borough
Engineer, then $500 will be held in escrow for engineering review of the
proposed building or property alteration. In addition, any time a request
for a permit for demolition of a housing or commercial structure is made,
and applicant does not wish to sign a waiver for future building, then the
applicant will post an escrow with the Borough in the amount of $200 for
engineering review to determine if a structure may be rebuilt upon the lot
after demolition.
§ 233-123.10. Notice to abutting owners.
Upon receipt of the application, the Board will set a time and place for
a hearing and will notify the applicant. The time fixed will not be less
than 15 days after the notice is given to the applicant. The notice will be
accompanied by a copy of a form letter, which the applicant must serve
upon all property owners within 200 feet of the property to be affected by
the application. Notice will be given either personally or by leaving a copy
at the property owner's usual place of abode. If the property owners are
nonresidents of the Borough, notice may be given by sending a copy of the
form letter via registered mail to the last known address of the property
owner as shown on the most recent tax list of the Borough. The applicant
will present proof to the Board at the hearing by affidavit or otherwise that
notice has been given to each of the property owners entitled to receive
notice.
§ 233-123.11. Consideration of application.
A. In considering the application, the Board will be guided by the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and land.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Any factor that is relevant to the coordinated, adjusted, and
harmonious development of the Borough.
B. The Board may require an agreement with the applicant concerning any
or all of the above factors. If, after considering the above factors, the
Board determines that the proposed soil removal will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the Borough or its
inhabitants, it will issue the necessary permit. Otherwise it will deny
§ 233-123.9 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.11
226:675
§ 233-123.12. Payment of taxes; performance bond requirements.
the application and notify the applicant. Notice of the grant or denial of
the application will be given to the applicant within a reasonable time
after the application is filed.
A. Approval of a soil movement permit will not be given until the applicant
has submitted proof that there are no taxes or assessments for local
improvements due or delinquent on any property involved in the soil
moving operation.
B. Before any permit is issued, the applicant will file with the Borough
Clerk a bond executed by the applicant as principal and a surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety.
C. The amount of the bond will be determined at the rate of not less than
$0.10 per cubic yard and not in excess of $0.50 per cubic yard of the
amount of soil to be moved; provided, however, that no bond may be
less than the principal amount of $2,000. The Board or the Borough
Engineer may request additional bonds for improvements shown on the
soil moving application or plan, such as, but not limited to, the
following: retaining walls, planting, drainage, erosion, control damages
to hauling route, etc. In ascertaining the rate upon which to compute
the amount of the bond, the Board or the Borough Engineer will take
into consideration such factors as may bear upon the facility with which
the proposed work may be performed, including but not limited to the
type and character of soil; the extent of the area over which the soil
moving operations are to be conducted; the extent and depth of the
various cuts and fills; the extent to which the area of operations is
wooded; the proximity of the proposed operations to streets, buildings,
structures, natural or artificial streams or watercourses, and general
drainage conditions.
D. Failure to post the required bond will result in a rescission of any
conditional or unconditional approval or permit.
E. If a modification or amendment is sought to an approved soil moving
permit, for which a performance bond has been posted, the applicant
will first submit written consent of the surety on this bond to the Board.
This consent will evidence the surety's approval of the proposed
modification or amendments.
F. An application for release of a performance bond will be accompanied
by an affidavit stating that the soil moving operation has been
completed in accordance with the application and all plans, maps, and
other data filed therewith, and in accordance with all resolutions and
conditions adopted by the Board.
§ 233-123.11 NORWOOD CODE § 233-123.13
226:676
§ 233-123.13. Regulations.
Soil removal conducted under a permit issued under this chapter will be in
accordance with the following regulations:
§ 233-123.14. Topsoil restrictions.
A. Operations will be so conducted that there will not be created any sharp
declivities, pits, or depressions.
B. Land will be graded so as to conform to the approved contour lines and
grades and will be cleared of debris.
C. The top layer of soil to a depth of six inches may not be removed from
the premises but will be set aside and respread over the premises when
the remainder of the soil has been removed.
D. Adequate measures must be taken to prevent erosion or the depositing
of soil upon surrounding lands, streets or municipal facilities.
A. Whenever any person moves topsoil in or upon any lot, provision will be
made for the storage of this topsoil within the boundary lines of the lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored will be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit so that the final
grade or grades of the replaced topsoil will be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No person may remove to any point beyond the boundary lines of the lot
any topsoil unless and until topsoil not inferior in quality to that to be
removed is replaced uniformly to a depth of not less than six inches,
measured from the proposed final grades as shown on the
topographical map, over the entire area of the lot, excepting only the
portions thereof that have become, since the date of filing of the
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
street pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway, or other paved area, or by
any body of water or waterway. No person may remove from the lot
more topsoil than that comprising the surplus or excess remaining after
the replacement of the topsoil as aforesaid.
§ 233-123.13 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-123.14
226:677

ARTICLE XVII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 233-124. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing on September 6, 1960, may be continued although such
use or building does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter
for the zone in which such land or building is located; provided, however,
that no nonconforming use shall be expanded.
§ 233-125. Abandonment. [Amended 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15:14]
A nonconforming use may not be continued if it is abandoned by the owner.
The use of the abandoned building structure, or land will be in conformity
with this chapter after the nonconforming use is abandoned.
§ 233-126. Restoration.
§ 233-127. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again into a nonconforming use.
§ 233-128. Exemptions and limitations; transition zoning.
[Amended by Ord. No. 94-0-08]
A. Any nonconforming building or structure, or a building or structure
containing a nonconforming use, which has been condemned or totally
destroyed may be rebuilt and used to the original specifications only
upon approval of a variance as provided by the Municipal Land Use
Law.80 A nonconforming building or structure, or a building or structure
containing a nonconforming use, which has not been substantially
totally destroyed may be rebuilt and used for the same purpose as
before, provided that it does not exceed the height, area, and other bulk
standards of the original building or structure and does not otherwise
increase the intensity of the nonconformity. [Amended 9-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 15:14]
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition any wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by
the Construction Official.
A. The following exceptions are permitted under the terms herein with
respect to any use in any zone which is determined to be
nonconforming according to the standards and requirements set forth
in this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 233-124 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-128
226:679
§ 233-129. Certificate of nonconforming use. [Amended 9-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 15:14]
B. A nonconforming building or use may be permitted to alter, enlarge,
remodel any existing building, provided that:
(1) There is in no way a further encroachment on or decrease of any
yard distances between the building or use and any adjacent
residential zone.
(2) All yard, area and other requirements shall be the same as required
if the building or use were located in the proper zone.
(3) That no such nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a
conforming use.
A. The owner, prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other
person interested in the land on which a nonconforming use exists may,
within one year of the adoption of an ordinance that rendered the use or
structure nonconforming, apply to the Zoning Officer for a certificate
certifying that the use or structure existed before the adoption of that
ordinance. The applicant will have the burden of proof and will pay the
fees authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 and N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15.
Certificate denials by the Zoning Officer may be appealed to the Board
of Adjustment.
B. In accordance with the provisions of this article, no use of land or
buildings shall be made other than that specified on the certificate of
nonconforming use unless said use shall thereby be changed to
conforming.
§ 233-128 NORWOOD CODE § 233-129
226:680
ARTICLE XVIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 233-130. Enforcement by Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction Official
who shall also be known as the Zoning Officer. In no case shall a permit
be granted for the construction or alteration of any building where the
proposed construction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any
provision of this chapter. A building permit issued contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall be void. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official
and his duly authorized assistants to cause any building, plans or premises
to be inspected or examined and to order in writing the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter, and he
shall have the right to enter any building or premises during the daytime in
the course of his duties.
§ 233-131. Filing plans.
All applications for building permits shall be made in the manner prescribed
in the Building Code and filed with the Construction Official prior to the
issuance of the building permit.
§ 233-132. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a record of all
applications for permits and a record of all permits issued, with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall be responsible for the filing and
safekeeping of copies of all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part
of the records of his office and shall be available for the use of the Borough
Council and of other officials of the Borough.
§ 233-133. Special permits.
A. An application for any special permit specified in this chapter shall be
made to the Board of Adjustment, which shall refer the matter to the
Planning Board for report thereon as to its effect on the comprehensive
planning of the Borough. The Board of Adjustment may thereafter
instruct the Construction Official that a permit be granted, if in its
judgment any one of such cases will not be detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of the Borough and is deemed necessary for
its convenience.
B. In approving any such application, the Board of Adjustment may impose
any conditions that it deems necessary to accomplish the reasonable
application of applicable standards as provided in the appropriate
sections of this chapter and may deny any such application, but only in
accordance with the standards.
C. A special permit or variance granted by the Board of Adjustment or by
the Mayor and Council, after a favorable recommendation by the Board
§ 233-130 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-133
226:681
§ 233-134. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
the provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare and shall be
applicable to all zones within the Borough. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 233-134.1. Certificate of zoning compliance. [Added 12-13-2017
by Ord. No. 17:15]
of Adjustment shall automatically terminate and become null and void
two years from the date of the adoption of the resolution of the Board
of Adjustment or the Mayor and Council granting same in the event
no substantial construction, alteration or conversion is commenced
thereunder.
A. When required. A certificate of zoning compliance is required to be
issued by the Zoning Officer before a change in occupancy of any
premises in the Borough:
(1) Whenever a certificate of occupancy is required;
(2) Upon the change of tenancy or change of ownership and occupancy
of any residential property, whether or not the property is
designated as a one- or two- or multifamily dwelling in the
Borough's tax collection records or the Borough's tax assessment
records; and
(3) Upon a change of tenancy or change of ownership and occupancy
of any commercial or business premises in the Borough, whether or
not so designated in the Borough's tax collection records or tax
assessment records.
B. On-site inspection. The Zoning Officer or his/her designated
subordinate may issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance only
after completing an on-site inspection.
C. Fee. The fee for a certificate of zoning compliance on-site inspection is
$50, and the fee for reinspection, if necessary, is $25.
D. Standards. The Zoning Officer will issue a certificate of zoning
compliance if he/she finds that: 1) the uses and structures on the
property are permitted by this Code; or 2) any uses or structures that
are not permitted by this Code are either: i) existing legal
nonconforming uses or structures, ii) existing uses or structures that
are permitted by variances, or iii) uses or structures that are otherwise
permitted by law.
§ 233-133 NORWOOD CODE § 233-134.1
226:682
E. Issuance of certificate. The Zoning Officer, upon issuing a certificate of
zoning compliance, will provide the applicant with a copy of the
certificate, and, upon denying a certificate of zoning compliance, will
provide the applicant with a statement of reasons for the denial. The
Zoning Officer also will provide copies of all certificates or denials to
the office of the Tax Assessor, and will file the original certificates and
denials with the Construction Code Official for retention in the
permanent Construction Office file relating to the subject premises.
Additional copies of certificates of zoning compliance will be made
available for a fee of $10 each.
§ 233-134.1 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-134.1
226:683

ARTICLE XIX
Planning Board Checklists
[Added 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02:11]
§ 233-135. Checklists for site plan, subdivision, and variance
applications. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:26]
Application checklists for applications for site plan, minor subdivision,
major subdivision, and variance approvals are set forth in full on the
schedules attached to and made a part of this Code. These checklists have
been published in summary form by reference and are incorporated herein
as if set forth at length.81
81.Editor's Note: Said checklists are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 233-135 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-135
226:685

ARTICLE XX
Penalties
[Added 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07:03]
§ 233-136. Maximum fines and penalties.
A. Any person who is convicted for a violation of any provision of this
chapter of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough relating to
zoning, land use, or planning for which no penalty is specified shall be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000,
imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, unless a different penalty is
stated in the Code chapter hereof or the ordinance.
B. Any person who is convicted for a violation of any housing or zoning
provision of this Code who shall be the subject of a fine on an amount
that is greater than $1,250 shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or
abate the condition within 30 days and shall be afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before the court for an independent determination
concerning the violation. After the thirty-day period, the court may
impose a fine greater than $1,250 if the court determines that the cure
or abatement of the violation has not been substantially completed.
C. A separate offense or violation shall be deemed to be committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
§ 233-136 VEHICLES, OPERATION OF § 233-136
226:687
Part IV: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 234
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 233-136 NORWOOD CODE § 233-136
234:688
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[An ordinance adopting Part IV of the Code of the Borough of
Norwood and making certain substantive changes to existing
ordinances of the borough is presently proposed before the Board
of Health. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as Article I
of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-136
234:689
Chapter 236
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 85.
§ 233-136 NORWOOD CODE § 233-136
234:690
ARTICLE I
Fowl, Livestock and Hoofed Animals
[Adopted 1-23-1967]
§ 236-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep or allow to be kept in any building
or enclosure or on any premises in the Borough of Norwood, of which he
or they may be the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, any live fowl or other
livestock, or any hoofed animal or animals, without a permit from the Board
of Health. No permit will be granted to keep live fowl or other livestock, or
any hoofed animal or animals, within 300 feet of any dwelling house located
on the licensed premises, nor within 400 feet of any adjoining dwelling
house, school or church, whether the same be occupied or not, nor within
300 feet of any part or property line on all sides.
§ 236-2. Expiration and fee.
Such permit shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. The fee
for this permit shall be $5 per year.
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-2
234:691

ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 9-12-2011 by BH 11:01]
§ 236-3. Keeping of dogs and cats as pets.
No household in the Borough shall own, keep, or harbor more than a total
of six dogs, six cats, or any combination of dogs and cats in excess of six
animals in total. A household may own, keep, and harbor both dogs and
cats, as long as the total number of dogs and cats does not exceed six.
Any household having more than the permitted number of dogs and cats
licensed in the Borough when this article takes effect may continue to own,
keep, harbor, and relicense these animals, provided the owner has complied
with all other relevant ordinances of the Borough and the Board of Health.
When a dog or cat dies, or is given away or sold, it may not be replaced if
the household in which the dog or cat was owned, kept, or harbored at that
time is in excess of the permitted number of dogs, cats, or dogs and cats
combined per household.
§ 236-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-3
234:693
Chapter 237
BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SHOPS AND NAIL SALONS
§ 237-1. Purpose.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Norwood hereby provides for the
protection of the public by controlling the sanitary practices and licensing
at places of cosmetology, barbering, hair and nail styling.
§ 237-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER — Any person who is licensed to engage in any of the practices
encompassed in barbering.
BARBERING — Any one or combination of the following practices when
done on the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment
of disease or physical or mental ailments and when done for payment either
directly or indirectly or when done without payment for the general public:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering
for the public.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Norwood Board of Health and/or any Regional
Board of Health of which Norwood is a member.
DESIGNEE — Any person designated by the Health Officer to act for him/
her in the performance of his/her duties.
DISINFECTANT — An Environmental. Protection Agency (EPA) or New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection registered product with
demonstrated bacterial, virucidal and fungicidal activity used in accordance
with manufacturer's instruction.
HAIRDRESSER/COSMETICIAN or COSMETOLOGIST/HAIRSTYLIST — Any
person who is licensed to engage in the practices encompassed in
cosmetology and hairstyling.
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair;
B. Shampooing, cutting, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair;
C. Singeing or dyeing the hair;
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams
to the hair, scalp, face or neck;
D.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp with or
without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical
appliances, or the cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or
wigs to the extent that the services are performed while the wig is
being worn by a customer.
E.
§ 236-3 NORWOOD CODE § 237-2
237:694
HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY — Any one or combination of the
practices as outlined in N.J.S.A. 45:5B-3(j) when done on the human body
for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease or physical or
mental ailments and when done for payment either directly or indirectly or
when done without payment for the general public.
HAIRDRESSING OR COSMETOLOGY SALON/SHOP — Any establishment
engaged in the practice of hairdressing, cosmetology, or barbering for the
public.
NAIL SALON/SHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of
cutting, shaping, polishing or enhancing the appearance of nails of the
hands or feet, including but not limited to the application and removal of
sculptured or artificial nails.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands or feet,
including. but not limited to the application and removal of sculptured or
artificial nails.
OPERATOR — A person who owns, leases, or manages a salon/shop, or
any licensed person performing barbering, hairdressing, cosmetology or
manicuring.
OWNER — A person who owns a salon/shop establishment and is
responsible for upholding the regulations of this chapter in all areas of the
establishment.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, limited-liability partnership,
company, limited-liability company, corporation, trustee, association or any
public or private entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present in the barbershop or
hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop who is the
apparent supervisor of the barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology
salon/shop or nail salon/shop at the time of inspection. If no individual
claims to be a supervisor, then any employee present is deemed to be the
person in charge for the purposes of this chapter.
SANITARY CONDITIONS — Safe and clean salon/shop conditions that
prevent the spread of communicable diseases and protect the public health
and welfare as defined in Chapter XII of the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
WORKING AREA — A separate room with more than one workstation, or a
private room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
§ 237-3. License and operation requirements.
A. It shall be illegal for any person to open and/or operate a cosmetology
shop and/or nail salon or any facility using barber and/or beauty shop,
cosmetology, hair styling and/or nail salon equipment without first
§ 237-2 BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SHOPS AND NAIL § 237-3
237:695
obtaining a valid New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology license to
operate such a business and then obtaining a license from the Board of
Health.
B. Every barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/
shop must comply with local planning and zoning regulations and all
other applicable ordinances before being issued a license.
C. Standards; prohibitions and requirements. Each salon/shop shall be
maintained to provide a safe and sanitary environment as defined in
Chapter XII of the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
(1) Use of a cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop as sleeping quarters is
prohibited.
(2) Every cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop and all appurtenances or
equipment therein shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.
(3) Every cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop shall be well lighted, well
ventilated, and be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold
water.
(a) Lighting shall be sufficient to provide adequate illumination in
the work area, such as 30 footcandles.
(b) Windows shall be effectively screened against insects, rodents,
and other vermin.
(c) Every salon/shop must have an approved water supply with
sufficient hot and cold running water under pressure in
accordance with the New Jersey State Uniform Construction
Code.
(d) All plumbing fixtures must be protected against backsiphonage
or backflow.
(e) Plumbing fixtures shall be clean and free from defects.
(4) The use of mugs, shaving brushes and dusting brushes is
prohibited.
(5) Razors, scissors, clippers; pinchers, needles and all other
instruments, electrical and nonelectrical, shall, after each use on a
patron, be sterilized by immersion in a suitable and approved
solution, or by some other method in accordance with the Board of
Cosmetology requirements.
(a) Disinfectants shall be changed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions to ensure complete disinfection.
No sediment from the item being disinfected shall be allowed
to remain in the bottom of the disinfection container.
§ 237-3 NORWOOD CODE § 237-3
237:696
(6) Combs and brushes shall be cleaned after each use with soap and
water and then shall be sterilized in the manner described above or
by some other manner approved by the Board of Health.
(7) Requirements of attendants.
(a) They shall wear a clean, washable outer coat or uniforms.
(b) They shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water
between each patron.
(c) They shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water
immediately after using the toilet, eating and/or smoking.
(d) They shall not remove warts or moles or treat any disease of a
patron, nor perform any medical procedure such as an
injection, nor dispense any medical advice.
(e) All operators shall have an exclusion policy for people with
communicable disease that may be transmitted through the
services of a barber, hairdresser, cosmetologist, or nail
technician.
(8) Headrests, if used, shall be protected with fresh paper and a
laundered towel for each patron.
(9) Individual paper neckbands or freshly laundered towels shall be
used and not reused unless laundered after use on each patron.
(a) All linens and towels shall be disposed of in a covered
receptacle after each patron.
(b) Clean towels and linens shall be stored off the floor in a clean,
protected location.
(10)No alum, stringent, antiseptic or other preparation shall be used in
stick form. If used at all, it shall be applied in the form of a powder
or liquid on a freshly laundered towel or some other clean material
that has not been used by another patron.
(11) The use of any cosmetic, acid, solution or any article or material
that may be injurious to the skin, hair, or health shall not be used.
(a) When only a portion of a cream, liquid, powder or other
cosmetic preparation is to be removed from the container, it
shall be removed in such a way as not to contaminate the
remaining portion.
(b) Multi-use of cosmetic applicators is prohibited. This includes
the use of lipsticks and makeup brushes which are not
disposable. Powder puffs and sponges, except single-service
items, shall not be used.
§ 237-3 BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SHOPS AND NAIL § 237-3
237:697
§ 237-4. Application for Borough license.
(c) Lotions and powders shall be dispensed from a sanitary selfdispensing
container.
(12)Waste disposal shall be performed daily in a manner which is
determined to be acceptable by the Board of Health.
(13) Disposable or single-use articles shall be disposed of in a waste
receptacle after use on each patron unless stored in a separate
closed, clean container labeled with the patron's name and used
only on that patron.
(a) All disposable or single-use articles that come into contact with
blood and/or body fluids must conform to medical waste
regulations.
(b) All sharp or pointed articles shall be disposed of in a punctureproof
container.
(14) An antimicrobial additive shall be placed in each foot spa or water
bath during use.
(a) After each patron, the salon/shop shall drain all water and
debris, properly disinfect and dry the foot spa or water bath.
(b) At the end of each day, the salon/shop shall remove and
immerse any filter in disinfectant and flush the foot spa or
water bath with low-sudsing soap and water.
(15) Each salon/shop shall provide adequate toilet and hand-washing
facilities for patrons and employees.
(a) Toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be in working condition
at all times and kept clean and sanitary.
(b) Each hand-washing sink, shall have a soap dispenser and
disposable towels or an air dryer for hand drying.
(16) Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(17) Personnel shall have appropriate licenses as issued by the New
Jersey State Board of Cosmetology. Such licenses shall be displayed
in the establishment. where the public can view them.
(18) Instruments that contact the customer, i.e., sanding disks, stones,
etc., shall be single-use items or be sterilized between each
customer.
(19) Instruments, gauze and tissues that are contaminated with blood
shall conform to medical waste regulations.
§ 237-3 NORWOOD CODE § 237-4
237:698
§ 237-5. Licensing fees.
A. An application for a Borough license shall be sent to the owner or
person in charge of the cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop annually
each year in December.
B. All licenses are valid for one year or a portion thereof remaining when
issued and are renewable by submission of an application on or before
December 31 of each year.
C. Every applicant for a license to operate a cosmetology salon/shop and/
or nail salon/shop shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with
§ 237-5 hereafter.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed until a completed application has
been submitted, the license fee has been paid and the applicant's
barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail
salon/shop meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and all
other applicable state and local regulations.
E. Licenses shall be valid until December 31 of each year as noted on the
license unless suspended by the Board of Health, or until such time as
the facility changes owners, closes, or goes out of business if any of
those events occurs before December 31 in any year.
F. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from
location to location. Any change in ownership of a facility must be
reported promptly to the Board of Health and must be approved by the
Board of Health prior to the issuance of an operating license.
G. Licenses must be displayed in a prominent location within the
establishment where patrons can observe them.
A. The annual fee for licenses of the public establishments regulated
herein are fixed as follows:
(1) Beauty parlors, nail salons and barbershops shall be assessed as
follows:
(a) Facility with one to four work stations: $100.
(b) Facility with five to 10 work stations: $150.
(c) Facility with 11 or more work stations:. $200.
(d) Facility reinspection fee: $100.
B. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the December 31 of each
year, except as otherwise indicated in § 237-4E above.
C. License fees shall be paid to the Board of Health. The license fee under
this section for the year in which this section takes effect shall be paid
on or before 30 days from the effective date of this chapter, and the
license so issued in that first year shall expire on December 31 of the
§ 237-4 BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SHOPS AND NAIL § 237-5
237:699
§ 237-6. Annual inspections.
§ 237-7. Violations and penalties.
year that it becomes effective. Thereafter, all license fees shall be paid
on or before December 31" of each year. Any applicant whose check is
returned unpaid to the Board of Health shall be required to pay a return
check fee of $25.
A. The Board of Health shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
B. At least once a year, the Registered Environmental Health Specialist
shall inspect each place of cosmetology, hair salon, barber shop, or nail
styling salon/shop and shall make as many additional inspections as are
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
C. The Registered Environmental Health Specialist, after proper
identification, shill be permitted to enter, during normal operating
hours, any portion of any of the aforementioned salons or shops for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this
chapter.
D. In the event that the Registered Environmental Health Specialist finds
unsanitary conditions in the operation of a cosmetology salon/shop, hair
salon, barber shop, or nail salon/shop, or if a violation or multiple
violations occur, the Registered Environmental Health Specialist may
immediately issue a written notice to the license holder, or person in
charge, citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be
taken and time frame within which such action shall be taken. If
corrective action is not made in the allotted time, the licensee may be
fined and/or his/her license suspended.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least $100, but not
exceeding $1,200, and each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to
be a separate and distinct offense.
B. A license may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any provision
of this chapter by the holder after an opportunity for a hearing by the
Board of Health. No license is transferable by sale or otherwise.
C. License suspension.
(1) Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable
state regulations shall be grounds for suspension of any license
issued under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Health may suspend, without warning, prior notice or
hearing, any license to operate a cosmetology salon/shop or nail
§ 237-5 NORWOOD CODE § 237-7
237:700
salon/ shop if the operation constitutes an imminent hazard to
public health, including, but not limited to, any one of the following:
(a) There is an outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers.
(b) There is an absence of potable water, supplied under pressure,
in a quantity which in the opinion of the Board of Health, is
capable of meeting the needs of the facility.
(c) There is sewage backup into the facility.
(d) An unlicensed individual is performing procedures requiring
licensure by the New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology.
(3) Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of the
written order to the license holder or person in charge of the
facility by the Registered Environmental Health Specialist or a
municipal police officer. When a license is suspended, all
cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop operations shall cease
immediately and shall not resume until written approval to resume
has been issued by the Board of Health. The Registered
Environmental Health Specialist shall remove a suspended license
from the premises.
(4) When a license is to be suspended, the holder of a license, or the
person in charge, shall be notified in writing of the suspension, and
an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request
for a hearing is filed with the Board of Health by the holder of the
license within two business days. If no written request for a hearing
is filed within two business days, the suspension is sustained. The
Board of Health may end the suspension at any time by giving
written notice to the license holder if reasons for suspension no
longer exist.
(a) Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Board of Health
shall schedule a hearing not later than 10 business days from
the date of the actual receipt of the request to afford the owner
the opportunity to present evidence and argument on all the
facts or issues involved and to examine the merits of such
suspension.
(b) The Board of Health shall examine the merits of such
suspension and render a decision in writing to vacate, modify,
or affirm such suspension within 10 business days of the date
of the hearing held under this section.
(5) Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended license may make written request for license
reinstatement. Within 10 business days following receipt of a
written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that,
in his or her opinion, the conditions causing the suspension have
§ 237-7 BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY SHOPS AND NAIL § 237-7
237:701
Chapter 240
FEES
§ 240-1. Schedule of license fees. [Amended 12-5-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-1]
been corrected, the Registered Environmental Health Specialist
shall make a reinspection. If it is determined that the applicant has
complied with the requirements of this chapter, the license shall be
reinstated and returned to the license holder.
D. The Board of Health shall designate a time and place to conduct the
hearings provided for in this chapter. The Board of Health shall make a
final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The
Board of Health shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to
the license holder within 10 business days of the hearing date. A
request for a hearing shall not stay any suspension or denial of a license
until such time as a hearing has been held and a decision rendered
thereon.
E. A notice or order provided for in this chapter is properly served when it
is delivered to the license holder or person in charge, posted at a
conspicuous location on the building, or when it is sent by registered
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder
of the license. A completed and signed inspection report shall constitute
a written notice.
A. For all eating establishments, including but not limited to restaurants,
diners, luncheonettes, and taverns: $150 for the first 50 seats and $5
for each additional seat above 50, but not to exceed $850.
B. For takeout food-handling establishments, including but not limited to
delicatessen stores, meat and food markets, pizza kitchens, and ice
cream/frozen dessert stores: an annual fee of $150; for food caterers,
an additional fee of $100.
C. For package stores: $50; for package stores and bars: $75 annually.
D. For bakeries: a fee of $150 annually.
E. For each retail vehicle serving lunches or meals of readily perishable
food: a fee of $200 annually.
F. For vending machines: a fee of $25 for the first machine and $15 for
each additional machine annually.
G. For ice cream trucks: $160 annually.
H. For stores dealing only in packaged candy, cookies or snacks: $50
annually.
§ 237-7 NORWOOD CODE § 240-1
237:702
§ 240-2. Exemptions.
Senior citizens' establishments and activities in Borough-owned buildings,
religious institutions, and other nonprofit organizations are exempt from
the fees imposed in this chapter.
Chapter 245
I. For nursery schools, day-care centers, and day camps: a fee of $175
annually.
J. For nursing homes and assisted-living facilities: a fee of $7 per resident,
as of January 1 of each year.
K. For tanning salons: a fee of $75 annually.
L. For the issuance of a marriage license: $28.
M. For transcripts and corrections of marriage, birth and death
certificates: $10; burial permits: $15.
N. For swimming pools:
(1) Nonprofit, excluding residential pools: $50 annually.
(2) Community association pools: $150 annually.
(3) If operated as a business or for profit: seasonal $100 annually, year
round $200 annually.
O. For gumball machines: $5 each annually.
P. For body arts and body piercing: $300 annually.
Q. For temporary retail food license: one to three days, $50; four to seven
days, $75; more than seven days, $100.
R. For supermarkets: $600 annually.
S. For trucks dispensing dairy products, retail: $5 annually.
T. For portable toilets: $25 each.
U. For commercial whirlpools and hot tubs: $50 each.
V. For beauty parlors, nail salons, and barber shops in correspondence
with § 237-5: facilities with one to four stations, $100; five to 10
stations, $150; 11 or more, $200.
W. For plan review: $100 per review, $50 for revision fee.
X. For facility reinspection fee: $100.
Y. For kennels: in correspondence with § 85-3E(1) and (2).
§ 240-1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 240-2
245:703
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 245-1. Standards adopted by reference.
A code regulating retail food-handling establishments, providing for the
inspection of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations, is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 245-2. Licensing; food-handlers' course required.
A. No retail food establishment, including restaurants, diners and any
other establishments selling or serving food to the public in the
Borough of Norwood, shall be granted a retail food establishment
license unless the owner, manager or employee in charge of other
employees serving food on each particular shift has successfully
completed a course prescribed by the Norwood Board of Health
pertaining to health, education, sanitation, personal hygiene, foodborne
illness, dishwashing procedures, insects and rodents and other
health related matters. There are two such courses: an eighteen-hour
food managers' certification course and a three-hour food-handlers'
course. The owner, manager and employees in charge of other
employees serving food on a particular shift shall have completed the
three-hour food-handlers' course. The certificate of satisfactory
completion of the three-hour food-handlers' course shall be effective for
two years from the date of its issuance and shall be a prerequisite to
any license being issued to a retail food establishment after the
appropriate fee has been paid.
B. Additionally, commencing January 1, 1997, or such date as may be fixed
by the Norwood Board of Health, each owner or key management
personnel actively involved in the daily operation of a retail food
establishment where food is prepared is required to take the first
available eighteen-hour food managers' certification course and
employees in charge of other employees serving food on a particular
shift must take the three-hour food-handlers course. The Norwood
Board of Health shall issue a temporary retail food license which shall
remain in effect for 90 days from the date of its issuance or until the
required eighteen-hour food managers' certification course and threehour
food-handlers course has been given and satisfactorily completed.
For the issuance of such a temporary retail food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for the permit, together
with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food license in the
amount of $25. No part of the surcharge shall be returned.
C. If there is no owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food to others on each particular shift who has satisfactorily
completed the eighteen-hour food managers' certification course or
three-hour food-handlers course in accordance with this chapter, then
§ 240-2 NORWOOD CODE § 245-2
245:704
§ 245-3. Ratings.
§ 245-4. Fees.
Each licensee shall pay a license fee for the issuance of a license to operate
a retail food establishment or other business in the Borough of Norwood as
indicated in Chapter 240, Fees.
§ 245-5. Licensing requirements.
the retail food establishment shall be issued a summons to appear
before the Norwood Board of Health to answer the violation.
A. Any retail food establishment which receives an unsatisfactory rating
from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall immediately
cease from serving any food or similar products until the licensee has
received a satisfactory rating from the Inspector conducting such
inspections.
B. Any retail food establishment which receives two unconditional
satisfactory ratings within any one-year period shall have its owner or
manager appear at the next meeting of the Norwood Board of Health to
show cause why its license shall not be suspended for failing to operate
its premises in accordance with Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary
Code. The conditional satisfactory rating shall be posted in the
premises for such time as the Board of Health and/or Inspector believes
it is necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety. In
addition, its owner or manager must take and satisfactorily complete
the next available eighteen-hour food managers' certification course.
C. In addition to the remedies stated above, the Inspector conducting the
inspections shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for the
violation of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code, the ordinances
of the Borough of Norwood and applicable statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
A. A retail food establishment license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire annually on December 31 of each year, and
application for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with the
required fee, prior to February 1 of each year.
B. A retail food establishment license issued by another Board of Health in
an additional municipality is no transferable as to another license.
C. All licenses shall be issued by March 1 of the new calendar year and
shall be renewed not later than March 15 in any calendar year.
D. A late charge of 50% will be added to the license if not renewed by
March 31 of that same year. All applicants for licenses or permits shall
furnish any and all information required by the Board of Health. Any
false or misleading information shall constitute sufficient cause to
refuse a license or for the revocation of a license already issued.
§ 245-2 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 245-6
245:705
§ 245-6. Nonprofit organizations.
§ 245-7. Nursery schools.
Nursery schools preparing food or representatives of the nursery schools
preparing food must take the three-hour food handlers' course.
§ 245-8. Inspections.
All food service establishments and mobile units shall be subject to
complete inspection during each business year, without advance notice to
the licensee to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and with the provisions of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code. The licensee and operators of all such establishments shall cooperate
fully during such inspections. In the event that an aforementioned facility
does not receive a satisfactory rating, the inspector shall return within a
reasonable time for a first reinspection to determine whether compliance
has been accomplished. In the event that it has not been achieved, the
licensee must show cause at an informal hearing of the Board of Health
as to why compliance has not been achieved. In that event, a second
reinspection shall be $250. If upon completion of a second reinspection it
is again determined that compliance has not been achieved, the licensee
shall show cause at an informal hearing before the Board of Health as to
why the license should not be revoked. The fee for such a hearing and a
third inspection shall be $500. As a result of repeated violations, the Board
of Health may issue an interim or temporary license for a specific period of
time and shall be entitled to a processing fee of $75 for each such issuance.
§ 245-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less that
$50 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. As concerns nonprofit organizations, whenever food is being prepared
at any of these facilities, a temporary permit, exempt from fees, must be
obtained from the Board of Health two weeks prior to the date of the
function. In order to obtain this permit, the following information must
be provided:
(1) Date and length of function.
(2) Type of food being prepared.
(3) Approximate number of people being served.
B. Each nonprofit organization which prepares and serves food, in
addition to the matters set forth above in Subsection A, should have
someone from their organization take the three-hour food handlers'
course.
§ 245-6 NORWOOD CODE § 245-9
245:706
Appendix
Chapter A261
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A261-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,82 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The Application for renewal of municipal consent, which
application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and is incorporated herein
by reference and made a part hereof, except as modified, changed, limited
or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Norwood in the County
of Bergen, and the State of New Jersey.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of antennas, wire, coaxial cable,
amplifiers, towers, microwave links, wave guide, laser beams, optical fibers,
optical transmitters and receivers, satellite receive/transmit antennas and/
or other equipment designed and constructed for the purpose of producing,
receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video,
digital or other forms of electronic, electromagnetic, optical or electrical
signals.
CABLEVISION — The grantee of rights under this Ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent
applicable, any other federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including but not limited to those described in 47 CFR Section
76.3), or as such regulations may be amended.
82.Editor's Note: See the preamble to this ordinance, on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 245-9 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A261-1
A261:707
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A261-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A261-3. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years.
§ A261-4. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A261-5. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer service along any public right-ofway
to any person's residence located in all franchise territory at tariffed
rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A261-6. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company. The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate
parts of its facilities to allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other
similar circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party
requesting such action except when requested by the municipality, in
which case the company shall bear the cost.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
§ A261-1 NORWOOD CODE § A261-6
A261:708
§ A261-7. Performance bonds during life of franchise.
The company shall give a bond to the Borough of Norwood, which bond
shall be in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A261-8. Rate structure.
The municipality having reviewed the rates proposed in the application
for cable television reception service makes no determination as to their
reasonableness but approves them as presented subject to review and
regulation by the Board, if permitted by law.
§ A261-9. Basic service.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company caries as part of its
entry level service without a separate or additional charge.
§ A261-10. Local access and origination cable casting.
The cable operator shall provide access time to noncommercial, public,
governmental and educational entities to the extent such as was promised
to the municipality during the application at Page 13, Section IV, Paragraph
5.
§ A261-11. Free services.
The company shall provide the installation of one outlet and basic monthly
cable reception service to each school and library in the municipality and
to all municipally owned buildings, free of charge. Each additional outlet
installation shall be paid for by the institution on a materials-plus-labor
basis.
§ A261-12. Equipment and personnel.
The municipality finds that the equipment and/or personnel to be provided
by the company for public, educational or governmental use as provided at
Page 13 Section 4 of the Application for Municipal Consent is reasonable.
§ A261-13. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability at the head end to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall only be to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
§ A261-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A261-13
A261:709
of emergency messages by the municipality. The company shall in no way
be held liable for any injury suffered by the municipality or any other
person during an emergency if for any reason the municipality is unable to
make full use of the cable television system as contemplated herein. The
municipality shall also establish reasonable procedures for such use.
§ A261-14. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay as an annual franchise fee a sum equal to 2% percent
of the actual gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable television reception
services in the Borough. Cablevision shall annually file the reports as
required by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30 and regulations as promulgated from time to
time by the Office of Cable Television.
§ A261-15. Designation of complaint officer.
The Norwood Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26, and any
complaints by local subscribers to cable television reception or service shall
be filed directly with the said office. All complaints shall be reviewed and
processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
§ A261-16. Liability insurance.
§ A261-17. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open
daily during normal business hours and such additional periods as may be
necessary to effectively serve such purpose.
§ A261-18. Terms.
A. Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole
cost and expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient
liability insurance naming the Borough as an additional insured and
insuring against loss by any claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand
in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any
person, and $3,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident or occurrence. Cablevision also agrees to maintain during
the term of this consent an excess liability or umbrella policy, naming
the Borough as an additional insured, in the minimum amount of
$10,000,000.
B. The insurance policy or policies maintained pursuant to this section
shall contain provisions to the effect that the insurer will not cancel,
refuse to renew, or change the insurance without first giving the
Borough prior notice of such intention to cancel, change or not renew.
§ A261-13 NORWOOD CODE § A261-18
A261:710
§ A261-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision
at is sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Borough and with
the approval of the Board of Public Utilities, Office of Cable Television,
shall remove the cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained
in connection with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its
affiliated entities or assignees should, within six months after such
expiration, termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to
operate an open video system or any other federal or state certification to
provide telecommunication services.
§ A261-20. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto, or otherwise submitted in writing by Cablevision to the Borough,
except as modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and
conditions in this consent. The application and any other writings submitted
by Cablevision are incorporated in this ordinance by reference and made
a part hereof, except as specifically modified, changed, limited, or altered
by this ordinance. If any portion of the application conflicts with state or
federal law, the same will not be effective to the extent of the conflict.
A. In the event that the Borough approves or permits a cable system to
operate in the community on terms more favorable or less burdensome
than those contained in this ordinance, such more favorable or less
burdensome terms shall be applicable in this franchise, subject to
approval of a petition to the Board of Public Utilities as provided for in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-15 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. In the event that a nonfranchised multichannel video programmer
provides services to residents of the Borough, Cablevision shall have a
right to request franchise amendments to this ordinance that relieve
Cablevision of regulatory burdens that create a competitive
disadvantage to Cablevision. In requesting amendments, Cablevision
shall file with the Board a petition for approval in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-15 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 seeking to amend the
ordinance. Such petition shall indicate the presence of a nonfranchised
competitor(s); identify the basis for Cablevision's belief that certain
provisions of this franchise place it at a competitive disadvantage, and
identify the regulatory burdens to the amended or repeated in order to
eliminate the competitive disadvantage. The Borough shall not
unreasonably withhold or object to granting the company's petition and
so amending the franchise ordinance, subject to approval of the petition
by the Board of Public Utilities as provided for in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-15 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A261-18 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A261-21
A261:711
§ A261-21. Compliance with law.
Notwithstanding any specific mention of applicable federal or state statutes
or regulations above, Cablevision shall comply with all of the requirements
of the Federal Act, Federal Regulations, the State Act and State Regulations
(to the extent not preempted) and any other valid statute, regulation, rule or
promulgation, specifically including, but without limitation, those relating
to equal employment opportunity.
§ A261-22. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A261-23. When effective.
This consent shall become effective as to the date upon which the Board
issues a certificate of approval, which confirms Cablevision's acceptance of
the provisions of this ordinance.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98:03 5-5-1998 Land use procedures
amendment site plan
review amendment
Chs. 230 and 231
98:04 5-5-1998 Fire prevention Ch. 127
98:05 5-5-1998 Disability discrimination
grievance procedure
Ch. 18
98:06 6-3-1998 Salaries NCM
98:07 8-12-1998 Bond NCM
98:08 8-12-1998 Bond NCM
98:09 9-1-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
98:10 10-6-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
98:11 Number not used
§ A261-21 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:712
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98:12 12-1-1998 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
98:13 1-5-1999 Salaries NCM
99:01 4-6-1999 Index rate NCM
99:02 7-28-1999 Bond NCM
99:03 7-28-1999 Length of Service Awards
Program
Ch. 25, Art. II
99:04 7-28-1999 Bond NCM
99:05 9-7-1999 Street vacation NCM
99:06 10-5-1999 Cooperative agreement NCM
99:07 12-7-1999 Salaries NCM
99:08 12-7-1999 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 10
00:01 3-7-2000 Exceed index rate NCM
00:02 3-7-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
00:03 Tabled
00:04 5-2-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 127
00:05 5-2-2000 Bond NCM
00:06 5-2-2000 Bond NCM
00:07 7-11-2000 Salaries NCM
00:08 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:09 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:10 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:11 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:12 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:13 7-11-2000 Bond NCM
00:14 10-3-2000 Cable television franchise Ch. A261
00:15 12-5-2000 Department of Public
Works amendment
Ch. 54
00:16 12-5-2000 Department of Public
Works amendment
Ch. 54
00:17 12-5-2000 Towing amendment Ch. 215
00:18 12-5-2000 Sale of property NCM
00:19 12-5-2000 Street vacation NCM
01:01 2-6-2001 Land use procedures Repealed by Ord.
No. 04:20
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:713
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
01:02 3-6-2001 Exceed index rate NCM
01:03 3-6-2001 Alcoholic beverage licenses
amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
01:04 3-6-2001 Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I
01:05 4-3-2001 Filming Ch. 122
01:06 5-1-2001 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
01:07 6-6-2001 Summer recreation
program fees amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
01:08 6-6-2001 Personnel Ch. 46
01:09 7-3-2001 Salaries amendment NCM
01:10 Not adopted
01:11 7-3-2001 Salaries amendment NCM
01:12 7-3-2001 Salaries amendment NCM
01:13 7-3-2001 Bond NCM
01:14 7-3-2001 Bond NCM
01:15 7-3-2001 Bond NCM
01:16 6-6-2001 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
01:17 8-14-2001 Defense and
indemnification of
municipal officials
Ch. 17
01:18 10-2-2001 Acquisition of property NCM
02:01 2-5-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
02:02 3-5-2002 Exceed index rate NCM
02:03 3-5-2002 Parks and recreation areas;
Recreation Committee
Ch. 168
02:04 5-7-2002 Salaries NCM
02:05 5-7-2002 Bond NCM
02:06 5-7-2002 Bond NCM
02:07 5-7-2002 Bond NCM
02:08 5-7-2002 Bond NCM
02:09 6-5-2002 Landscapers Ch. 148
02:10 6-5-2002 Limousine or livery service Ch. 149
02:11 6-5-2002 Zoning amendment
(Planning Board checklists)
Ch. 233
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:714
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02:12 8-6-2002 Fees amendment (Board of
Health)
Ch. 240
02:13 8-6-2002 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
02:14 8-6-2002 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
02:15 Parades and street
meetings
Not adopted
02:16 9-3-2002 Records repealer Ch. 62
02:17 12-23-2002 Bond NCM
02:18 12-23-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
03:01 2-4-2003 Index rate NCM
03:02 4-1-2003 Massage establishments Ch. 157
03:03 4-1-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 215
03:04 5-6-2003 Alcoholic beverages:
possession and
consumption by underaged
persons
Ch. 77, Art. III
03:05 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
03:06 6-4-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
03:07 7-1-2003 Bond NCM
03:08 7-1-2003 Bond NCM
03:09 7-1-2003 Bond NCM
03:10 7-1-2003 Bond NCM
03:11 10-7-2003 Mobile telephone usage To be superseded
by state effective
7-1-2004
03:12 11-5-2003 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 127
03:13 11-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
03:14 12-2-2003 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168, Editor's
note only
03:15 12-2-2003 Appropriation NCM
04:01 2-25-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
04:02 2-11-2004 Limousines and livery
services
Ch. 149
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:715
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04:03 4-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
04:04 4-7-2004 Contractor licensing Repealed by Ord.
No. 17:12
04:05 4-7-2004 Municipal Ethics Board Ch. 20
04:06 4-14-2004 Index rate NCM
04:07 5-4-2004 Defense and
indemnification of
municipal officials
amendment
Ch. 17
04:08 5-4-2004 Street vacation NCM
04:09 6-1-2004 Fees amendment; parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I; Ch.
168, Art. II
04:10 6-1-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
04:11 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
04:12 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
2004:01
BOH
6-28-2004 License fees for Board of
Health amendment
Ch. 240
04:13 7-6-2004 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 157
04:14 8-3-2004 Referendum question NCM
04:15 8-3-2004 Bond NCM
04:16 10-5-2004 Towing amendment Ch. 215
04:17 10-5-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
04:18 12-7-2004 Bond NCM
04:19 12-7-2004 Acquisition of property NCM
04:20 12-7-2004 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 230
04:21 12-7-2004 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
04:22 1-4-2005 Salaries NCM
05:01 2-1-2005 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
05:02 3-1-2005 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 16
05:03 3-1-2005 Fences amendment; fences
and hedges amendment
Chs. 120; 202, Art.
III
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:716
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05:04 4-5-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
05:05 4-5-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 165
05:06 5-4-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
05:07 5-4-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 98
05:08 5-4-2005 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
05:09 5-4-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
05:10 Appropriation NCM
05:11 6-8-2005 Salaries NCM
05:12 Bond NCM
05:13 7-5-2005 Zoning Ch. 233
05:14 7-5-2005 Penalties and fines Ch. 174
05:15 7-5-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 165
05:16 8-2-2005 Salaries NCM
05:17 Bond NCM
05:18 8-2-2005 Nuisances Ch. 163
05:19 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
05:20 8-2-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05:21 8-2-2005 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 131
05:22 8-2-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 200
05:23 9-6-2005 Conservation easement NCM
05:24 9-6-2005 Salaries NCM
05:25 9-6-2005 Ground lease NCM
05:26 10-1-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05:27 Bond NCM
05:28 12-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
05:29 Tabled
05:30 12-6-2005 Animals amendment Ch. 85
05:31 12-28-2005 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 157
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:717
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05:32 12-28-2005 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 46
06:01 3-9-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
06:02 3-9-2006 Building construction fees
amendment
Ch. 98
06:03 3-9-2006 Solid waste amendment Ch. 198
06:04 3-28-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 199
06:05 3-9-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
06:06 4-4-2006 Bond NCM
06:07 4-25-2006 Establishing CAP bank NCM
06:08 5-16-2006 Eminent domain Ch. 19
06:09 Not adopted
06:10 6-7-2006 Garage sales Ch. 137
06:11 8-1-2006 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
06:12 Not adopted
06:13 Tabled
06:14 8-1-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
06:15 9-5-2006 Bond NCM
06:16 10-3-2006 Zoning amendment
(Municipal Housing
Liaison)
Ch. 233
06:17 10-3-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
06:18 Not adopted
06:19 Tabled
06:20 11-29-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
06:21 12-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
06:22 12-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
Board of
Health
2007:01
3-5-2007 Barbershops, beauty shops
and nail salons
Ch. 237
07:01 3-6-2007 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 157
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:718
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07:02 3-6-2007 Penalties and fines
amendment
Ch. 174
07:03 3-6-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
07:04 3-6-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
07:05 3-6-2007 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 172
07:06 3-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
07:07 5-1-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
07:08 5-1-2007 Emergency appropriation NCM
07:09 5-1-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07:10 6-6-2007 Certificates of continued
occupancy; site plan review
amendment
Chs. 106; 231
07:11 6-6-2007 Vacation of drainage
easement
NCM
07:12 7-3-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
07:13 7-3-2007 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
07:14 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:15 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:16 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:17 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:18 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:19 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:20 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:21 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:22 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:23 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:24 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:25 7-3-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:26 Street vacation Not adopted
07:27 7-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
07:28 7-18-2007 Bond NCM
07:29 8-7-2007 Conservation easement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:719
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07:30 10-2-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
07:31 11-7-2007 Dog licensing amendment;
licensing of cats
amendment
Ch. 85, Arts. I and
III
07:32 12-4-2007 Street vacation NCM
07:33 12-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
08:01 3-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
08:02 3-4-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
08:03 5-6-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
08:04 6-4-2008 Bond NCM
08:05 6-4-2008 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
08:06 6-4-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
08:07 Not adopted
08:08 10-7-2008 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
08:09 10-7-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
08:10 11-5-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08:11 11-5-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08:12 11-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
08:13 10-29-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
09:01 3-3-2009 Miscellaneous fees Ch. 115, Art. I
09:02 4-29-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
09:03 Not adopted
09:04 6-3-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
09:05 6-3-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
09:06 8-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
09:07 8-4-2009 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
09:08 8-4-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 198, Art. II
09:09 10-28-2009 Bond NCM
09:10 10-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
09:11 11-4-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:720
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09:12 11-4-2009 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 230
09:13 12-30-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
10:01 2-2-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
10:02 4-6-2010 Salaries amendment NCM
10:03 4-6-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
10:04 4-6-2010 Animals: dog licensing
amendment; licensing of
cats amendment
Ch. 85, Arts. I and
III
10:05 4-6-2010 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 98
10:06 5-4-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
10:07 4-28-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
10:08 5-4-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
10:09 5-26-2010 Emergency appropriation NCM
10:10 7-28-2010 Outdoor sidewalk cafes Ch. 164
10:11 9-7-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 77, Art. I
10:12 9-7-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 211
10:13 10-5-2010 Limousine and livery
services amendment
Ch. 149
10:14 11-3-2010 Salaries NCM
10:15 11-3-2010 Acquisition of drainage
easement
NCM
10:16 12-29-2010 Bond NCM
11:01 3-9-2011 Unregistered or junk
vehicles amendment
Ch. 224
11:02 3-9-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
11:03 5-25-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11:04 4-26-2011 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
11:05 5-11-2011 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 135
11:06 6-29-2011 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:721
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11:07 7-13-2011 Ground lease amendment NCM
11:08 8-10-2011 Salaries NCM
11:09 8-10-2011 Salaries NCM
BH 11:01 9-12-2011 Animals: dogs and cats Ch. 236, Art. II
11:10 9-27-2011 Appropriation NCM
11:11 Not adopted
11:12 12-14-2011 Salaries NCM
12:01 3-14-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12:02 4-25-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
12:03 6-13-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12:04 6-13-2012 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
12:05 7-11-2012 Salaries NCM
12:06 7-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
12:07 7-11-2012 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 202, Art. I
12:08 7-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
12:09 7-25-2012 Sewers: sump pumps Ch. 189, Art. IV
12:10 7-25-2012 Bond NCM
Bd. of
Health
2012-1
12-5-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 240
12:11 12-12-2012 Towing amendment Ch. 215
12:12 12-27-2012 Appropriation NCM
12:13 12-27-2012 Bond NCM
13:01 2-27-2013 Acquisition of easement NCM
13:02 4-24-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
13:03 4-10-2013 Rental property Ch. 181
13:04 5-8-2013 Precious metals and gems Ch. 176
13:05 6-12-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
13:06 7-10-2013 Salaries NCM
13:07 9-11-2013 Bond NCM
13:08 9-11-2013 Salaries NCM
13:09 10-9-2013 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:722
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13:10 10-9-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
13:11 10-9-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
13:12 11-13-2013 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
13:13 Not adopted
13:14 12-3-2013 Bond NCM
13:15 12-3-2013 Salaries NCM
13:16 12-3-2013 Salaries NCM
13:17 12-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
13:18 1-7-2014 Acquisition of easements NCM
14:01 2-12-2014 Acquisition of easements NCM
14:02 4-9-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
14:03 4-9-2014 Street vacation NCM
14:04 4-9-2014 Salaries NCM
14:05 Acquisition of easements NCM
14:06 5-14-2014 Salaries NCM
14:07 4-30-2014 Bond NCM
14:08 6-11-2014 Street vacation NCM
14:09 7-16-2014 Sale of certain property NCM
14:10 7-30-2014 Salaries NCM
14:11 8-13-2014 Bond NCM
14:12 8-27-2014 Appropriation NCM
14:13 11-12-2014 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
14:14 12-10-2014 Contracts: public contracts
and political contributions
Ch. 108, Art. I
15:01 3-11-2015 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
15:02 3-11-2015 Salaries NCM
15:03 4-8-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
15:04 5-13-2015 Salaries NCM
15:05 5-13-2015 Drug-free and drunkdriving-
free zones
Ch. 109
15:06 5-13-2015 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 202, Art. I
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:723
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15:07 5-13-2015 Emergency appropriation NCM
15:08 6-10-2015 Bond NCM
15:09 8-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
15:10 8-12-2015 Bond NCM
15:11 9-9-2015 Purchase of property NCM
15:12 9-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
15:13 9-9-2015 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
15:14 9-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
15:15 11-11-2015 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 42
15:16 11-11-2015 Contracts: public contracts
and political contributions
amendment
Ch. 108, Art. I
15:17 12-30-2015 Parking on private property Ch. 166
15:18 12-30-2015 Precious metals and gems;
secondhand goods
amendment
Ch. 176
15:19 12-30-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 177
15:20 12-30-2015 Salaries NCM
16:01 4-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
16:02 4-13-2016 Outdoor sidewalk cafes
amendment
Ch. 164
16:03 5-11-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
16:04 5-11-2016 Salaries NCM
16:05 5-11-2016 Trees: clear cutting Ch. 221, Art I
16:06 5-11-2016 Landscapers amendment Ch. 148
16:07 5-11-2016 Trees: tree experts and
tree care operators
Ch. 221, Art. II
16:08 5-11-2016 Easements NCM
16:09 6-8-2016 Fences repealer; zoning
amendment
Ch. 120 (reference
only); Ch. 233
16:10 6-8-2016 Salaries NCM
16:11 7-13-2016 Outdoor sidewalk cafes
amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:724
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16:12 7-13-2016 Street vacation NCM
16:13 7-13-2016 Advertising and other
printed materials
amendment
Ch. 68
16:14 8-10-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
16:15 8-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
16:16 8-10-2016 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 172
16:17 8-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
16:18 8-10-2016 Bond NCM
16:19 9-14-2016 Soil removal repealer;
zoning amendment
Ch. 194 (reference
only); Ch. 233
16:20 9-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 222
16:21 9-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
16:22 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Tabled
16:23 11-9-2016 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 232
16:24 12-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
16:25 12-14-2016 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 232
16:26 12-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
17:01 3-8-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
17:02 3-8-2017 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 168
17:03 3-8-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
17:04 4-12-2017 Lease agreement NCM
17:05 4-26-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17:06 6-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
17:07 7-12-2017 Salaries NCM
17:08 7-12-2017 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 200
17:09 8-9-2017 Salaries NCM
17:10 8-9-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 177
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A261:725
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17:11 9-13-2017 Bond NCM
17:12 9-13-2017 Contractor licensing
repealer
Ch. 107, reference
only
17:13 10-11-2017 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 172
17:14 12-13-2017 Street vacation NCM
17:15 12-13-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 233
17:16 12-13-2017 Garage sales amendment Ch. 137
17:17 12-13-2017 Lease agreement NCM
17:18 12-27-2017 Street naming NCM
17:19 12-27-2017 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 NORWOOD CODE § DL-1
A261:726

ZONING
233 Attachment 1
Schedule A
Schedule of General Requirements
For Topographic Slope Less Than 15%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Principal Building
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Accessory Building Maximum Maximum Minimum
Zone Permitted Use
Area (square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Requirements
Frontage
Front Rear Side Rear Side
Minimum
Lot
Depth
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Improved
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Distributed
Land Area
(percent)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Habitable
Floor Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Building
Stories
Height
(feet)
R-40 One-family residential 40,000 150 50 40 30 5 15 150 150 35% 50% 10% 1,500 2 ½ 35
R-22.5 One-family residential 22,500 125 50 35 20 5 15 125 125 40% 60% 15% 1,300 2 ½ 35
R-10 One-family residential 10,000 100 35 30 15 5 10 100 100 45% 70% 20% 1,200 2 ½ 35
R-7.5 One-family residential 7,500 75 35 30 10 5 5 100 75 45% 75% 20% 1,000 2 ½ 35
B Limited business 7,500 75 50 20 10 20 10 100 75 80% 90% 22% - - 30
LI Light industrial 2 acres 300 35 30 30 30 30 300 300 75% 85% 30% - - 35
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 400 150 100 100 100 100 400 400 70% 80% 30% - - 35
PPP
LA-5
Parks and public purposes
Laboratories, adm. offices -
5
-
5 acres
-
300
-
100
-
100
-
100
-
100
-
50
- - - - -
50%
-
-
-
-
-
35
TH One-family attached and
semiattached townhouse
units
Minimum 10 acres
Maximum 35 acres
50 50 50 50 200 200 20% - 2 ½ 35
NOTES:
1. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 1:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
233 Attachment 2
Schedule B, Table 1
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 15% to 20%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Improved Lot
Coverage (percent)
Maximum
Disturbed Land
Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 50,000 50 50 30 175 180 10% 32% 50%
R-22.5 One-family residential 28,000 40 40 20 150 130 14% 38% 60%
R-10 One-family residential 12,500 35 35 15 105 105 19% 43% 70%
R-7.5 One-family residential 9,250 30 30 10 100 90 19% 43% 75%
BUS Limited business 9,250 50 25 10 100 90 22% 78% 90%
LI Light industrial 100,000 50 50 40 300 300 29% 73% 85%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 100 100 400 400 29% 68% 80%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 2:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
233 Attachment 3
Schedule B, Table 2
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 20% to 35%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Improved
Lot Coverage
 (percent)
Maximum Disturbed
Land Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 60,000 60 60 35 200 175 9% 30% 45%
R-22.5 One-family residential 33,500 40 40 20 175 135 13% 36% 55%
R-10 One-family residential 15,000 35 35 15 110 110 18% 40% 65%
R-7.5 One-family residential 11,250 30 30 10 100 100 19% 40% 70%
BUS Limited business 11,250 50 30 10 100 100 22% 76% 85%
LI Light industrial 120,000 60 60 40 325 325 28% 71% 80%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 125 100 450 450 28% 66% 80%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 3:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZOINING
233 Attachment 4
Schedule B, Table 3
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 35% to 50%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Improved
Lot Coverage
 (percent)
Maximum Disturbed
Land Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 70,000 60 60 40 200 185 9% 28% 45%
R-22.5 One-family residential 39,000 40 40 25 175 140 12% 34% 55%
R-10 One-family residential 17,500 35 35 15 120 115 17% 38% 65%
R-7.5 One-family residential 13,000 30 30 12.5 105 105 18% 38% 70%
BUS Limited business 13,000 50 30 12.5 105 105 21% 74% 85%
LI Light industrial 140,000 60 60 50 325 325 27% 69% 80%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 125 100 450 450 27% 64% 80%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 4:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
233 Attachment 5
Schedule B, Table 4
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 50% to 65%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Improved
Lot Coverage
 (percent)
Maximum Disturbed
Land Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 80,000 60 60 45 250 200 8% 25% 40%
R-22.5 One-family residential 45,000 50 50 30 200 150 11% 32% 50%
R-10 One-family residential 20,000 40 40 17.5 125 120 16% 36% 60%
R-7.5 One-family residential 15,000 35 35 12.5 110 110 18% 36% 65%
BUS Limited business 15,000 50 30 12.5 110 110 21% 72% 80%
LI Light industrial 160,000 60 60 50 350 350 26% 67% 75%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 150 100 500 500 26% 62% 75%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 5:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
233 Attachment 6
Schedule B, Table 5
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 65% to 80%
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Improved
Lot Coverage
 (percent)
Maximum Disturbed
Land Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 90,000 60 60 50 250 225 8% 22% 40%
R-22.5 One-family residential 52,500 50 50 35 200 165 10% 31% 50%
R-10 One-family residential 22,500 40 40 20 135 125 15% 34% 60%
R-7.5 One-family residential 17,000 35 35 15 120 115 17% 34% 65%
BUS Limited business 17,000 50 30 15 120 115 20% 71% 80%
LI Light industrial 180,000 60 60 60 350 375 25% 66% 75%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 150 100 500 500 25% 61% 75%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 6:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
233 Attachment 7
Schedule B, Table 6
Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations in Areas of Steep Sloping
Land For Topographic Slopes 80% or more
[Amended 2-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04:01; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16:21]
Zone Permitted Use
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Front
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Rear
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Side
Minimum
Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Improved
Lot Coverage
 (percent)
Maximum Disturbed
Land Area
(percent)
R-40 One-family residential 100,000 70 70 50 300 250 7% 20% 35%
R-22.5 One-family residential 60,000 60 60 35 200 175 9% 30% 45%
R-10 One-family residential 25,000 40 40 20 150 125 14% 32% 60%
R-7.5 One-family residential 18,750 35 35 15 125 120 17% 32% 65%
BUS Limited business 18,750 50 30 15 125 120 20% 70% 80%
LI Light industrial 200,000 70 70 60 400 400 25% 65% 70%
LA Laboratories, adm. offices 15 acres 150 150 100 600 500 25% 60% 70%
PPP Parks and public purposes - - - - - - - - -
NOTES:
 1. Steep slopes shall be defined as land surface gradients of 15% or greater.
 2. Areas in steep slopes for calculation of lot proportions shall be determined from distances between topographic lines drawn at two-foot intervals or less.
 3. All measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.
233 Attachment 7:1 04 - 01 - 2017