BOROUGH OF NATIONAL PARK
7 South Grove Avenue
National Park, NJ 08063
845-3891
ZONING ORDINANCE
(Ordinance 1-88)
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6:
SECTION 7:
SECTION 8:
SECT ION 9:
SECT ION 1:
SECTTON 2:
~> EC:TI O N 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2 :
SECT ION 1 :
SECT ION 2 :
SECT ION 1 :
SB:CTION 2 :
SECT ION 3 :
SECTION 4:
SECTION 1 :
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3 :
SECTION 4 :
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6 :
SECT ION 1:
SECTION 2 :
SECTION 3:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 ZONING ORDINANCE
SHORT TITLE
PURPOSE
INTERPRETATION
ENFORCEMENT
PERMITS
CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
RIGHTS OF COMPLAINT
ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
ARTICLF. 2 ADMINISTRATION
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
LETTER OF APPROVAL
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
RECORDS
ARTICLR 3 AMENDMENTS
AMENDMENTS
CONSTRUCTION PRIOR TO APPROVAL
ARTICLE 4 WORD USAGE and DEFINITIONS
WORD USAGE
DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 5 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS
REGULATIONS
PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES
REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL
EXISTING NATURAL FEATURES
ARTICLE 6 REGULATIONS TO ALL ZONES
RESTRICTION OF PRINCIPLE BUILD INGS
FLOODLIGHTING
PROHIBITED USES
PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS
TEMPORAY USES
CONFORMITY/ BUILDING SETBACK LI NES
ARTICLE 1 ZONR REGULATIONS
ESTABL ISMENT OF ZONES
ZONING MAP
ZONE BOUNDARIES
PAGE 1
PAGE 1
PAGE 1
PAGE 1
PAGE 1
PAGE 2
PAGE 2
PAGE 2
PAGE 2
PAGE 3
PAGE 4
PAGE 4
PAGE 5
PAGE 6
PAGE 6
PAGE 7
PAGE 7
PAGE 2 0
PAGE 20
PAGE 20
PAGE 20
PAGE 2 1
PAGE 22
PAGE 22
PAGE 24
PAGE 24
PAGE 25
PAGE 26
PAGE 26
PAGE 26
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 5:
SECT ION 6:
SECTION 7:
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTlON 4:
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6:
SECTION 7:
SECTION 8:
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2 :
~; ECT ION 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6:
SECTION 7:
SE:CTTON 8:
SECT](1N 9:
SECTION 1:
SECT ION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTION 4 :
SECTION 5:
SECTION 6:
SECTION 7:
SECTION 8:
SECTION 9:
ARTICLE 8 RESIDENTAL ZONE Rl
PERMITTED USES - PRINCIPLE
PERMITTED USES - ACCESSORY
CONDITIONAL USES
FENCES, WALL AND HEDGES
OFF-STREET PARKING
SIGNS
AREA, YARD, HEIGHT
ARTICLE 9 BUSINESS ZONE Bl
PERMITTED USES - PRINCIPLE
PERMITTED USES - ACCESSORY
CONDITIONAL USES
FENCES, WALL AND HEDGES
OFF-STREET PARKING
SIGNS
AREA. YARD, HEIGHT
BUFFERS/SCREENING
ARTICLE 10 MARINE COMMERCIAL ZONE B2
PERMITTED USES - PRINCIPLE
PERMITTED USES - ACCESSORY
CONDITIONAL USES
FENCES, WALL AND HEDGES
OFF-STREET PARKING
SIGNS
AREA, YARD, HEIGHT
BUFFERS/SCREENING
OTHER PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 11 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE Lil
PERMITTED USES - PRINCIPLE
PERMITTED USES - ACCESSORY
CONDITIONAL USES
FENCES, WALL AND HEDGES
OFF-STREET PARKING
SIGNS
AREA. YARD, HEIGHT
BUFFERS/SCREENING
LIGHTING
PAGEi; 27
PAGE 27
PAGE ?.7
PAGE 27
PAGE 27
PAGE 27
PAGE 28
PAGE 29
PAGE 29
PAGE 30
PAGE 30
PAGE 30
PAGE 30
PAGE .30
PAGE 31
PAGE 32
PAGE 32
PAGE 32
PAGE 32
PAGE 32
PAGE 32
PAGE 33
PAGE 33
PAGE 33
PAGE 34
PAGE 34
PAGE 34
PAGE 34
PAGE 34
PAGE 34
PAGE 35
PAGE 35
PAGE 35
ARTICLE 12 NON-CONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION 3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 5:
CONTINUANCE
ABANDONMENT
RESTORATION
REVERSION
DISTRICT CHANGES
PAGE 36
PAGE 36
PAGE 36
PAGE 36
PAGE 37
AR'l'ICLE 13 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECT row· :3:
SECTION 4:
SEC'r ION 5:
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
SECTION :3:
SECTION 4:
SECTION 1:
GENERAL REGULATIONS
PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE Rl
PARKING AND LOADING I BUSINESS Bl
PARKING IN BUSINESS ZONE B2
PARKING/LOADING IN ZONE Lil
ARTICLE 14 SIGNS
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SIGNS IN RESIDENTAL ZONE Rl
SIGNS IN BUSINESS ZONE Bl
SIGNS IN LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE Lil
ARTICLE 15 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES
PAGE 38
PAGE 39
PAGE 39
PAGE 40
PAGE 40
PAGE 42
PAGE 43
PAGE 43
PAGE 44
PAGE 45
ARTICLE 16 POOLS AND DECKS ( RECREATIONAL USKS )
SECTION 1:
SECTION 2:
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR POOLS
ARTICLE 17 DISH ANTENNAS
PAGE 46
PAGE 46
Page 47
BOROUGH OF NATIONAL PARK
NEW JERSEY
ARTICLE 1 ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION NO. 1 SHORT TITLE
1. 1 This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as
"The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of National Park, New
Jersey."
SECTION NO. 2 PORPOSE
2. 1 This Ordinance shall be held to be the m1n1mum
requirements adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law ,
Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey, 1975. In order to promote
t he public health, safety, morals and general welfare, Among
other purposes the provisions of the Ordinance are intended
to provide adequate light, air and convenience of access to
pr e vent o vercrowding of l and or buildings, and to avoid undue
concentration of population by regulating and limiting the
us e of land, the height and bulk of buildings wherever
e rected; to limit and determine the size of yards and other
open spaces and to conserve the value of property and
~ ncourage the most appropriate use of l and throughout this
Borough.
SECTI ON NO. 3 INTERPRETATION
3 . 1 The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to
be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
p ublic health, safety, comfort, convenience a nd general
we lfare.
SECTION NO. 4 ENFORCEMENT
4. 1 The administration a nd enforcement of this
Ordinance is hereby conferr ed upon the Construction Official
of t he Borough of National Park. He and his duly appointed
ass ista nts s hall have such powe r s as are established by this
Ordinance, or as may be reasonably implied. He shall be
a ppointed by the Borough Council of the Boroug h of National
Park and s hall receive such c ompensation as the Borough
Council may, from time to time, determine.
SECTION NO. 5 PERMITS
5 . 1 In no case shall a permit be granted for the
construction, r econstruction or alteration of a building, not
a certificate of occupancy issued for any building whic h
would be in violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordin a nce other than by a written order of the Board of
Adjustme nt or the Borough Council.
SECTION NO. 6 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
6. 1 Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or Ordinances, the most restrictive of
those imposing the higher standards shall govern.
SECTION NO. 7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
7. 1 For any and every violation of any prov1s1on of
this Ordinance, the owner, contractor, or other persons
interested as general agent, architect, building contractor,
owner. tenant, or any other persons who commit , take part or
assist in any violation of this Ordinance, or who maintain
any building or premises in which any violation of this
Ordinance shall exist, and who shall have refused to abate
said violation within five (5) working days after written
notice shall have been served upon him either by certified or
r egistered mail or by personal services may for each
violation be imprisoned in the Gloucester County Jail for a
period not exceeding ninety (90) days or be fined not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500 . 00) or both, at the
discretion of the Judge before whom a conviction may be had.
Each and every day that such violation continues after such
notice shall be considered a separate and specific violation
of this Ordinance.
SECTION NO. 8 RIGHTS OF COMPLAINT
8. 1 In addition to the powers given to the Construction
Official as aforesaid, the owner of or any person having
interest in any property in the Borough may make complaint
f or any violation of this Ordinance or any provision or
section thereof and upon conviction in such case, t he
penalties herein before provided shall be imposed.
SECT[ON NO. 9 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
9. 1 In addition to the remedy or remedies herein before
provided, any person, persons, company or corporation
violating this Ordinance or any provision or section thereof,
may be proceeded against by the Borough or by the
Construction Official of the Borough or by appropriate
action, or by proceeding in equity or otherwise to prevent
and enjoin any threatened violation of this Ordinance.
PA(;fi: ?
ARTICLE 2 ADMINISTRATION
SECTION NO. 1 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
1. 1 CREATION, MEMBERSHIP, OFFICERS:
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, the members
of which shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
Counc il . The Board of Adjustment shall consist of seve n (7)
members, none of whom shall hold an elective office or other
official position in the Borough. The initial members shall
be a ppointed for terms of one, two, three, and four years
respectively. Their successors shall be appointed upon the
expiration of their respective terms to serve for four years.
The members of the Board s hall be removable for cause by
Council upon written charges and after public hearing. A
vacancy shall be filled by Council for the unexpired term of
any member who resigns, dies, or is r emoved . The Board shall
e lect a Chairman f rom i ts members and a Secr e tary who may,
but need not, be a member of the Board.
1.2 The Board of Adjustment shall ha ve the powers as
prescribed by law a nd shall exer cise such powe rs and
discharge s uch duties in a manner provided by such law.
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant tha t there is error in any order, r equirement ,
decision or refusal ma de by the Construction Official,
adminis trative officer based on or made in the enforcement of
t his Ordinance.
b . Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance, request for special exceptions upon which
such board is authorized by this Ordinance to pass.
c. Where by reason of exceptional narrownes s,
shallowness , or s hape of a specific piece of property at the
time of enactment of the r egulation, or by reason of
e xceptional topographic conditions or other e xtraordinary and
excepti onal situation or conditions of such piece of
property, the strict application of any regulation e nacted
under the Ordinance would result in hards hip upon the owner
of such property to a uthorize , upon an appeal relating to
such prope rty, a variance from such strict application so as
to relieve s uch difficulties or hardships, provided such
relief may be granted without substantial d e triment to the
public good and without substantially impairing the intent an
purpose of the Ordina nce.
d. Recommend in particular cases and for special
reasons to Boro ugh Council the granting of a variance to
allow a structure or use in a district against such structure
o r use. Whereupon the Council may by r esolution, approve or
disapprove s uc h r ecommendation. If s uch r e commendation s hall
T\ A ,-.r,t ,..,
be approved, then the Construction Official in charge of
granting permits shall forthwith issue a permit for such
structure or use .
e. No variances will be granted which do not conform to
Chapter 86 "Flood Damage prevention" of the Borough
Ordinances.
SECTION NO. 2 LETTER OF APPROVAL
2. 1 A Letter of Approval shall be secured from the
Zoning Board prior to the issuance of a building permit for
t he construction, erection or alteration of any structure or
part of a structure whereupon a change in the use of land or
a structure is involved.
2.2 The issuance of a Letter of Approval under the
terms of this Ordinance shall in no way waive or modify the
requirements of other regulations of the Borough governing
such matters as construction, health, sanitation and the
like.
2.3 Any modification of the plans or other date upon
which the Zoning Board's issuance of a Letter of Approval was
based shall invalidate such Letter of Approval and the
revised plans or data shall be resubmitted to the Zoning
Board for a new Letter of Approval.
SECTION NO. 3 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
3. 1 A Certificate of Occupancy shall be obtained from
the Construction Official by the owner or his duly authorized
agent before any building or structure for which a
c onstruction permit has been issued is occupied or used.
3.2 Upon serving of notice by the Zoning Board to the
owner of any property in violation of any of the provisions
of this Ordinance with respect to any building or use
thereof, or of the use of land, the Certificate of Occupancy
for such use shall be deemed to be invalid and the owner
shall be subject to the penalties herein before prescribed.
3.3 The effective date of such invalidation of the
Certificate of Occupancy shall be the tenth (10th) calendar
day following the date of the Zoning Board's notice of
violation.
3.4 A new Certificate of Occupancy shall be required
for any further use of such land or building or structure.
DAr!V A
SKCTION NO. 4 RKCORDS
4. 1 It shall be the duty of the Zoning Board to keep a
record of all applications for zoning variances, a record of
all zoning variances issued and denied, a record of all
c ertificates of occupancy concurred in by the Zoning Board
together with notations of all special or unusual conditions
involved therewith. These records shall be dated and
numbered consecutively, safely secured in the Municipal
Building, and shall be made available by the Zoning Board
and/or the Municipal Clerk for public inspection upon
r equest.
4.2 The Zoning Board shall prepare and submit to the
Borough Council monthly reports c iting, for the period since
it's last report, all applications received and it's actions
thereon, complaints of violations received, all notices of
violation issued by them and action taken by them consequent
thereon. A copy of such r e port shall be filed with the tax
assessor, the secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
t he secretary of the Planning Board and the Construction
Off i cial at the same time it is filed with the Borough
Co uncil.
ARTICLE 3 AMENDMENTS
SECTION NO. 1 AMENDMENTS .
1. 1 The Borough Council may from time to time or upon
the recommendation of the Planning Board, after Public Notice
and hearing, amend, supplement or change these regulations
a nd districts herein established and adopt rules and
regulations for the purpose of interpreting and carrying this
Ordinance into effect. When owners of more than fifty
percent (50%) of the frontage within a district or part of a
district comprising not less than one (1) block, shall
present to the Borough Council a duly signed petition for the
change , relocation or revision of said district or part of
district, the Borough Council shall act upon said petition
within sixty (60) days after the filing of said petiti on with
the Borough Clerk. Said petition shall be accompanied by a
map showing the area for whic h the change of distr ict is
asked and all immediately abutting property a nd uses thereof
a nd, furt her , shall be accompanied by a statement setting
forth grounds or reasons for the proposed change. All such
proposed changes i n this Ordinance or relocation of districts
s hall be referred by the Borough Council to the Planning
Board and the Board of Adjustment. In the event of
unfa vorable report from either of said boards , or in case of
protests against such proposed change signed by owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots
or land included in such proposed c hange or of the lots or
land in the rear thereof extending two hundred (200) feet
t herefrom, or of the lots or land on either side ther eof or
directl y opposite thereto extending two hundred (200) feet
therefrom (exclusive of street space) such change shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds
( 2 /:3) of all members of the Borough Council.
SKCTlON NO. 2 CONSTRUCTION PRIOR TO APPROVAL
2. 1 Any building permit hereto issued pursuant to any
Ordinance which provided for the erection of a building or
s truc ture in conformance with the Ordinance or Ordinances to
which this is an amendment and supplement shall continue in
full force and effect, provided that the holder has
substantially undertaken such construction on t he date of
adoption of t his Ordinance.
ARTICLE 4 WORD USAGE and DEFINITIONS
SECTION NUMBER NO. 1 WORD USAGE
a. All words used in the present tense include the
future tense; all words in the plural number include the
singular number, and all words in the singular number include
the plural number, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.
b. Unless otherwise specified, a ll distances shall be
measured horizontally.
c. The word "structure" includes the word "building";
the word " lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "used"
shall be deemed also to include "occupied or designed,
intended or arranged to be used or occupied"; the term
'' e rected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed,
reconstructed, structurally a ltered, e nlarged, and moved" ;
and the word " s hall" is manda tory and not directory.
SECTION NO. 2 DEFINITIONS
1. ACCESSORY BUILDING: A bui lding on the same lot with
a nd s ubordinate to a principal building, occupied or devoted
e xc lusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building
is attached to a principal building by a breezeway, roof,
wall or the like, such an accessory building shall be
considered part of the principal b u ilding.
2. ACCESSORY USE: A use naturally and normally incident
and subordinate to the principal use upon a ny premises. More
particularly, but not by way of limitation, an accessory use
shall be construed to include a private swimming Pool,
driveway , private road, alley or other facility for ingress
and egress by pedestrians and vehicles.
3. ALLEY: A permanent serviceway providing a secondary
means of access to abutting properties.
4. AL'l'KRATION: As applied to a building, a change or
rearrangement in the structure parts or in the existing
facilities, or an enlargement whether by extension of a side
o r by increasing in height or by moves from one location or
position to another.
5. APARTMKNT HOOSE: A building arranged, intended or
designed to be occupied by three or more families living
independently of each other.
6. ATTIC: The open, nonhabitable space between the
cei l i ng beams of the top habitable story and the roof rafters
in any building.
PAGE 7
7. AWNING: A roof-like projection from the wall of a
b u i lding, usually made of cloth, canvas, metal, fiberglass or
similar material, which provides shade or decorative accent
to a window or door.
8. AUTO SERVICE STATION: An area of land, including
structures thereon, which is used for the retail sale and
direct delivery to motor vehicles of gasoline and lubricating
o i l, and may include in the building facilities for
lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing of vehicles. No
autobody work, nor welding, nor painting, nor the repairing
i n any manne r of buses or of trucks rated at more than one
and one half ton capacity, nor the renting of cars, trailers
or trucks, nor the rental of parking space shall be
permitted.
9. BASEM¥.NT OR CELLAR: A story partly underground, but
having at least one half of its clear height and at least
t hree feet of clear height above the average level of the
adjoining finished grade in the case of split level or bilevel
type homes. In an average dwelling, the height above
the average grade shall be no less than an elevation of
eleven inches.
10. BLOCK: An area bounded by streets or by streets and
streams or by Borough boundary lines.
11. BUILDINGS: Any structure having a roof supported by
columns, piers, or walls, including lunch wagons, tents,
trailers, · dining cars, camp cars or other structures on
wheels or having other support, and any unroofed platform,
terrace or porch having a vertical face higher than three
feet above the level of the ground from which the height of
Lhe building is measured .
12. BUILDING AREA: The maximum horizontal projected area
of the building and its accessories. Roofed-over porches, bay
wi ndows or similar extensions of a building shall be
considered parts of the bui lding. That part of any eave or
similar projection in excess of two feet shall be considered
as part of the building. That part of any eave or similar
projection in excess of two feet shall be considered as part
of the building for the computation of yards and land
coverage.
13. BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical dimension measured from
the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the
f r ont of the building to the highest point of ceiling of the
top story in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a
mansard roof and to the average height between the plate and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
14. BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the intersection of
a horizontal plane at average grade level and a vertical
plane that coincides with the exterior surface of the
building on any side . In cas e of a cantilevered section of a
building of projected roof or porch, the vertical plane will
c o i ncide with the most projected surface. All front yard
requirements are measured to the "building line" from the
f ront lot line. If the front line is on a cul-de-sac or
other curve, the "building line" shall be along the arc
parallel to such front line.
15. CANOPY: A roof-like cover, not c onnected to any
dwe ll i ng , open to the elements on all four sides, which i s
used to protect equipme nt, tables, e tc. outdoors .
16. CONSTRUCTION PKRMIT : That permit issued by the
Building Construction Code Official to insure that the
structure complies with the building code, zoning ordinance
and other ordinances applicable to the constructi on its elf,
upon payment of the fees required by the Uniform Construction
Code Ordina nce .
17. BUILDING, PRIMARY: A building in which is conducted
t he principal use of the lot on which such building is
sit uat ed.
lU . BUSINF.SS OFFICE: A busines s establishment which does
not offer a product or merchandise for sale to the Public,
but offers a service to the Public. However, personal
services, such as barber and beauty shops and repair
services, such as radio and television repair shops are not
t o be included within the definition of "business office".
19. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued upon
completio n of a building or alteration thereof or the change
of use the reof, indicating the exac t purpose for which the
bui ld i ng is to be used and certifying its compliance along
with t he compliance of the structure itself with the Zoning
Ordinance, other Borough Ordinances, as well as special
agreements between the planning board or other agencies and
the owne r in consideration of the grant to construct, alter
or change the use thereof.
20. CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the
burial of t he dead and dedicated by deed or other legal
i nstrument for such use.
21. CHURCH: A building or group of buildings including
customary accessory building designed or intended for public
worship. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the word Church
s hall include chapels, congregations, parish houses, convents
and a ccessory uses, but this definition shall not include
schools or cemeteries.
22. CLUBHOUSE: A building used to house a social,
fraternal, or service organization or club not organized or
conducted for prof it and which is not an adjunct to or
o pera ted by or in conjunction with a public tavern, cafe or
othe r place of business.
23. COMMERCIAL VEHICLK: A motor vehicle, other than a
passenger car or recreational vehicle, which has a loading
capacity in excess of one ton. Pick-up trucks and vehicles
commonly known as vans not having more than two (2) axles
and/or four (4) wheels shall not be considered commercial
vehicles.
24. CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in a particular
zone only upon a showing that such use in a specified
iocation will comply with the conditions and standards for
the location or operation of such use as contained in the
Zoning Ordinance and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefor by the Planning Board.
25. COURTYARD: A require d open, unoccupied space other
than a yard, on the same lot with a building.
26. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A residential development of
. attached and/or detached dwelling units planned as single
entity in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
and whic h has a courtyard or public open space as an
appurtenance.
27. COVERAGK, LOT: That percentage of the lot area
covered by the building area.
28. CURB LEVEL: The mean grade of the street in front
of the midpoint of the lot.
29. DWELLING: A building containing dwelling units .
The term "dwelling", "one-family dwelling", "two-family
dwelling", or "multi-family dwelling", shall not be deemed to
include hotel, motel, rooming house or other accommodations
used for more or less transient occupancy.
30. DWELLING, CONVERSION: A one-family dwelling which,
as a result of certain alterations, may be capable of
accommodating two (2) families having separate cooking,
living, sleeping, and sanitary facilities.
31 . DWELLING, DUPLEX: Two (2) dwelling units having one
(1) structural wall in common.
32. DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: One of a series of one-family
dwelling units, attached by a common wall between it and the
adjacent dwelling unit(s), with individual and private front
and/or rear yards provided for each unit. Such dwelling units
shall be owner occupied. Said owners shall by deed
provisions be jointly responsible for the ownership and
maintenance of certain common use portions of the townhouse
PM~ti' in
development complex, including, but not limited t o the
fo l l owing: courtyard and/or open space and recreation
fac il ities, streets, roads and pedestrian ways, parking and
garaging facilities, fenc~ng and landscaping , and heating ,
cooling or utility systems. Such joint ownership and
maintenance responsibilities of the owners shall be exercised
through a homeowners association or some similar form of duly
constituted agency.
33. DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building containing one (1)
dwelling unit only.
34. DWELLING. MULTI- FAMILY: A building or portion
thereof containing two (2 ) o r more dwelling units.
35. DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof used
fo r living purposes by one (1) family and having cooki ng and
s anitary facilities for its exclusive use .
36. EXISTING OSE: The use of a lot or structure at the
time of the enactment of a zoning ordinance.
37 . FAMILY: Any number of persons related by blood or
marriage (including adopted children or children similarly
placed in a home for care by a governmental agency), or not
more than two (2) persons who are not so related, living
together as a single housekeeping unit and using cooking
fac ilities in common. A "family" shall be deemed to include
household servants, but in no case shall a lodging or
boar d ing house or rooming house be classified as a single
housekeeping unit , nor shall any sleeping quarters in any
residential dwelling be rented separately to boarders .
38. FENCE: A grown and/or artificially constructed
barrier erected for the enclosure of yard areas. Said
barrier s hall be classified as a fence when it will restrict
the free passage of pedestrians or is cons idered a necessary
part of an artificially constructed barrie r although it does
not rest rict the free passage of pedestrians .
39. FLOOR ARRA, LIVEABLE: All space within the exterior
walls of a dwelling unit, exclusive of garages, cellars,
heater rooms and basements having a window area of less than
eighteen (18) percent of the square foot area of the room and
of unheated porches and breezeways, but shall include all
spaces not otherwise excluded, such as principal rooms,
utility rooms, bathrooms and all closets and hallways opening
directly into and appurtenant to any rooms within the
dwelling unit, and all attic space having a clear height of
seven (7) feet, accessible by a permanent stairway. Such
"li veable floor area" space shall be finished off, with
framing members covered and ready for decorating.
40. FRONT FACADE: A facade which contains or
DAl""'r.' 1 1
incorporates within its borders, a public entry. The front
f a cade area is that portion of the structure corresponding to
an individual activity or occupant situated therein and shall
be measured horizontally and vertically to the limits of the
activity.
41. GARAGE, INDUSTRIAL: A building designed or used for
the storage of commercial vehicles, trucks or other motor
vehicle equipment, including any incidental repair or
s ervicing facilities.
42. GARAGE, PRIVATE: A compartment in or a structure
appurtenent to the principal building of a residential use
on the same lot, designed to house not more than four (4)
motor vehicles for purposes of storage only. One (1)
c ommercial vehicle not exceeding one (1) ton in rated
capacity may be stored in a "private garage".
43. GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building designed or used as a
commercial garage, the bus i ness of which includes the storage
of motor vehicles, incidental auto service station services,
s ales of accessories or repair of motor vehicles or any
combination thereof, but not including a showroom purely for
the exhibit or display of new motor vehicles in conjunction
wi th a new motor agency.
44. GARAGE , REPAIR: Premises which are used for the
r e pair, greasing, servicing, adjusting, w~shing or equipping
of motor vehicles, but not for the sale of gasoline or diesel
fuel except as incidental and necessary to a repair.
45 . HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation for gain or support
c onducted only by members of a family residing on the
p r e mises, and conducted entirely within the dwelling ,
provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except
s uch as may be produced by members of the immediate family
resi ding on the premises.
46. HOTEL: An establishment providing lodging and
usually meals for the general public , especially transient
guests. It may include such uses incident to the operation
as follows : rest rooms, offices, meeting rooms, restaurants,
cocktail lounges, beauty parlors, barber shops, apparel
stores, confectionery shops and the like. Such incidentals
uses shall be conducted solely within the primary building.
47. JUNKYARD: The use of more than one hundred
( 100)square feet of open area of any lot for the deposit,
co llection, storage, keeping or abandonment of wrecked or
i noperative automobiles or other vehicles or parts thereof,
wastepaper, rags, sheet metal, used building materials, house
furnishings, mac hinery or other scrap materials or junk.
48. LAND USE LAW: An act relating to the planning and
regulation of land uses and revising parts of the statutory
laws of the State of New Jersey, Chapter 291, Laws of New
J ersey 1975. Approved January 14, 1976.
49. LIVESTOCK: Includes the following animals and their
r espective young: horses. mules, asses, goats, sheep, cows,
reindeer, and hoofed animals, pigs, swine, ducks, chickens
and pigeons.
50. LOADING SPACE: Any off-street space not less than
ten (10) feet wide and twenty-five (25) ~eet long, surfaced
t o be available in all weather, suitable for the loading and
unloading of goods without disrupting vehicular traffic on
Borough streets and having direct access to a street.
51. LOT: A parcel or area of land, the dimensions and
extent of which are determined by the latest official records
or by the latest approved map of which the lot is a part.
52. LOT. CORNER: A lot at the junction of and abutting
on two (2) or more intersecting streets when the interior
angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred and thirtyf
i ve (135) degrees.
53. LOT. COVERAGE: That portion of the lot that is
covered by buildings and structures.
54. LOT, DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between
t he front and rear lot lines,
SS. LOT, l!'RONTAG.K: The horizontal distance measured
along the full length of the front lot line.
56. LOT. INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
57. J-'OT. LINE: A line bounding a lot as defined
herein:
A. FRONT: The street line of a lot. On a corner lot,
the "front lot line" shall be the shorter street line. On a
corner lot with equal street lines or having more than the
required lot depth on two (2) or more streets, or on a
through lot, ·the owner may elect which street line shall be
considered the "front lot 1 ine".
B. REAR: The lot line which is most distant from and
most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
C. SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot
line.
58. LOT, THROUGH: A lot abutting on two (2) parallel
or approximately parallel streets.
59. LOT. WIDTH: The width of a lot measured at right
angles to its depth a t the set back line.
6 0. MANUFACTURING: The production of articles or
finished products from previously refined raw materials by
giving them new forms or qualities.
61. MOTEL: Two or more rental units, with individual
entra nces from the exterior of the building to each uni t ,
operated as a business .for the purpose of providing l odging
to transient guests. An office and single dwelling unit may
be included as secondary uses in conjunction wi th the
operation of a "motel".
62. MOTOR VEHICLE SALES ESTABLISHMENT: A building or
use which is designed for the display and sale of motor
vehicles .
63. NON- CONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure which
conforms to the use regulations of this Ordinance but which
violates one (1) or more of the applicable regulations in
this Ordinance : also a structure whi ch occupies a lot does
not meet one (1) or more of the require ments of this
Ordinance, or one (1) o r more of the requirements regarding
off-street loading or parking, fences, walls or signs.
64. NON- CONFORMI NG LOT: A lot of r ecord exi sting at
the date of the passage of this Ordinance which does not have
the minimum width or contain the minimum area fo r the zone in
which it is located.
65. NON-CONFORMING USE: A use whic h lawfully occupies
a building or land at the time this Ordinance or any
subsequent a mendment t he reto becomes effective and which does
not conform t o the use r egulations of t he zone in which it is
located.
66. OCCUPANCY: The specific purpose for which land or
a building is used, designed or maintained.
67. OPKN SPACE: An unoccupied s pace open to the s ky on
the same l ot with a princ i pal and/or accessory bui lding .
68. PARKING SPACE: An off-street space a va ilable for
the parking of a motor vehicle and which in this brdinance i s
held to be an a r ea ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet
long, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant
t he reto and giving access thereto.
69. PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: A meeting ha ll,
clubhouse, auditorium, c hurc h . synagogue or other structure
or portion of a structure used at regular or periodic
intervals as a gathering p l ace for purposes of conference,
deliberation, worship, e ntertainment, a musement, rec reation
or education or for performance of social, athletic or
cultural programs.
70. PLANNING BOARD: The Planning Board of the Borough
of National Park.
71. PREMISES: The lot and any structure thereon, on or
in which the subject use is situated.
72. PRINCIPAL USE: The main use for which a building
or lot is to be used.
73. PROifESSIONAL RESIDENCE : Includes, but not limited
to the following: architect, artist, accountant, ·dentist,
surgeon or physician, engineer, lawyer, real estate or
insurance agent, provided that the professional person owns
and occupies as a dwelling the unit used in the practice of
the profession and the use does not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the floor area .
74. HESTAORANT: Any establishment, however designated,
at which food or beverage or any combination thereof is sold
for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an
enclosed building.
74. 1 RESTAURANT, DRIVE- IN: An establishment where
patrons are s e rved soft drinks, ice cream and other food
products for consumption outside the confines of the
principal building or in automobiles parked upon the
premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto,
seats or other accommodations are provided for the patrons.
75. RETAIL STORE: A building in which any article,
excluding automotive vehicles and building material$ is
offered for sale at retail.
? 6 . SKRVICK ESTABLISHMENT:
a. BUSINESS: An establishment primarily engaged in
rendering nonrepair services, such as advertising , building
cleaning or household equipment rental, to business
enterprises on a fee or contract basis.
b. PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD: A business conducted to
render either a personal service, such as hair cutting or
styling, shoe repair or dry cleaning, laundromats, provided
that they have attendants, but not including mortuary
services, or a household service, such as insect
extermination or the repair of furniture , small household
appliances and television sets, but not including the repair
on the premises of furnaces, refrigerators, air conditioners
and other articles of similar bulk and weight and not
including any business which uses a truck of over one (1) ton
in rated capacity in the provision of its services.
77. SETBACK: The distance from the street line as
extended t o its farthest point to the nearest projection of
any building. The front . . interior side, corner side, and
rear "setback" shall be measured from the front, interior
s ide , corner side and rear lot lines respectively.
78. SCHOOLS, PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND PAROCHIAL: A facility
having regular sessions of instructions conducted by
regularly employed instructors and t eachers who teach those
subjects which are fundamental and essential in general
education under the supervision of the New Jersey Department
of Education, or a lawfully constituted ecclesiastical
governing body of the New Jersey Department of Education .
79. SIGN: Any device , structure, or object for visual
c o mmunica tion that is used for the purpose of bringing the
s ubject thereof to t he attention of others, including words,
letters , figures, design, symbols, fixtures , colors,
i llumination, or projected images, but not including any
f lag, badge , or insignia of any public, quasi-public, civic,
c haritable or r e ligious group.
79. 1 SIGN AREA: The a r ea defined by the frame o r edge
of a s i gn. When there is no geometric frame or edge of the
sign, t he area s ha ll be defined by a projected , enc l osed,
f our sided (straight s ides ) geometric shape which most
c losely outlines the said sign. For t he purposes of making
s uch calcul ation, the applicant may block off portions of t he
s ign into not more t ha n three (3) r ectangular portions in
o rder to exclude large areas of open space caused by the
peculiar design or shape of the sign.
79.2 SIGN AWNING: A sign that i s mounted or painted on,
o r attached to a n awning that is otherwise permitted by this
oniinance
79.3 SIGN BANNER: A graphic or sign which has its
l e tters or design applied to c loth, canvas or other flexible
material whic h is durable and weather resistant .
79.4 SIGN CANOPY: A sign that is mounted or painted on,
or attached to a canopy that is otherwise permitted by this
ordinance.
79 . 5 SIGN. CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign that is designed so
that the message on the sign can be easily and periodically
altered.
79.6 SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign advertising a specific
e vent or activity terminating on a specific or assumed date.
Such s i g ns may include, but are not necessarily limited to,
sale signs for property a nd/or buildings, po l itical signs,
yard sale signs , etc.
79.7 SIGN DEFINITIONS:
a. An ADVERTISING sign is defined to be a sign which
directs attention to a business, service, commodity or
ent e rtainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon
the premises it is erected on.
b. A BUSINESS sign is defined to be a sign that direc ts
attention to a business or a profession conducted upon the
pre mises it is erected on . . For ·sale and For Rent signs
rel a ting to the prope rty they a re erected on shall be d e emed
a bus iness sign.
79 .8 SIGN CATEGORIES:
a . lNTRRIOR SIGNS: All signs located on the exterior or
inter i or s i de o f an exterior window o f the front facade and
intended to be visible from the ext erior of the building.
b . ATTACHED SIGNS: Signs parallel to and attached t o
the f ront facade of a building and projecting not more than
twelve (12) inches f rom the facade .
c . SIGN, WALL: A sign fastened t o or painted on the wall
o f a bui l ding or s t ructu're in such a manner that the wall
becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background
s urface of the sign a nd which does not project more than
twelve (12) inches from such building or structure that is
otherwise permitted by this ordinance.
d . SIGNABLE FACADE ARKA: The rectangular, continuous
are a on the wall of a building which extends from the top
lin e of wi ndows and doors on one floor and the bottom line of
t he windows, roof, or cornice above it and which is
uni n t erupted by architectural details and openings, that is
otherwise permitted by this ordinance.
e. PROJECTING SIGNS: Signs projecting horizontally and
perpendicular to the plane of the facade more than twelve
(12) inches .
f. FREE STANDING SIGNS: Signs not relying on a
building for support, but having their weight supported by
the ground.
80. STORY: That portion of a building included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor
above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space
between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
80 . 1 STORY. HALF: That portion of a building under a
gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at
least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
01\f"'t;' 1'7
two(2) feet above the floor of such half story.
shal l also be included as a half story.
A basement
81. STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property,
including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, court,
highway or road. A "street" as used herein, includes in its
width the entire right-of-way.
82. STREET LINE: . The line determining the limit of the
highway right of the public either existing or contemplated,
not to be confused with the curb line.
83. SWIMMING POOL: A water- filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable , having a depth of more than eighteen
inches below the level of the surrounding land, or· ·an abovesurface
pool, having a depth of more than thirty inches,
designed. used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
84. SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: A swimming Pool operated
as a secondary use to a residential dwelling unit or units
and located on an individual residential lot.
85. SWIMMING CLUB: A public or privately owned Pool
o p e n to the general public or on a membership basis , having
appropriate dressing room facilities, recreational facilities
and off-street parking areas.
86 . TRAILER, DWELLING: A vehicle with or without its
own motiv·e power and used for dwelling purposes, which use is
prohibited, except as may be provided and authorized by the
Borough Council of the Borough of National Park and/or zoning
r e gulations .
87. TRAILER, RECREATIONAL: A vehicle with or without
its o wn motive power, including campers and mobile homes,
designed to be used as temporary living quarters or to hold
camping and recreational equipment.
88. USE: The specific purpose for which land or a
building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is
or may be occupied or maintained.
89. YARD ARKA:
a. YARD FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same
lot with the principal building, extending the full width of
the lot and situated between the property line and the front
line of the building projected to the side lines of that lot.
Setback line shall be synonymous with the rear limit of the
required front yard area. In the case of a corner lot, each
yard with frontage on a street shall be considered a front
yard. That which is otherwise permitted by this ordinance .
b. YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width
of t he lot lying between the rear line of the l ot and the
nearest line of any primary building on same lot. The depth
of a rear yard should be measured at right angles to the rear
line of the lot, or if the lot is not rectangular, then in
the general direction of its side building lines.
c. YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space between the
side l ine of the lot and the nearest line of the primary
building. It shall extend from the front yard to the rear
yard, or in the absence of either, to the street or rear lot
lines as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall be
measured at right angles to t he side line of the lot .
90. ZONING BOARD: The officially established Zoning
Board of Adjustment of the Borough of National Park.
ARTICLE 5 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS
SECTION NO. 1 REGULATIONS
1. 1 No building shall hereafter be erected and no
existing building shall be moved, structurally altered,
rebuilt, added to or enlarged nor shall any land be used for
any purpose other than those included among the uses listed
as permitted uses in each zone by this Ordinance and meeting
the requirements set forth in the appended schedule; nor
shall any open space contiguous . to any building be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the
area and bulk requirement, off-street parking reguirements
and all other regulations designated in the schedule and this
Ordinance for the zone district in which said building or
space is located. in the e vent of any such unlawful
encroachment or reduction, such building or use shall be
deemed to be in violation of this Ordinance, and the
certificate of occupancy shall become void.
SECTION NO . 2 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES
2. 1 No structure shall be built within fifty (50) feet
of the bed of a stream carrying water on a n average of six
(6) months of the year. No building shall be constructed on
land subject to periodic overflow or on land which has a n
average water table within two (2) feet of the ground
surface.
SECTION NO. 3 REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL
3. 1 No person, firm or corporation s hall strip,
e xcavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or other use
other than on the premises from which taken, except in
connection with the construction or alteration of a building
on s uc h premises and excavation or grading inc idental
thereto, or except as herein specified.
SECTION NO. 4 EXISTING NATURAL FEATURES
4. 1 Existing natural features such as trees, brooks,
drainage channe l s and v iews shall be retained. Whenever s uc h
features interfere with the proposed use of such property, a
retention of the maximum a mount of such features consistent
with the use of the property shall be required as specified
by the Planning Board Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of
National Park.
ARTICLE 6 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES
SEc·r ION NO. 1 RESTRICTION OF PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS
1. 1 No lot shall have erected upon it more than one (1)
principal residential building.
1.2 No yard or other open space provided about any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
thi s Ordinance shall be considered to provide a yard or open
space for any other bui lding.
1. 3 A secondary building attached to a primary building
shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of
this Ordinance for the primary building.
1.4 Detached accessory buildings shall be located to
the rear of the front building line of the primary building,
a nd if located in a side yard area shall conform to side yard
requirements of the particular district in which it is
located.
1.5 Every principal building shall be built upon a lot
with frontage upon a public street improved to meet the
Borough requirements.
1.6 Where a building lot has frontage on a street which
is proposed for right-of-way widening, the required front
yard area shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way
line.
1.7 For the purpose of regulating the locations of
accessory building on corner lots, and on through lots, all
portions of a corner lot or a through lot which fronts
on a public street shall be subject to the front yard
requirements of the zone district in which said corner lot or
through lot is located.
1.8 All yards, open space, off street parking and
required landscaping must be contained within the zone in
which the use is permitted.
1.9 When a new lot is formed so as to include within
its boundaries any part of a former lot on which there is an
existing building or use, the sub-division must be carried
out in such a manner as will not infringe upon any of the
provisions of this Ordinance either with respect to any
existing structures or use or any proposed structures or use.
1. 10 Rental residential dwellings of
be located in the cellar of any building.
d wellings shall not be located or situated
cellar of any building.
PJH~l? ?1
any kind shall not
Owner-occupied
solely in the
1. 11 Business structures or uses shall not display
goods for sale purposes or coin- operated vending machines of
any type in any location which would infringe upon the
required yard areas specified in this Ordinance.
1. 12 The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply
to customary local utility distribution or collection lines
for water, gas, telephone or electric service. All
facilities such as pumping stations, repeater stations and
electric substations which require a structure above ground
shall be subject to the yard requirements of the Ordinance
except as provided in the various zones.
1. 14 All yards facing on a public street shall be
considered front yards and shall conform to the minimum front
yard r equirements for the zone in which located. Corner lots
shall provide the minimum front yard requirements for the
respective zone for both intersection streets, for both
principal and accessory buildings.
SRCTION NO. 2 FLOODLIGHTING
2. 1 Floodlighting is permitted in all zones, provided
that all lights are shaded and the beams directed so as not
to cause glare on adjoining buildings, properties or
roadways.
SHCTION NO. 3 PROHIBITED USES
3. 1 Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning
district established by this Ordinance is hereby prohibited
from that district and further provided that the following
uses or activities shall be specifically prohibited in any
zone of the Borough.
3.2 All billboards, signboards, advertising signs or
devices not expressly related to the business being conducted
on the premises or otherwise specifically permitted by this
Ordinance is prohibited.
3.3 AUCTION MARKETS
3.4 .Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly
yards, the sorting or baling of scrap metal, paper, rags or
other scrap or waste materials.
3.5 The keeping or raising of livestock which by reason
of the nature of the living habits of the animals themse lves
normally cause or result in objectionable odors, and/or
unsightly conditions .
3.6 Trailer courts, trailer coaches used as dwelling or
PAGR ?.?.
commercial activities related to the outdoor storage or
display of trailer coaches.
3.7 Privately operated dumps for the disposal of
garbage, trash, junk, refuse and similar materials, but
excluding Borough Council authorized recycling centers.
3.8 Open air drive-in motion picture theaters.
3.9 The open storage of any unregistered, unlicensed
motor vehicle or portiori thereof for a period in excess of
six (6) months.
3. 10 Boarding kennels.
3 . 11 Manufacturing uses involving production of the
following products from raw materials.
3. 12 Asphalt, cement, charcoal and fuel briquettes .
3. 13 Chemicals: aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic
soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black and bone black,
creosote, hydrogen, industrial alcohol, nitrates
(manufactured and natural), potash, plastic materials and
s ynthetic resins, pyroxlin, rayon yarn, and hydrochloric,
nitric, phosphoric, picric and sulfuric acids.
3. 14 Linoleum and oilcloth, matches, paint, varnishes
and turpentine.
3. 15 Rubber, (natural or synthetic), soaps, including
fat rendering, starch.
3. 16 The following manufacturing processes: nitrating
of cotton or other materials; milling or processing of flour.
feed or grain; magnesium foundry; reduction, refining,
smelting and alloying of metal or metal ores, refining
secondary aluminum; refining of petroleum products;
distillation of wood or bones; reduction and processing of
wood pulp and fiber , including paper mill operations; lime,
gypsum, plaster or plaster of paris.
3 . 17 Operations involving stockyards and
slaughterhouses, grain elevators and slag piles.
3. 18 Any use of any building or premises in such a
manner that the health. morals, safety or welfare of the
community may be endangered.
3. 19 Any trade or use which is noxious or offensive by
reasons of the emissions of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise.
PAGF. ?.3
SECTION NO. 4 PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS
4. 1 Height modification.
4.2 The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not
apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used
for human occupancy.
4.3 Chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
television and radio antenna and similar features, and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried on and
above the roof level may exceed the height limitations of
this Ordinance by not more than twenty (20) feet. Special
provisions apply to satellite dish earth station antennas.
If such equipment is constructed as a secondary structure
apart from the primary structure, the height restriction of
this Ordinance shall apply excluding radio antenna.
4.4 The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to
prevent the erection above the building height limit of a
parapet wall or cornice for ornament exceeding the height
limits of this Ordinance by not more than five (5) feet.
4.5 Public and quasi- public buildings, schools,
churches and other similar permitted uses shall increase the
front, rear and side yards by one (1) foot for each foot by
which such buildings exceed the height limit herein
established for such zone in which it is located.
SECTION NO. 5 TEMPORARY USES
5. 1 It is recognized that it may be in the interests of
the Borough and in accordance with the purpose of this
Ordinance to permit temporary activities for a limited period
of time, which activities may not be permitted by other
provisions of this Ordinance. Such uses shall be permitted
if they are of such nature and are so located that at the
time of application they will:
5.2 In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the
lawful use of land and activities normally permitted in the
zone in question:
5.3 Contribute materially to the welfare and well-being
of the Borough.
5 . 4 Upon proper application and favorable finding by
the Borough Council, it may direct the Construction Official
to have issued a permit for said use for a period not to
exceed one (1) month.
5.5 For periods in excess of one (1) month, a use
variance shall be required.
PA~R ?~
SECTION NO. 6 CONFORMITY OF BUILDING SETBACK LINES
6. 1 Notwithstanding othe r ~equirements of this ordinanc e
there shall be in conformity of building setback lines with
the median set back lines of existing structures on the same
side of street and within 300 feet of the proposed new
construction.
PAnR ?S
ARTICLE 7 ZONE REGULATIONS
S~CTION NO. 1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
1. 1 For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Borough of
National Park is divided into the following zones:
1.2 RESIDENTIAL-------------------R 1
BUSINESS DISTRICT-------------B 1
MARINE COMMERCIAL-------------B 2
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT-----LI 1
SECTION NO. 2 ZONING MAP
2 . 1 The boundary of the districts shall be shown on a
map attached to this part of this Ordinance and titled Zoning
Map of the Borough of National Park dated
the said map and all notations, and references thereon are
hereby incorporated and declared as a part of this Ordinance.
SECTION NO. 3. ZONE BOUNDARIES
3. 1 Zone boundaries are intended to follow the center
line of roadways, public right- of-ways, streams and public
property , except where indicated otherwise by dimensions or
other notations on the Zoning Map of the Borough of National
Park.
3 .2 In unsubdivided land, where a zone boundary divides
a property and the location of such boundary is not fixed by
dimensions or other notation on the zoning map, then the
location of such boundary shall be determined by the Zoning
Board through use of the graphic scale appearing on the map.
ARTICLE 8 RESIDENTIAL ZONE Rl
SECTION NO. 1 PERMITTED USRS PRINCIPAL
1. 1 Detached single-family dwelling.
1.2 Municipal parks, playgrounds, buildings, and or
structures connected with the governmental function or a
governmental service.
SECTION NO. 2 PERMITTED USF.S .. ~.ACCESSORY
2. l Private garages.
2.2 Normal residential storage structures not to exceed
one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
2.3 Animal shelter for domestic pet not to exceed three
(3) pets.
2.4 Private swimming pool.
2.5 Fences
2.6 Signs
SECTION NO. 3 CONDITIONAL USES AS DEFINED
3. l Professional residence.
3.2 Home occupations.
3.3 Non-governmental public utility uses .
3.4 Public and private schools and libraries.
3.5 Churches, Sunday School buildings.
SECTION NO. 4 FENCKS. WALLS AND HEDGES
4.1 As required by Article 15
SECTION NO. 5 OFF-STREET PARKING
5. 1 As r equired by Article 13
SECTION NO. 6 SIGNS
6. 1 As required by Article 14
Pa~e 27
SECTION NO_ 7 AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS

R-1 Minimum lot size 6,000 square feet

7_1 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS, ZONE Rl
Lot width (feet)
Lot Depth (feet)
Lot area (square feet)
Front yard (feet)
Each side yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
First floor living area
(square feet)

*Note: Fifteen (15) feet
** Note: twenty(20) feet
if side yard abuts street
if side yard abuts street
7.2 MAXIMUM REQUIRKMKNTS
Lot coverage (%)
Building Height (feet)
30
35
40
35
7_3 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Private garages
Storage structures
Animal Shel ters
Swimming Pools * NOTE: Not to be located
** Note: Fifte en feet if
REAR AND
SIDE SETBACKS
**5 feet
**'.3 feet
3 feet
*·**6 feet
in front yard.
side yard abuts
FROM PR INC IPAT.J
BUILDING
10 feet
street.
ARTICLE 9 BOSINESS ZONE Bl
SECTION NO. 1 PERMITTED OSES .. PRINCIPAL
1. 1 Detached single-family dwelling.
1.2 Retail business establishments which are clearly of
a community service character, such as, but not limited
to the following:
1.3 Stores selling groceries, meats. baked goods and
other such food items.
1.4 Stationery, tobacco, and newspaper stores, drug
stores, luncheonettes and confectionery stores.
1.5 General merchandise stores such as hardware,
appliance, furniture, and radio and television stores.
Clothing, accessory and jewelry stores.
1.6 Personal service establishments which are clearly
of a community service character, such as, but not
limited to the following: barber and beauty shops, shoe
repair shops, tailor shops, dry cleaning, pick-up shops
and self-service laundries.
1.7 Business and professional offices, banks and
financial institutions.
1.8 Commercial schools, conducted for profit.
Theaters, playhouses and other similar places of public
assembly.
1.9 Auto service stations .
l. 10 Other business uses which in the opinion of the
Board of Adjustment are similar in nature and scale to
those permitted above, provided that no warehousing shall
be permitted in this zone.
SECTION NO. 2 PERMITTED ACCESSORY OSES
2. 1 Off-street parking facilities for the use of
customers and employees.
2.2
vehicles
provided
goods or
2.3
2.4
2 . 5
Private garage space for the storage of commercial
used in conJunction with a permitted business use,
that said garage is not used for the storage of
warehousing.
Off-street loading facilities.
Signs
Fences
SECTION NO. 3 CONDITIONAL USES AS DEFINED
3. 1 Churches
3.2 Clubhouses and meeting houses
3.3 Restaurants, including drive-in types and taverns
3.4 Funeral parlors, veterinarian hospitals
SECTION NO_ 4 FENCES. WALLS AND HEDGES
4. 1 As required by Article 15
SECTION NO. 5 OFF-STREET PARKING
5. 1 As required by Article 13
Sfi:CTION NO_ 6 SIGNS
6. 1 As required by Article 14
SECTION NO_ 1 AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
DETACHED RETAIL
SINGLE AND
FAMILY PERSONAL
AND SERVICE
RESTAURANTS
AND
TAVERNS
CONVERSION ESTABLISHDWELLING
MENTS
'f. 1 MINIMUM REQU IREMRNTS
Width (feet) 60 *
Depth (feet) 100 *
Area (sq. ft. ) 6000 *
B'ront yd. (ft. ) 25 *
Side yd_ (ft. ) 10 *
Rear yd. (ft. ) 2 O*
60
100
6000
25
10*
20
100
150
15' 000
30
20**
20
OFFICE
AND
BANKS
100
150
15' 000
30
20**
20
* Note: See Art. 8, 7. 1 minimum requirements for dwellings
**Note: Business Zone B2 shall conform to Business Zone Bl
except that called for under Marine District.
7.2 MAXIMUM
REQUIREMENTS
LOT COVERAGE % 30
BUILDING HT.ft.35
35
35
SECTION NO. 8 BUFFERS/SCREENING
20
35
20
35
8. 1 Fences, walls, shrubbery or other appropriate
screening devices shall be installed around garbage and trash
storage areas, parking are as, property lines serving as
zoning district lines with residential district s and at other
locations deemed desirable or necessary by the Planning
Board.
ARTICLE 10 MARINE COMMERCIAL ZONE B2
SECTION NO. 1 PRRMITTKD USES .. PRINCIPAL
1. 1 Detached single-family dwelling.
1.2 Marine services, such as dockage, boat landing,
boat repairs and marine gasoline stations on docks o r
bul kheads .
l. 3 Boat sales.
1.4 Marine engine sales a nd repairs.
1.5 Marine supplies and equipment sales .
1 . 6 Bait and tackle sales.
1. 7 Retail fish markets.
1.8 Outside storage of boats in conjunction with
marine operations, but subject to the following provisions:
a. The lands for parking may be used for winter storage
but may not include dry storage, for year round use or summer
repa ir work.
b . No boat may be stored in a required minimum front
yard.
SI<CTION NO. 2 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
2 . 1 Sarne as those specified for Bl zone.
S~CTlON NO. 3 CONDITIONAL USES
3 . 1 Same as those specified for Bl zone.
SECTION NO. 4 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
4. 1 As r equired by Article 15
SEC'l' ION NO. 5 OFF- STREET PARKING
5. 1 As required by Article 13
SECTION NO. 6 SIGNS
6. 1 As required by business zone Bl
SECTION NO. 7 AREA , YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
7. 1 As specified in the Bl schedule.
SECTION NO. 8 BUFFERS/SCREENING
8. 1 As required for Bl Zone
SECTION NO. 9 OTHER PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
9. 1 No gasoline pump, gasoline storage tank or any
structure used for storing any fuel or oil s hall be situated
nearer than one hundred (100) feet to adjacent residential or
commercial lands except other boatyards and marinas .
9.2 Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent community or ne i ghborhood boat docks or slips, which
may be on a cooperative or proprietary basis, provided that
they s hall offer nothing for sale other than space for wet or
dry s t orage and no repair facil ities other than devices with
the capacity to launch and recove r boats not over three (3)
tons.
ARTICLE 11 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE LI 1
SKCTION NO. 1 PERMITTED USKS --PRINCIPAL
1. 1 All of those uses permitted in the business zones
except dwelling units .
1.2 Veterinarian hospitals, greenhouses, wholesale
business establishments , lumber yards, building material
yards, warehouses and food associated industries .
1.3 Body and fender repair s hops. Electronic and
electric repair shops. Executive and administrative offices,
scientific and/or research l a boratories. Machine shops,
woodworking shops and fabrication of paper products.
1.4 Other businesses of similar nature providing they do
not by reason of odor, noise, dust or smoke, or use of
flammable materials constitute a nuisance or danger to life
or property.
SEC'l'ION NO. 2 PERMITTED USES---ACCESSQRY
2. 1 Off-street loading facilities
2.2 Off-street parking facilities
2.3 Signs
2.4 Fe nces
SECTION NO. 3 CONDITIONAL USES AS DEFINED
:s. 1 Automotive service establishments, motor vehicle
sales estab lishme nts .
SECTION NO. 4 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
4. 1 As required by Article 15
SECTION NO. 5 OFF-STREET PARKING
5. 1 As required by Article 13
SECTION NO. 6 SIGNS
6. 1 As required by Article 14
SECTION NO. 7 ARRA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
7. 1 Minimum requirements:
a. Retail: as permitted in Business Zone.
b. Offices and Banks: as permitted in Business
Zone.
Lot width (feet)
Lot depth (sq. ft. )
Lot area (feet)
Front yard (feet)
Side yard (feet)
Rear yard (feet)
REPAIR SHOPS
60
100
6000
30
10
20
WHOLESALE TRADE
WAREHOUSE
100
100
10,000
30
10
20
7.2 Maximum height requirements: the maximum height of
buildings shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet.
7.3 Occupied area requirements: No building in this
z one will occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the lot
area including accessory buildings.
SECTION NO. 8 BUFFERS/SCREENS
8. 1 Buffers and screens shall be provided as described
in the Business Zone. Further, depending upon the nature of
the business being established, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board shall decide the extent and type of buffers and
screens, however, the basic requirements as provided in this
Ordina nce shall prevail.
SECTION NO. 9 LIGHTING
9. 1 Lighting shall be provided in Business Zone.
ARTICLE 12 NON-CONFORMING USES, LOTS and -STRUCTURES
SECTION NO. 1 CONTINUANCE
1. 1 Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the
lawful use of land or buildings existing at the date of the
adoption of this Ordinance may be continued although such use
or building does not conform to the regulations specified by
this Ordinance for the zone in which such land or building is
located, provided however:
1.2 That no non-conforming lot shall be further reduced
in size.
1.3 No non-conforming use may be enlarged.
1.4 That no non-conforming building shall be extended
or increased unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the
degree of non-conformance .
SECTION NO. 2 ABANDONMENT
2. 1 A non-conforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned
when there occurs a cessation of any use or activity by an
apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or
owner to reinstate such use within a period of six (6) months
from the date of cessation or discontinuance.
SECTION NO. 3 RESTORATION
3. 1 Any non-conforming structure existing at the time
of the passage of this Ordinance may be restored or repaired
in the event of partial destruction thereof is not abandoned.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent any such existing non
conforming structure from being restored to a safe condition
or from being repaired, reconstructed, or structurally
altered, provided that such restoration, repair,
reconstruction or alteration would comply with all other
municipal regulations -and Ordinances; and provided further,
that no restoration, repair, reconstruction, or alteration
shall in any way enlarge or extend any non-conforming
structure or non-conforming use.
SECTION NO. 4 REVERSION
4. 1 No non-conforming use shall, if once changed into a
conforming use, will be changed back again to a nonconforming
use.
.....,_,..,._ "4C
SECTION NO. 5 DISTRICT CHANGES
5. 1 Whenever the boundaries of a distric t shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one (1) d istrict
to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall a lso apply to any non-conforming use
existing therein or created thereby.
ARTICLE 13 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
SECTION NO. 1 GENERAL REGULATIONS
1. 1: No structure or building of a portable nature or
commercial vehicle of more than one (1) ton capacity
including trailers, display vehicles for commercial purposes
shall be parked on any public street overnight except that
certain recreational vehicles or municipal equipment may upon
approval of the Depart~ent of Public Safety receive limited
parking privilege allowing maximum parking time of five (5)
days in front of the residence of the registered owner.
providing proper lighting or other safety devices are
provided. The habitation of any vehicle will be prohibited .
These limitations extend to all districts.
1.2 No front yard shall be used for open storage of
boats, vehicles or any othe r equipment except parking on
driveways will be permitted.
1.3 Off-street parking space shall be provided as
f urther specified in this Ordinance and shall be furnished
with necessary passageways and driveways. All such space
shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on which it
is situated, and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner. All parking areas, passageways and driveways,
except where provided in connection with one-family
residences, shall be surfaced with a dustless, durable , allweather
pavement, clearly marked for car spaces and shall be
adequately drained.
1. 4 None of the off-street parking facilities as
r e quired in the Ordinance shall be required for any existing
building or use, unless said building or use shall be
enlarged.
1 . 5 The collective provision of off-street parking
areas by two (2) or more buildings or uses located on
adjacent lots is permitted, provided that the total of such
facilities shall not be less than the sum required of the
various buildings or uses computed separately and further
provided that the land upon which the collective facilities
are located is owned or leased by one (1) or more of the
collective users .
1.6 All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and
driveways serving commercial uses shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when
t he use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be
provided by commercial uses to protect adjacent residential
zones from the glare of such illumination and from that of
automobile headlights .
1.7 Off-street parking areas located in commercial
zones and which provide parking for twenty (20) or more
vehicles shall be provided with ~hade trees of a quantity and
type approved by the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
National Park.
1.8 All parking spaces herein described shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long,
exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto
and giving access thereto.
1. 9 All residential off- street parking facilities which
are commonly referred to as driveways, must be as a minimum
ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long with access to
an indentif ied dedicated street or road and must be hard
surfaced with an all-weather durable pavement.
SECTION NO. 2 PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE Rl
2. 1 Off-street parking space together with appropriate
access thereto shall be provided on the same property as it
is intended to serve in accordance with the following minimum
standards:
a. Dwellings : two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
b . Churches and public meeting places, one (1) space
for each four (4) seats or other similar form of
accommodation.
c. Other public and quasi-public buildings, one (1)
space for each four hundred C400) square feet of total floor
area.
d . Public parks, playgrounds and recreation areas, two
(2) spaces for each acre devoted to such use.
e . Parking is not permitted between the building and
the street line.
SECTION NO. 3 PARKING and LOADING IN BUSINESS ZONK Bl
3. 1 Off-street loading and unloading . Truck loading and
unloading facilities shall be provided on the property in
other than the front yard area in sufficient amount to permit
the transfer of goods in other than a public street. This
paragraph shall not require such facilities for uses which
are in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance.
3 . 2 Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities
shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the boundary
of a residential district. As a minimum, the uses enumerated
below shall provide the specified number of parking spaces
with suitable means for ingress and egress.
a. Dwellings .. .. two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
b. Public meeting places .... one (1) space for each four
(4) seats or other similar form of accommodation.
c. Other public buildings .... one (1) space for each
four hundred (400) square feet of total floor area.
d. Business and professional offices . . .. one (1) space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of total Jloor area
devoted to such use, but in no case less than two (2) spaces.
e. Any retail business or personal service
establishment enumerated in Section No . 1 employing five (5)
ful l time employees or the equivalent total number of parttime
and full-time employees on the premises----one (1) space
for each such full-time employee and o ne half (1 /2) space for
each part-time employee.
f. Theaters, restaurants, taverns and othe r
places------off-street parking shall be provided at the rate
of one (1) space for each three (3) seats or s imilar forms of
accommodation, plus one (1) space for each employee.
g. Public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas----two
(2) spaces for each acre devoted to such use.
h. Parking lots are encouraged to be coordinated with
adjacent properties minimizing points of access to the
str eets.
i. Parking is not permitted between the building and
the street line unless the building setback is a minimum of
eighty (80) feet.
SECTION NO. 4 PARKING IN BUSINESS ZONE B2
4. 1 Off-street parking for the use of patrons and
employees shall be provided as further detailed in Article 13
Section No. 3.
SECTION NO. 5 PARKING I LOADING IN LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONK LI 1
5. 1 Off-street parking shall be provided for employees
and customers as follows:
Retail: one (1) space for every four hundred (400)
square feet of floor space.
Offices: one (1) space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of floor space .
Industrial: one (1) space for each six hundred (600)
square feet of floor space.
5.2 Off-street loading facilities providing so as to
allow the transfer of goods in Qther than a public right-ofway.
a. A minimum of twelve (12) feet wide by thirty (30)
feet long and fourteen (14) feet high shall be hereby defined
as a "loading unit".
b. The number of spaces to be provided for each
commercial or industrial use as follows:
SQUARE FOOT FLOOR AREA NUMBER OF SPACES
5000 to 10,000 1
10,000 to 25,000 2
25,000 to 40,000 3
40,000 to 60,000 4
~or each additional 50,000 square feet or portion thereof,
one ( l) additional space.
c. Loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal use and in other than the front yard area.
d. These facilities shall not be required for uses that
are in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance.
-- -- A 1
ARTICLE 14 SIGNS
SECTION NO. 1 GKNKRAL REGULATIONS
1.·1 The limitation of signs as set forth for the
various zones by this Ordinance shall not apply to any sign
or directional device erected by the Federal, State or County
or Local Government or any Agency thereof.
1.2 Temporary signs, as enumerated in this Ordinance
shall be removed from the property upon which located within
two (2) weeks following completion of the activity or event
described. ·
1.3 No temporary sign exceeding six (6) square feet in
area on either of two (2) sides shall be erected or repaired
until a building permit for same shall have been issued.
1.4 No permanent sign which exceeds four (4) square
feet in area on either of two (2) sides shall be erected
until a building permit for same shall have been issued as
provided for elsewhere by this Ordinance.
1.5 The use of fluorescent or reflective type paint or
tape materials on signs is prohibited.
1.6 All permanent signs shall be limited to
identification of occupant, and principal proJect and/or
a c tivity located on the premises. Silhouetted or threedimemsional
signs, i.e. , signs lacking a background, and
having letters, figures, or devices silhouetted against the
sky or other open space not a part of the sign and/or signs
in which objects or representational devices are present in
r e lief, in the round, or other than in a plan, are
prohibited.
1.7 Advertising signs as defined herein are prohibited.
1.8 In a business district. a sign may be erected and
maintained in conJunction with a business providing that all
the limitations noted herein apply. Further, a sign in this
district will be limited to forty (40) square feet on any two
(2) sides. Such sign must comply with all other limitations,
and regulations as noted herein.
1.9 An application for a building permit for a sign
must contain such information as shall be necessary to
assure, under the circumstances full compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable
Ordinances of the Borough of National Park.
1. 10 No sign shall be so erected that it impedes the
vision of the motorist or pedestrians, or otherwise endangers
their safety.
SECTION NO. 2 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE Rl
2. 1 Signs in accordance with the following:
a. One name plate sign situated within the property
lines and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area on
either of two (2) sides .
b. One temporary sign pertaining to the lease or sale
of property or construction of a structure on the property or
a political sign, none ·of which . shall be. illuminated. They
s ha ll be situated not less than two (2) feet from the
i nner most line of the sidewalk or ten (10) feet from the
street if no sidewalk exists, unless attached to the
s tructure, and shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area
on either of two (2) sides.
c. One (1) sign, which may be illuminated by nonflashing
light, identifying a playground, park, or other such
permitted use, which is situated on the property to which it
relates not less than two (2) feet from i nner most line of
the side wa lk and does not exceed forty (40) square feet in
area on either of two (2) sides, and sign shall not be higher
than twelve (12) feet f r om f i nished grade to top of sign.
d. One sign, which may be illuminated by non-flashing
1ight, which shall indicate only t he name and profession of
t he resident, s hall be situated not less than fifteen
( 15 ) feet from the inner roost line of the sidewalk, and shall
not exce~d four (4) square feet in area on either of two (2)
s ides. nor shall the top of the sign be more than five (5)
feet from the finished grade t o the top of the sign for a
f ree s tandi ng sign, eight (8) feet for an attached sign.
SECTION NO. 3 SIGNS IN BUSINESS ZONE Bl
3 . 1 Signs in accordance with the following: all signs
associated with permitted residential use s are permitted in
t he commercial zone. All other signs shall comply with the
s tandards listed below:
3.2 One (1) identificati on sign may be placed or
i nsc ribed upon the front facade of a building for each
permitted use or activity. Said sign shall not exceed an
area of forty (40) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the
s ignable facade area, whichever is less, and shall not
project more than twelve (12) inches in front of the front
f acade. Signs may be illuminated by non-flashing light which
s hall be shielded to prevent g lare in a public street or
ad j ace nt residence zone.
3.3 Awning signs, provided the area of the sign does not
e xceed twenty (20) percent of the entire awning or forty (40)
square feet, whichever is less .
3.4 Canopy signs, provided the area of the sign does not
exceed fifty (50) percent of entire canopy face or forty (40)
square feet, whichever is less.
3.5 One (1) changeable copy sign, provided the area of
t he sign does not exceed twenty (20)square feet. Copy signs
are permitted to display special events, attractions, or
similar time related notices only. Copy signs shall not be
used to advertise merchandise. Change of the copy of a
c hangeable copy sign does not require a new permit.
:3 .6 One (1) free standing sign, which may be illuminated
by non-flashing light, indicating the business being
conducted on the premises shall be situated not less than 2
feet from the inner most line of the sidewalk and shall not
exceed twenty (20) square feet in area on either of two
sides , nor shall the height of the sign be more than six (6)
feet, nor shall the top of the sign be more than fifteen (150
feet from finish grade.
3.7 Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the glass area of the window in which placed.
S~CTION NO. 4 SIGNS IN LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE LI 1
4. 1 Signs in accordance with the following: all signs
associated with commercial uses are permitted in the light
industrial zone. All other signs shall comply with the
standards listed below:
4.2 One free standing sign shall be permitted for each
structure, said sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet,
plus ten (10) square feet for each separately operated use or
activity in the structure, if there is more than one (1).
However, in no case shall any sign exceed one hundred and
fifty (150) square feet in area on either of two (2) sides.
4.3 Such signs shall not be located within fifty (50)
feet of a street or property line .
4 . 4 Such signs shall be for the sole purpose of
identifying the facility and listing the individual
occupants.
4.5 Such signs shall not be more than nineteen (19) feet
in height from grade to top of the sign nor less than twelve
(12) feet from grade to the bottom of the sign.
4.6 In no event shall the height of the individual
letters comprising the sign exceed thirty (30) inches or be
less than six (6) inches .
-- - - • A A.
ARTICLE 15 FENCKS, WALLS AND HEDGES
SECTION NO. 1 REGULATIONS .f!'OR ALL ZONES
1. 1 All fences, walls and hedges shall be securely
built and fastened and maintained so as not to inhibit
pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon a public cartway.
1.2 At the intersection of two (2) or more streets, no
fence, wall or hedge will be permitted to obstruct the vision
of vehic ular traffic in any direction. No fence, wall or
hedge at any intersection may exceed a height of three (3)
feet measured from the lowest point of the intersecting
stree t . Further, that a hedge , wall or fence or anv existing
obstruction of this c haracter which curtails the view of
drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection, shall be
removed by and at the expense of the owner of such corner lot
within six (6) months of the date of passage of this
Or dinance.
1.3 No fence, wall or hedge will be e r ected on any
property line or beyond any property line. Fur ther, where a
fence, wall or hedge is establis hed a long a front or side
property line adjacent to public sidewalks o r· property line,
a distance of six (6) inches will be maintained from the
inner- most line of the sidewalk or property line to the
outer- most fa'ce of the fence, wall or hedge. A fence, wall
or hedge established along the front and side lines of any
property will be r estricted to a height of four (4) feet
along the front lines, and a he ight of six (6) feet along the
side lines to a distance equal to the front set back distance
set forth within this Ordinance. Further, properties lying
within t he light industrial areas may erect a fence
surrounding the whole property within the restrictions as
provided herein to a height of ten (10) feet.
1.4 All fences facing a s treet shall be constructed
with the finished side exposed to the street. In the case of
side yard and rear yard fences. the fin ished side may face
either direction.
1.5 In the case of abutting driveways, no fence shall
be erected in such a manner as to obscure the vision of a
vehicle exiting one's driveway.
1.6 No fence in any zoning district shall be
constructed of, or topped with, barbed wire , or any other
materials which may be considered dangerous unless approved
as a conditional use by the planning board.
ARTICLE 16 POOLS and DECKS ( RECREATIONAL USES )
SECTION NO_ 1 GENERAL REGULATIONS
1. 1 The regulations of this section shall apply to al l
open private recreational uses which require the installation
of permanent surfaces, either elevated or at ground level,
including swimming pools.
1.2 No such use shall be located in front yards o r less
than s ix (6) feet from any property line measured from the
edges of any permanent surface. ·
1. 3 Such uses a re considered "structures" for the
purpose of permits and certain other regulations; however,
they are not counted as floor area in computing building
coverage.
1.4 No suc h use shall be constructed until a building
permit for the same is obtained. The applicatio n for said
permit shall be accompanied by a plan showing the size and
location of any recreational facility and its enclosure to
insure such facility is in full compliance of this ordinance.
SJ.i:CTION NO. 2 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR POOLS
2. 1 All in-ground swimming pools used for bathing or
s wimming purposes in which water may collect in excess of a
depth of two (2) feet shall be completely enclosed by a
fence.
2 . 2 Such fence shall be at least four feet in height ,
but not in excess of six (6) feet, and non- removable . Fences
shall have self locking gates and shall be as such as to
prevent unauthorized children and stray animals from entering
the pool area.
2.3 A fence around an above ground pool is required if
t he pool is less than four feet (4) above the surroundink·
grade and also where there is no safety ladder for said pool.
---- A~
ARTICLE 17 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SATELLITE DISH
ANTENNAS
RESERVED
---- A '7