7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 1/392
Borough of Oceanport, NJ
Monday, July 6, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Oceanport of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code, LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1 through
390, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of
the Borough of Oceanport," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1970 Code of the Borough of Oceanport and all
other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport by
impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted in such
form as to indicate the intent of the governing body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 2/392
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Oceanport" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be
published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the
certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk, or an authorized
agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Borough of Oceanport to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or part of a section,
and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 3/392
A.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by
this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Oceanport which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
The following ordinances, and any amendments thereto, are specifically repealed:
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject 1970 Code Ch./Art.
11 7-6-1922 Autobus licensing Ch. 24, Art. I
14 1-4-1923 Billposting Ch. 21
27 2-19-1925 Autobuses stopping
near intersections
Ch. 24, Art. II
101 6-3-1943 Taxicabs Ch. 59
109 9-7-1944 Board of Assessors Ch. 3
121 6-6-1946 Registration of criminals Ch. 32
154 9-7-1950 Trailer and camp cars Ch. 61
237 9-3-1964 1964 Building Code Ch. 28, Part 2
259 12-7-1967 BOCA Building Codes Ch. 28, Part 1
280A 8-7-1969 Lot maintenance Ch. 43
308 3-2-1972 Parking lots and
garages
Ch. 44
352 6-20-1974 Plumbing Code Ch. 46
353 7-2-1974 Electrical standards Ch. 34A
367 3-6-1975 Unsolicited literature Ch. 42
391 12-2-1976 Claims approval Ch. 12
428 4-19-1979 Fire operation zones Ch. 36A
500 2-7-1985 Property Maintenance
Code
Ch. 40
519 3-20-1986 Festival Committee Ch. 7C
586 2-16-1989 Chief Financial Officer Ch. 5
634 6-3-1993 Smoking in certain
areas
Ch. 49B
BOH* 3-11-1927 Sewage disposal Ch. 77
BOH* 7-27-1944 Sanitary standards Ch. 76
BOH* 12-1-1967 Plumbing standards Ch. 72
* Board of Health ordinance.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-12 of this ordinance shall
not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from
repeal:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 6-5-2008.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 4/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision prior to the
effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such
right or liability.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered,
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any lawful contract,
agreement or obligation.
The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval of the municipal budget.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats.
All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of payment of salaries and
compensation of officers and employees.
Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Ordinance No. 778, An Ordinance Amending the Fines and Penalties For Various Municipal
Offenses.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or
more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
Statutory references. Throughout the Code, outdated, incorrect and obsolete statutory references
have been updated to the current citation.
Violations and penalties: Throughout the Code, the following penalty sections have been revised
to refer to the general penalty in § 1-15 of this ordinance: §§ 84-6, 115-4, 115-11A, 115-14, 121-
11, 121-19B, 127-9, 127-15, 127-21, 127-29, 140-4, 154-6, 158-12, 183-4, 210-3; 223-4, 223-13C,
223-14C, 229-8, 261-13, 267-5A, 279-4, 281-3, 284-4, 284-8, 295-38A, 301-5, 306-6, 306-10,
306-15, 306-21, 311-7, 315-10, 320-12, 325-4, 325-18, 325-23, 328-11, 331-15, 336-27A, 361-21,
371-3, 384-3A, 390-27A(4)(b)[6] and 390-60.
Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, any references to the following agencies or officials are
updated as indicated:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 5/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
E.
"Building Inspector" and "Building Official" to "Construction Official."
"Magistrate" to "Judge."
"PortauPeck," "Port-au-peck," and similar variations to "Port-Au-Peck," except as cited in
specific map titles in Ch. A450.
"Zoning Board of Adjustment" to "Planning Board" (except in those sections of Ch. 390,
Zoning, where the context requires retention of "Zoning Board of Adjustment").
In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14E, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, deleted) 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-15. General penalty.
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
Code or any other ordinance of the Borough where no specific penalty is provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof.
Chapter 5. Administrator
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 6-5-1975 by Ord. No. 370
(Ch. 2 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-1. Position created.
The office of Municipal Administrator is hereby created in and for the Borough of Oceanport by and
subject to the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., and the
employment of a person to fill such office is hereby authorized.
§ 5-2. Appointment; term of office; removal.
The Municipal Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council. In the event the Mayor fails to nominate such Municipal Administrator within 30 days
after the office is created or after the office shall become vacant, or in the event the Council fails to
confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of such 30 days, the Borough
Council shall appoint the Municipal Administrator by a majority vote, the Mayor having no vote thereon
except in case of a tie. The term of office of the Municipal Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the
governing body. He shall be removed only by a two-thirds vote of the governing body. The resolution of
removal shall become effective three months after its adoption by the governing body. The governing
body may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect; provided, however, that the
governing body shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary
and his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the resolution.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 6/392
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
[2]
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
H.
§ 5-3. Compensation.
The Municipal Administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council in a Salary Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 5-4. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Administrator shall perform the following duties:
Provide general supervision for the operation of sanitation services and maintenance of roads,
drainage systems, Borough buildings and grounds, parks, playgrounds and vehicles.
Study and recommend to the Mayor and Council equipment acquisitions, facility construction or
other measures which will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of sanitation services, roads,
streetlighting, drainage, Borough buildings and grounds.
Study, recommend for approval by the Mayor and Council and supervise a coordinated system for
the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for all departments, in
accordance with all applicable statutes, sound purchasing practices and budget limitations;
prepare or cause to be prepared specifications for bidding in consultation with other Borough
officials involved and ensure compliance with specifications.
Function as a liaison between the Mayor and Council and the Planning Board, Tax Assessment
Board, Board of Health, Welfare Board, Waterways Committee, Shade Tree Committee, Northeast
Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority, Historical Society, Citizens Advisory Committee
and the Economic Development Committee.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Act as liaison with the Borough Engineer and with any other consultants retained for planning,
zoning, engineering or architectural services and, when assigned by the Mayor and Council, with
consultants retained for other types of services.
Collaborate with the Construction Official and Zoning Officer with regard to amendments and
supervision of the zoning, building and property maintenance codes.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 295, Property Maintenance; and Ch.
390, Zoning.
For the areas of responsibility assigned by this chapter or by the Mayor and Council:
Provide personnel administration, including negotiation of collective bargaining agreement.
Prepare recommendations for applicable items in the capital and operating budgets.
Study, recommend to the Mayor and Council and provide liaison for any county, state or
federal services or grants for which the Borough may be eligible.
Provide liaison with the Borough Attorney or other legal counsel engaged by the Borough.
Maintain effective communications with other Borough officials, including the Borough Clerk, Tax
Collector-Treasurer, Chief of Police, Judge, Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and Tax Assessors, informing
them about any actions which may affect their function and, if requested, providing any assistance
which is feasible.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 7/392
I.
J.
A.
B.
Carry out other administrative and managerial functions as may be assigned by the Mayor and
Council consistent with the will of the governing body.
Provide administrative assistance to the members of the governing body in the implementation of
its office duties, provided that requests for assistance by members of the governing body do not
unreasonably interfere with the efficient administration of the office and staff of the Borough
Administrator.
§ 5-5. Qualifications.
The Municipal Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of executive and administrative abilities,
with special regard to education and/or training and experience related to the functions assigned to the
said office in this chapter.
§ 5-6. Service as Borough Clerk.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned duties of the Borough Administrator, the Mayor and Council may
also appoint the Municipal Administrator to serve contemporaneously as Borough Clerk.
Chapter 6. Americans With Disabilities Act Compliance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 12-19-2019 by Ord. No.
1014. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 6-1. Legislative authority.
This chapter is hereby enacted pursuant to Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA).
§ 6-2. Employment by Borough in compliance with Act.
Persons employed by the Borough of Oceanport in a position provided by this chapter shall possess
good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental defects which impair the proper
performance of the required duties, or which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job position after reasonable accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodations cannot be made because it would cause the employer undue hardship, such person
may not be eligible.
§ 6-3. Americans with Disabilities Act Coordinator; Deputy
Coordinator.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, shall appoint one employee to
serve as ADA Coordinator. The ADA Coordinator shall be familiar with the requirements of the
ADA and coordinate Borough efforts to comply with and carry out Borough responsibilities under
the ADA and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto, including the investigation of complaints
alleging violations of the ADA.
The Borough shall make the name, office address and telephone number of the ADA Coordinator
available to any interested individuals.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 8/392
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, may appoint an individual to
serve as Deputy ADA Coordinator. The Deputy ADA Coordinator shall assist the ADA Coordinator
and perform such duties as required by the ADA Coordinator.
The term of office for the ADA Coordinator and Deputy ADA Coordinator shall be for one year,
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of
appointment.
§ 6-4. Notice.
The Borough shall disseminate sufficient information to inform all interested persons of the rights
and protections afforded by ADA and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto related to the
responsibilities of the Borough of Oceanport. This information shall be provided in a manner
consistent with the federal rules for effective communication.
The Borough may fulfill this requirement by publishing the notice periodically in local newspapers,
placing the notice on the Borough's website, posting the notice at Borough facilities and including
the notice in Borough publications.
§ 6-5. Grievance procedure.
General procedure.
The Borough has adopted an internal grievance procedure providing for prompt and equitable
resolution of grievances alleging any action prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice
regulations implementing Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Title II states, in part,
that "no otherwise qualified disabled individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be subjected to discrimination" in
programs or activities sponsored by a public entity.
All grievances should be addressed to the Borough's designated ADA Coordinator, who has
been designated to coordinate ADA compliance efforts, at the following address: ADA
Coordinator, Borough of Oceanport, 315 E. Main Street, Oceanport, NJ 07757.
A grievance may be filed in writing or orally, but should contain the name and address of the
person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation. A form for this purpose is available
from the designated ADA Coordinator.
A grievance should be filed promptly within 30 days after the grievant becomes aware of the
alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of discrimination which occurred before this
grievance procedure was in place will be considered on a case-by-case basis.)
An investigation, as may be appropriate, will follow the filing of a grievance. The investigation
will be conducted by the Borough's designated ADA Coordinator. The rules contemplate
informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested persons and their
representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a grievance.
In most cases, a written determination as to the validity of the grievance and a description of
the resolution, if any, will be issued by the designated decisionmaker and a copy forwarded to
the grievant no later than 45 days after its filing.
The ADA Coordinator will maintain the files and records of the agency relating to the
grievances filed.
The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the grievance filed hereunder will
not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of an ADA
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 9/392
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
D.
(1)
E.
grievance with the responsible federal department or agency or the New Jersey Division on
Civil Rights. Use of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other
remedies.
The rules will be construed to protect the substantive rights of interested persons, to meet
appropriate due process standards and to assure that the agency complies with the ADA and
implementing federal rules.
Designated ADA Coordinator.
The designated coordinator of ADA compliance and complaint investigation for the Borough
is: ADA Coordinator, Borough of Oceanport, 315 E. Main Street, Oceanport, NJ 07757.
All inquiries regarding the Borough's compliance with the ADA and the availability of
accommodation which would allow a qualified individual with a disability to receive services or
participate in a program or activity provided by the agency should be directed to the
designated coordinator identified in Subsection B(1) above.
All grievances alleging that the Borough has failed to comply with or has acted in a way that is
prohibited by the ADA should be directed to the designated ADA Coordinator identified in this
section, in accordance with Subsections B through F.
Grievance procedure. A grievance alleging that the agency has failed to comply with the ADA or
has acted in a way that is prohibited by the ADA shall be submitted either in writing or orally to the
designated ADA Coordinator identified in Subsection B within 30 days of the grievant becoming
aware of the alleged violation.
Grievance contents.
A grievance submitted pursuant to this section may be submitted in or on the form set forth at
Subsection E.
A grievance submitted pursuant to this section shall include the following information:
The name of the grievant and/or any alternate contact person designated by the grievant
to receive communication or provide information for the grievant;
The address and telephone number of the grievant or alternate contact person; and
A description of manner in which the ADA has not been complied with or has been
violated, including times and locations of event and names of witnesses, if appropriate.
Grievance form.
The following form may be utilized for the submission of a grievance pursuant to this section:
Americans with Disabilities Act Grievance Form
Date:
Name of grievant:
Address of grievant:
Telephone number of grievant:
Name, address and telephone number of alternate contact person:
Department alleged to have denied access:
Please describe the particular way in which you believe you have been denied the benefits
of any service, program or activity or have otherwise been subject to discrimination. Please
specify dates, times and places of incidents, and names and/or positions of employees or
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 10/392
(2)
(1)
(2)
F.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
other persons involved, if any, as well as names, addresses and telephone numbers of any
witnesses to any such incident. Attach additional pages, if necessary.
Proposed access or accommodation:
If you wish, describe the way in which you feel access may be had to the benefits described
above, or that accommodation could be provided to allow access.
A copy of the above form may be obtained by contacting the designated ADA Coordinator
identified.
Investigation.
Upon receipt of a grievance submitted pursuant to this section, the designated ADA
Coordinator will notify the grievant of the receipt of the grievance and the initiation of an
investigation into the matter. The designated ADA Coordinator will also indicate a date by
which it is expected that the investigation will be completed, which date shall not be later than
45 days from the date of receipt of the grievance, if practicable, or unless a later date is
agreed to by the grievant.
Upon completion of the investigation, the designated ADA Coordinator shall prepare a report
for review by the designated decisionmaker for the Borough. The designated decisionmaker
shall render a written decision within 45 days of receipt of the grievance, if practicable, or
unless a later date is agreed to by the grievant, which decision shall be transmitted to the
grievant and/or the alternate contact person if so designated by the grievant.
§ 6-6. Self-evaluation.
The ADA Coordinator shall evaluate all Borough programs and services to ensure equal
opportunity and equal access.
The ADA Coordinator shall distribute the self-evaluation plan and permit comment thereon by all
interested parties.
The ADA Coordinator shall in all respects comply with the federal rules adopted pursuant to the
ADA, and the self-evaluation shall be kept on file for a period of three years.
§ 6-7. Maintenance of accessible features.
The Borough shall maintain in proper working condition those features of facilities and equipment
that are required to be accessible and usable by persons with disabilities.
This chapter of the Borough Code shall not be interpreted to prohibit reasonable shutdown times
for repairs.
§ 6-8. Employment practices.
The hiring practices of the Borough shall not discriminate against persons with disabilities.
All job descriptions shall precisely and accurately describe the essential functions of the job
performed by each employee.
Job applications shall pertain strictly to job performance.
All job interviews shall be limited to questions concerning the applicant's ability to perform the job.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 11/392
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
A.
The interviewer shall not inquire about disabilities or conduct tests that screen out people with
disabilities.
Questions about the applicant's addiction to alcohol or drugs shall not be asked.
The Borough shall not conduct medical examinations or inquiries of job applicants prior to an offer
of employment. The Borough may, however, require medical examinations and/or inquiries after
making an offer of employment to a job applicant and before the applicant begins employment
with the Borough. The Borough may condition an offer of employment on the results of the
medical examination or inquiry. If the Borough chooses to conduct such medical examinations or
inquiries, all entering employees in the same job category shall be subject to the examination or
inquiry, regardless of disability.
Any medical information obtained from employee medical examinations and inquiries shall be
maintained on separate forms and shall be treated as confidential and not kept in an employee's
personnel file.
Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job after reasonable accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the employer undue hardship, such
person may not be eligible.
§ 6-9. Program accessibility.
The Borough shall make reasonable accommodations to make its facilities accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities. An individual shall not be excluded from participation in or
be denied the benefits of the services, programs or activities of the Borough due to disability.
The Borough shall make reasonable accommodations to its facilities as required by the ADA.
The Borough shall prepare a transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete the
structural changes in all public facilities. All interested persons, including individuals with
disabilities, shall be able to participate in the development of the transition plan. After completion,
a copy of the transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The transition plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
Identification of physical obstacles in the Borough's facilities that limit the accessibility of its
programs or activities to individuals with disabilities;
Description in detail of the methods that will be used to make the facilities accessible;
Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve compliance;
Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan;
Indicate why certain Borough facilities cannot be made accessible.
Effective immediately, the new construction and alternation provisions of the ADA and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to all Borough construction.
§ 6-10. Communications.
The Borough shall take whatever steps may be necessary to ensure that communications with
applicants, participants and members of the public with disabilities are as effective as
communications with others.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 12/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Auxiliary aids and services shall be furnished to afford individuals with disabilities an equal
opportunity to participate in and enjoy the benefits of the Borough's services, programs and
activities.
The Borough shall equip emergency systems with telecommunications devices for the deaf
(TDDs) and computer modems.
All Borough communications, including the public notices required by § 6-4 of this chapter, shall
comply with the communication requirements of the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
The Borough shall place an appropriate access statement on all public communications.
Chapter 8. Borough Historian
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 10-18-2018 by Ord. No.
992. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 8-1. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Borough Historian for the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 8-2. Appointment; term.
The Borough Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor and Borough Council for a term of one year
during the annual Borough reorganization meeting and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Borough Council.
§ 8-3. Compensation; expenses.
The position of Borough Historian shall be served without compensation, except the Borough Council
may annually appropriate such funds as it may deem necessary to reimburse the Borough Historian for
expenses incurred in the performance of the duties and responsibilities of the office.
§ 8-4. Clerical assistants.
The Borough Historian may employ such clerical assistants as may be necessary in order to carry out
the duties and responsibilities of the office, within the limits of the funds appropriated and made
available by the Borough Council in the annual budget appropriation.
§ 8-5. Powers and responsibilities.
The Borough Historian shall have the following powers and responsibilities as provided by N.J.S.A.
40:10A-7:
The Borough Historian shall carry out an historical program, including but not restricted to
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to the history of the Borough of
Oceanport. The Borough Historian shall store such materials in such manner as to ensure their
preservation and shall notify the State Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, County Local
Historian and the Mayor and Borough Council of any materials which should be acquired for
preservation. Upon leaving the position of Borough Historian, he or she shall turn over all
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 13/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
materials, records and reports to the possession of the successor to the office, if then appointed,
or to the Mayor and Borough Council until such successor shall be appointed.
The Borough Historian shall make an annual report to the Mayor and Borough Council stating all
the work performed and accomplished during that year. The Borough Historian shall transmit a
copy of such report to the New Jersey Historical Commission. The New Jersey Historical
Commission may advise the Borough Historian of general guidelines along which its historical
program may be implemented.
The Borough Historian may research, write and cause to have published a municipal history of the
Borough of Oceanport and may recommend appropriate historical materials for publication.
The Borough Historian may assist any historical commission which may exist or be established
within the Borough of Oceanport, as well as advise the Mayor and Borough Council concerning
the acquisition, administration, use and disposition of any landmark or historic site, including such
places in the Borough of Oceanport included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places. Such
advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section, Department of Environmental Protection, by
the Borough of Oceanport.
The Borough Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration, including the erection of
monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
Chapter 14. Cadet Corps
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 3-16-2006 by Ord. No.
805. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 50.
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 103.
§ 14-1. Findings and purpose.
It is deemed advantageous by the Mayor and Council of the Borough to establish the Cadet Corps
of the Borough of Oceanport First Aid Squad.
The purpose of the Cadet Corps is to assist the Borough of Oceanport First Aid Squad in providing
emergency services and to insure continuous memberships, upon reaching the age of 18, into the
First Aid organization.
§ 14-2. Establishment; qualifications; fee.
There is hereby established the Cadet Crops of the Borough of Oceanport First Aid Squad.
Any resident of the Borough between the ages of 16 and 18 is eligible to submit an application of
membership. The prospective member must have maintained at least a C average, or the
equivalent, during his/her last completed year in the school system. All applicants who are
presently participating in the school system must have at least a C average, or the equivalent, in
order to be favorably accepted.
No application fee is required of any applicant.
§ 14-3. Applications and interviews.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 14/392
All applications will be reviewed at the following monthly meeting of the Cadet Corps. An interview will
be arranged to take place within two weeks after the monthly meeting.
§ 14-4. Bylaws, rules and regulations.
The Borough of Oceanport First Aid Squad is hereby authorized to enact appropriate bylaws, rules and
regulations to govern the Cadet Corps and provide a copy of them to the Borough Clerk to be
maintained in current form at the Borough Hall.
Chapter 29. Committees and Commissions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Economic Development Committee
[Adopted 9-7-1972 by Ord. No. 321 (Ch. 7 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Economic Development Committee Ordinance of the Borough of
Oceanport."
§ 29-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a local economic development committee to be known as the
"Economic Development Committee of the Borough of Oceanport."
§ 29-3. Composition.
[Amended 4-5-1984 by Ord. No. 483; 8-17-2006 by Ord. No. 816]
The Economic Development Committee of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of 12
members. One of the members of the Committee shall be the President of the Board of Education or
his/her designee from the Board of Education. The remaining 11 members shall be nominated by the
Mayor and confirmed by the vote of Council at its reorganization meeting or as is necessary by the
event of a vacancy.
§ 29-4. Terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 4-5-1984 by Ord. No. 483; 8-17-2006 by Ord. No. 816]
The 11 members (not the Board of Education member) shall serve for a term of three years or until
their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee,
regardless of cause, shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor, confirmed by the vote of Council,
for the unexpired term thereof.
§ 29-5. Removal from office.
[Amended 11-15-1984 by Ord. No. 496]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 15/392
Any member of said Economic Development Committee may be removed from his or her office for
cause after an opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
Furthermore, any member who shall have missed three consecutive Committee meetings or a total of
four Committee meetings during any one calendar year shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her
office, and the resulting vacancy shall thereafter be filled in the manner as hereinabove provided.
§ 29-6. Qualifications of members.
Each member shall be chosen with a special view to his qualifications and fitness for service on the
Committee. In general and whenever possible, members shall be appointed on the basis of their
experience in business or industry, and their vocational backgrounds shall be such as to render them
particularly suitable for planning the development of available land resources for commercial or
industrial purposes.
§ 29-7. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he will
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office.
§ 29-8. Compensation.
The members and officers of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 29-9. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its members a Chairman or
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary. The Mayor and one member of the
Borough Council, appointed annually by the Council, shall be ex officio members of the Committee
without voting privileges.
§ 29-10. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-11. Employees and assistants.
Insofar as may be practicable, the employees and assistants required by the Committee shall be
recruited from the public officers and employees of the Borough. The Borough Attorney shall be
counsel to the Committee. The Borough Engineer shall be the engineer of the Committee, and the
several departments of the Borough government shall be available to the Committee for the purpose of
the Committee's business. Borough employees servicing the Committee shall do so without
compensation other than their regular compensation as employees of the Borough. The Committee
shall, from time to time, make known to the Mayor its wants in the nature of services by employees,
and the Mayor and Council shall designate which of the employees, if any, shall render such service.
§ 29-12. Powers and duties.
To effectuate its purposes, the Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 16/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
[1]
J.
Make and cause to be made an exhaustive study of available commercial and industrial sites, to
give wide publicity to the advantages thereof, that the early improvement, development and
productive use thereof shall be accomplished.
Serve as a clearing house in connection with problems affecting the business, industry and
commerce of the Borough.
Provide for and encourage the development and expansion of local trade and industry.
Promote the location of new business and industry and the expansion of now existing business
and industry.
Maintain a study of local business and trade conditions, collecting data and disseminating
information for existing business and industrial use and for the promotion of new business and
industry.
Publicize the trade conveniences as to the location of the Borough, its rail, water and highway
conveniences, its economic advantages and other pertinent factors which make the Borough a
desirable location for trade and industry.
Collect information and compile and distribute material dealing with business and trade and the
advantages and attractions of the Borough for trade and industry.
Compile information concerning the availability of county, state and federal funds and grants-inaid.
Collect and distribute information and publicize the historic and scenic places and points of
interest in the local area and cooperate with local organizations and businesses, industrial and
commercial, and also civic, fraternal and other associations cooperating in planning for business
and industry meetings and publicizing the business, industrial and commercial advantages of the
Borough.
Provide necessary liaison between the Mayor, the Borough Council and the Planning Board.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-13. Semiannual report.
The Committee shall make semiannual reports to the Borough Council, setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding six months.
Article II. Shade Tree Committee
[Adopted 10-4-1973 by Ord. No. 338 (Ch. 20, §§ 20-1 to 20-10 and 20-13 to 20-15, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-14. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Shade Tree Ordinance of the Borough of
Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-15. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a shade tree committee to be known as the "Shade Tree
Committee of the Borough of Oceanport."
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 17/392
A.
§ 29-16. Composition.
The Shade Tree Committee of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of seven members, to be
selected and appointed by the Mayor and Council at their next regular meeting after this article shall go
into effect.
§ 29-17. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of the said Shade Tree Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by
the vote of the Council. One member shall be appointed for one year, one member for two years, one
member for three years, two members for four years and two members for five years. Vacancies in the
membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever cause, shall be filled in the same manner in
which the original appointments were made, for the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for
their respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 29-18. Removal from office.
Any member of the Shade Tree Committee may be removed from his or her office for cause, after an
opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-19. Qualifications of members.
Members of the Shade Tree Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Oceanport and shall serve
without compensation, except as may be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-20. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he will
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office.
§ 29-21. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its members, a Chairman or
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary. One member of the Borough Council,
appointed annually by the Council, shall be a liaison member of the Committee without voting
privileges.
§ 29-22. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-23. Purpose; powers and duties.
[Amended 7-18-1991 by Ord. No. 616]
The purpose of this article shall be to create a Shade Tree Committee in the Borough of
Oceanport to provide for the preservation, regulation, planting, care and control of the shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 18/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
parkways under the control of the Borough of Oceanport and to make recommendations regarding
the removal of existing trees and the selection, placement and planting of trees upon private
property in connection with site plan and major subdivision applications.
To effectuate its purposes, the Committee shall have the power to:
Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and care of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or which may hereafter be planted in any public
highway, park or parkway, including the planting, trimming, spraying and care and protection
thereof.
Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far as may be
necessary for their proper growth and protection.
Care for and control such parks and parkways and encourage arboriculture.
Administer treatment to or remove any tree situated upon private property which is believed to
harbor a disease or insects readily communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of
the municipality, provided that such treatment or removal is done with the written consent of
the owner thereof, and further provided that the suspected condition is first confirmed by a
certificate issued by or on behalf of the New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
Review and make recommendations regarding the removal of existing trees and the
selection, placement and planting of new trees upon private property in connection with any
application for site plan or major subdivision approval pending before any board or agency of
the Borough.
§ 29-24. Annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Shade Tree Committee shall certify to the
governing body of the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct
of its work during the ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended
for such of the following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely:
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may thereafter be administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
§ 29-25. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year.
§ 29-26. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person, or for any injury to any property or highway tree or shrub.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 19/392
Article III. Recreation Committee
[Adopted 1-20-1977 by Ord. No. 395 (Ch. 17 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-27. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Oceanport a Recreation Committee, which shall have
the duties and powers hereinafter more particularly set forth.
§ 29-28. Composition; appointment; terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 767; 4-5-2012 by Ord. No. 901]
The Recreation Committee of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of 10 members, who shall
be residents of the Borough. Members shall be selected and appointed as follows: three members for
a term of one year each, three members for a term of two years each and three members for a term of
three years each. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for the term of three years, and members shall
serve until their respective successors shall be appointed. Vacancies in the membership of the
Committee, occurring for whatever cause, shall be filled for the unexpired term. In selecting and
appointing members, the Mayor and Council shall take into consideration recommendations made by
the Recreation Committee. These recommendations shall be based on the following goals: three
appointments shall be made available to the sports associations, with any given association having a
maximum of two members on the Committee; one appointment shall be made available to a senior
citizen, and five appointments shall be for members at large. If no one is available to fill either the
sports associations or the senior citizen appointments, such positions shall be filled by members at
large. When other vacancies occur, they shall be offered to the sports associations and senior citizen
candidates in that order until the recommended number of appointments is attained for each category.
§ 29-29. Removal from office.
Any member of the Recreation Committee may be removed from his or her office for cause after an
opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-30. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he or
she will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of the office.
§ 29-31. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its members a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Secretary and such other officers as it may deem necessary and may formulate
subcommittees for the administration and handing of its programs.
§ 29-32. Quorum.
A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum.
§ 29-33. Powers and duties.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 20/392
A.
B.
[1]
The purpose of this article shall be to create the Oceanport Recreation Committee, which shall be
charged with the responsibility to plan, promote and organize a recreational program within the
Borough and administer same in the interests of the entire community. The Recreation Committee
shall not be deemed to be a Recreation Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:61-17 et seq. or
N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq., but said Committee shall have only those powers and duties that have
been more particularly provided in this article or by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
The Recreation Committee shall fix and determine the duties of and recommend to the Mayor and
Council the appointment of a Recreation Director and aides and such other supervisory or
custodial personnel as it deems necessary for the successful completion and operation of the
recreational program. The Recreation Committee shall, from time to time, study the advisability of
the acquisition of additional park and recreational lands; formulate plans for the development and
improvement of the public park and playground lands or Community Center building now or
hereafter owned by the Borough; propose methods or arrangements for the proper maintenance
and care of such lands and the improvement thereof; and formulate rules and regulations for the
public use of such park and playground lands and improvements. The Mayor and Council, at its
discretion, shall refer to the Recreation Committee for its consideration and recommendation any
proposals for recreational programs or acquisitions of equipment, facilities or property that may be
under consideration by the Mayor and Council. The Committee shall study such matters referred
to it by the Mayor and Council and shall report its findings and conclusions thereon, in writing, to
the Mayor and Council as soon as may be reasonably possible.
§ 29-34. Annual budget.
The Recreation Committee shall submit to the Mayor and Council a proposed comprehensive budget
for the annual recreation program prior to December 1 of each year. The Mayor and Council shall
annually appropriate such sums as it may deem necessary for such purposes, and those funds will
thereafter be administered and disbursed by normal Borough financial control procedures.
§ 29-35. Annual report.
The Committee shall submit an annual report to the Mayor and Council by December 31, setting forth
in detail its operations, activities and accomplishments for the preceding year.
§ 29-36. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to hold the Committee or any Committee member liable for
the death, injury or illness of any person in connection with any recreational activity.
Article IV. Environmental Advisory Committee
[Adopted 4-4-2019 by Ord. No. 998[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. IV, Environmental Commission,
adopted 12-4-1980 by Ord. No. 450 (Ch. 7A of the 1970 Code), as amended.
§ 29-37. Establishment and purpose.
There is hereby established an Environmental Advisory Committee for the Borough of Oceanport, to
be known as the "Environmental Advisory Committee (EAC) of the Borough of Oceanport." The EAC
shall generally make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding sustainability research,
initiatives and funding opportunities, as well as technological advances that will assist the Borough in
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 21/392
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
implementing energy conservation and efficiency measures. The EAC will also make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding open space preservation, protection of
wetlands, water resources and watershed property, management, air pollution control, solid waste
management, recycling, noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance and
protection of flora and fauna.
§ 29-38. Appointments; terms of office; compensation.
The EAC shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the Borough of Oceanport.
The members of the EAC shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval. The
members first appointed shall be those members, and their term; previously serving on the
Environmental Commission. All appointments thereafter shall be for a three-year term.
The Mayor, in addition to the regular members of the Committee appointed pursuant to Subsection
A, shall appoint not more than two alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated at
the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The members first appointed
as Alternate Nos. 1 and 2 shall be those members, and their term, previously serving as alternates
on the Environmental Commission. All appointments thereafter shall be for a two-year term.
The members shall receive no compensation for their services.
§ 29-39. Powers and duties.
The EAC shall:
Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding sustainability research, initiatives and
funding opportunities, as well as technological advances that will assist the Borough in
implementing energy conservation and efficiency measures.
Conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the Borough.
Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding open space preservation,
protection of wetlands, water resources and watershed property, management, air pollution
control, solid waste management, recycling, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, and protection of flora and fauna.
Coordinate with the activities of unofficial bodies at the local, state and federal levels organized for
similar purposes.
Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets as may be
required, subject to funding by the Mayor and Council for such purposes.
§ 29-40. Index to be maintained.
The Commission shall compile and keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of
such areas.
§ 29-41. Meetings.
Meetings of the Environmental Advisory Committee shall be held at regular intervals on such dates as
it shall determine and at the call of the Chairman.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 22/392
A.
B.
C.
§ 29-42. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Advisory Committee shall keep minutes of its meetings and shall make written
reports to the Borough Council concerning its activities, proposals and plans and shall submit an
annual report to the Borough Council. Agendas and minutes of the Committee shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk.
§ 29-43. Organization.
The Environmental Advisory Committee shall organize annually and select a Chairman from amongst
its members.
§ 29-44. Removal from office.
The Borough Council may remove any member of the Committee for cause, on written charges served
upon the member and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
§ 29-45. Appropriations.
The Environmental Advisory Committee shall incur no financial obligations and shall expend no monies
without authorization of the Borough Council by duly adopted resolution. All requests for purchases
must be approved pursuant to the Borough's Purchasing Policy prior to the Committee incurring such
debt.
Article V. Substance Abuse Committee
[Adopted 10-20-1988 by Ord. No. 580 (Ch. 20A of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 4-19-1990
by Ord. No. 604]
§ 29-46. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Alliance to Prevent Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-47. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the "Alliance to Prevent
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse of the Borough of Oceanport" for the purposes of:
Organizing and coordinating efforts involving schools, law enforcement, business groups and
other community organizations for the purpose of reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
In cooperation with local school districts, developing comprehensive and effective alcoholism and
drug abuse education programs in grades kindergarten through 12.
In cooperation with local school districts, developing procedures for the intervention, treatment and
discipline of students abusing alcohol or drugs.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 23/392
D.
E.
F.
Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education, support and outreach efforts for
parents in the community.
Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community awareness programs.
In consultation with the Monmouth County Board of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services, identifying
alcoholism and drug abuse prevention education and community needs.
§ 29-48. Composition.
[Amended 9-3-1992 by Ord. No. 625]
The Substance Abuse Committee of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of as many
members without limitation as may be selected and appointed from time to time by the Mayor and
Council. The Committee may include representatives from the Oceanport Police Department, parentteacher's
organization and other public and private agencies which deal with the community on a
regular basis.
§ 29-49. Appointments; terms of office; vacancies.
The members of the Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by vote of the
Council. All members shall serve for a term of one year to expire on December 31 next succeeding the
date of appointment. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever cause,
shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointments were made for the unexpired term
thereof. Members shall serve for respective terms and until their successors are appointed and
qualified.
§ 29-50. Removal from office.
Any member of the Committee may be removed from his or her office for cause after an opportunity
has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-51. Qualifications of members; compensation.
[Amended 9-3-1992 by Ord. No. 625]
Members of the Substance Abuse Committee shall be either residents of the Borough of Oceanport or
employees of the Oceanport Board of Education and shall serve without compensation, except as may
be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-52. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he will
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office.
§ 29-53. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually, from among its members, a Chairman or
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary. One member of the Borough Council,
appointed annually by the Council, shall be a liaison member of the Committee without voting
privileges.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 24/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 29-54. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-55. Powers and duties.
The Committee created by this article shall provide leadership in planning and formulating
solutions to the various problems created by drug and alcohol abuse and other youth-related
problems in the community. The Committee will be responsible for the preparation and
presentation of public programs to educate and inform the community on all aspects of drug and
alcohol abuse and youth-related problems and will be responsible for the recommendation and
implementation of preventive measures to curtail the incidence of drug and alcohol abuse and
other youth-related problems in the community. In addition, the Committee will evaluate the
administration of any new programs which might be implemented in an effort to help achieve these
goals.
To effectuate its goals, the Committee shall have the power to:
Establish liaison with courts, police, schools, juvenile conference committees, clergy,
professionals, parents and service organizations.
Establish an independent counseling and referral service which can be utilized by the above
mentioned individuals and agencies.
Provide training programs for selected residents to enable them to conduct group dynamics
sessions throughout the Borough.
Coordinate all public relations efforts.
Research all sources of funding.
Design community-wide educational programs.
Submit quarterly reports and program evaluations to the Borough Council.
Be responsible for continuing personal education in all appropriate fields.
§ 29-56. Expenditures; annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Committee shall certify to the governing body of
the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during
the ensuing fiscal year which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely:
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
The purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may thereafter be administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 25/392
§ 29-57. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year, including a financial statement
as to its annual revenue and cash on hand, which financial statement may be audited at the option of
the Borough Council.
§ 29-58. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person or for any injury to any property.
Article VI. Water Watch Committee
[Adopted 2-16-1995 by Ord. No. 662 (Ch. 20B of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-59. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Watch Committee Ordinance of the
Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-60. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the "Water Watch Committee of
the Borough of Oceanport."
§ 29-61. Composition.
The Water Watch Committee of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of not less than 15
members to be selected and appointed by the Mayor and Council at their next regular meeting after
this article shall be in effect.
§ 29-62. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of said Water Watch Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
vote of the Council. All members shall serve for a term of one year, to expire on December 31 next
succeeding the date of appointment. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for
whatever cause, shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointments were made, for
the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their successors
are appointed and qualified.
§ 29-63. Removal from office.
Any member of the Water Watch Committee may be removed from his or her office for cause, after an
opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-64. Qualifications of members.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 26/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
Members of the Water Watch Committee may consist of both residents and nonresidents of the
Borough of Oceanport and shall serve without compensation, except as may be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-65. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he will
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office.
§ 29-66. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its members a Chairman or
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary. One member of the Borough Council,
appointed annually by the Council, shall be a liaison member of the Committee without voting
privileges.
§ 29-67. Quorum.
Eight or more members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-68. Purpose; powers and duties.
The purpose of this article shall be to create a Water Watch Committee in the Borough of
Oceanport to provide for the monitoring of water quality of the rivers, bays, streams and other
waterways in and surrounding the Borough of Oceanport, to detect sources of water pollution and
to recommend to the Mayor and Council policies or action to be taken or adopted by the Borough
to eliminate or reduce such pollution.
To effectuate it purposes, the Committee shall have the power to:
Obtain equipment and supplies necessary for the monitoring and testing of water quality and
the detection of pollution.
Conduct periodic testing and sampling of the rivers, bays, streams and other waterways in
and surrounding the Borough to determine the quality of such water and to detect and identify
the presence, nature and source of any water pollution.
Establish liaison with other governmental organizations and agencies to fulfill the purposes
established by this article.
Design and implement community-wide educational programs intended to foster public
awareness of the sources of water pollution and to encourage individual actions likely to
reduce or eliminate levels of water pollution.
Research sources of funding for the activities of the Committee.
§ 29-69. Annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Water Watch Committee shall certify to the
governing body of the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct
of its work during the ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended
for such of the following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 27/392
(1)
(2)
B.
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may thereafter be administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
§ 29-70. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its operation,
transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year.
§ 29-71. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person or for any injury to any property which may occur in the performance of
the powers and duties conferred on the Committee by this article.
Article VII. Cable Television Advisory Committee
[Adopted 2-15-1996 by Ord. No. 672 (Ch. 4 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-72. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television Advisory Committee Ordinance
of the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-73. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a committee of the Borough of Oceanport to be known as the
"Cable Television Advisory Committee of the Borough of Oceanport."
§ 29-74. Composition.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be composed of six members to be selected and
appointed by the Mayor and Council at its next regular meeting after this article shall become effective.
§ 29-75. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by the vote of the Council. All members shall serve for a term of one year to expire on
December 31, next succeeding the date of appointment. Vacancies in the membership of the
Committee, occurring for whatever cause, shall be filled in the same manner in which the original
appointments were made for the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for respective terms and
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 28/392
§ 29-76. Removal from office.
Any member of the Cable Television Advisory Committee may be removed from his or her office for
cause after an opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-77. Qualifications of members.
Members of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Oceanport
and shall serve without compensation, except as may be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-78. Oath of office.
Every member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he or
she will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his or her office.
§ 29-79. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its members a Chairman or
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary. One member of the Borough Council,
appointed annually by the Council, shall be a liaison member of the Committee without voting
privileges.
§ 29-80. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-81. Annual and monthly meetings.
The Committee shall hold an annual reorganization meeting during the month of January in each year.
The Committee shall meet regularly thereafter one day each month.
§ 29-82. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Committee may be held on call of the President or, in his absence, by the Vice
President.
§ 29-83. Powers and duties.
The primary function of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be to act as an advisory
committee to the Mayor and Council in matters related to the municipal cable television system. The
Committee shall also act as a liaison between the Borough administration, the community and the
management of the cable television system, giving input of community interest and standards
regarding programming, management and operation of the local cable system. It shall also be the duty
of the Committee to monitor and enforce compliance of the Municipal Consent Ordinance adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-24. The Committee shall assist the Council in conducting the public
hearings prior to the adoption of the Consent Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-23. Upon the
conclusion of public hearings, the Committee shall assist the Council in the selection of a qualified
applicant.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 29/392
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
A.
§ 29-84. Annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Committee shall certify to the governing body of
the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during
the ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely:
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the costs of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may thereafter be administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
§ 29-85. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year.
§ 29-86. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person or for any injury to any property.
Article VIII. Capital Improvements Advisory Committee
[Adopted 4-16-1998 by Ord. No. 702 (Ch. 4A of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-87. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Capital Improvements Advisory Committee
Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-88. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a committee of the Borough of Oceanport to be known as the
"Capital Improvements Advisory Committee of the Borough of Oceanport."
§ 29-89. Composition.
The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall be composed of nine members to be
selected as follows:
[Amended 9-17-1998 by Ord. No. 707]
Three members of the Borough Council, two of whom shall be the current members of the
Council's Finance Committee.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 30/392
(2)
(3)
B.
Five residents of the Borough not holding municipal elective office.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough.
The backup member of the Borough's Finance Committee shall serve as the liaison from the
Capital Improvements Advisory Committee to the Borough Council.
§ 29-90. Appointments; terms of office.
[Amended 9-17-1998 by Ord. No. 707]
The members of the Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by the vote of the Council. Members of the Borough Council's Finance Committee and the
Chief Financial Officer shall serve for the term of their respective appointments. The third member of
the Borough Council shall serve for a term of one year to expire on December 31 next succeeding the
date of appointment. The five resident members shall serve for terms of two years. Two resident
members shall be appointed for terms expiring on December 31 next succeeding the date of
appointment, and three resident members shall be appointed for terms expiring on December 31 of the
year following the year of appointment. Following the initial appointments, all resident members shall
serve for terms of two years. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever
cause, shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointments were made for the
unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for respective terms and until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
§ 29-91. Removal from office.
Any member of the Capital Improvements Advisory Committee may be removed from his or her office
for cause, after an opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the
Council.
§ 29-92. Qualifications of members; compensation.
Members of the Capital Improvements Advisory Committee, other than the Chief Financial Officer,
shall be residents of the Borough of Oceanport who shall not, with the exception of the Borough
Council members, hold elective office within the Borough. Such members shall serve without
compensation, except as may be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-93. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he or
she will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of such office.
§ 29-94. Officers.
The members of the Committee shall choose annually, from among its members, a Chairman or
President and such other officers as they may deem necessary. Borough Council members shall not
hold Committee office.
§ 29-95. Meetings.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 31/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall meet at such times as it may determine to carry
out its purpose and upon call of its Chairperson.
§ 29-96. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-97. Purpose; powers and duties.
The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall assist the Borough Council and Planning
Board in the development of the Municipal Capital Improvements Program in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29, 40:55D-30 and 40:55D-31 by proposing capital improvement projects;
classifying capital improvement projects in regard to urgency and need for realization; examining
budgetary constraints and the availability of public and private funding; estimating capital,
operating and maintenance costs and revenues of capital projects, and thereupon recommend to
the Borough Council and Planning Board capital improvement projects in a prioritized fashion with
estimated time sequences for implementation. The Committee shall additionally conduct periodic
reviews and monitor the annual Capital Improvements Program adopted by the Borough. "Capital
improvements" shall be defined as a governmental acquisition of real property or a major
construction project.
To effectuate its purposes, the Committee shall have the following powers:
To coordinate the activities of all unofficial bodies which are organized for purposes similar to
those of the Committee.
To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which, in
its judgment, it deems necessary for its purpose.
To apply for any grants appropriate for its purpose.
To appoint a Secretary and other officers and employees as it deems necessary.
The specific duties of the Committee shall include, but are not limited to, the following areas:
To plan, review and recommend to the Borough Council and Planning Board capital
improvements in accordance with the Committee's purpose.
To interview architects, engineers and other professionals, as requested by the Borough
Council, who may be considered for employment in connection with capital improvement
projects.
To assemble information, conduct studies, interview various appointed or elected officials of
the Borough and keep current data on all capital improvement projects.
To compile from all relevant committees and agencies of the Borough their respective
requests or plans for capital improvement projects and to distribute copies of such compilation
to the Borough Council and the respective committees and agencies not later than July 1 of
each year.
§ 29-98. Annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall
certify to the governing body of the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the
proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 32/392
(1)
(2)
B.
to be expended for such of the following items as is anticipated expenditure will be made for,
namely:
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the costs of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may be thereafter administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
§ 29-99. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year, such report to be submitted not
later than December 1 of each year.
§ 29-100. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person or for any injury to any property.
Article IX. Flood Hazard Mitigation and Floodplain
Management Plan Committee
[Adopted 11-4-1999 by Ord. No. 723 (Ch. 8A of the 1970 Code)]
§ 29-101. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Flood Hazard Mitigation and Floodplain
Management Plan Committee Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey."
§ 29-102. Establishment.
There is hereby established and created a committee of the Borough of Oceanport to be known as the
"Flood Hazard Mitigation and Floodplain Management Plan Committee of the Borough of Oceanport."
§ 29-103. Composition.
[Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 845]
The Committee shall be composed of eight members, to be selected and appointed by the Mayor. The
Committee shall consist of the following: the Superintendent of Public Works, the Construction Official
and the Director of Emergency Management. The Director of Emergency Management shall serve as
the Committee Chairperson. In addition, there shall be appointed one member of the Borough Council
and four at-large members who shall be neither Borough employees nor elected officials of the
Borough and all of whom shall reside in flood-prone areas.
§ 29-104. Appointments; terms of office; vacancies.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 33/392
(1)
(2)
A.
The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor. All members shall serve for a term of
one year, except that the members initially appointed shall serve for terms expiring December 31,
2000. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever cause, shall be filled in
the same manner in which the original appointments were made, for the unexpired term thereof.
Members shall serve for respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 29-105. Removal from office.
Any member of the Committee may be removed from his or her office for cause, after an opportunity
has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 29-106. Qualifications of members; compensation.
Members of the Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Oceanport and shall serve without
compensation, except as may be hereinafter provided.
§ 29-107. Oath of office.
Each member of the Committee shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe an oath that he will
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office.
§ 29-108. Quorum.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Committee.
§ 29-109. Officers.
[Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 845]
The Director of Emergency Management shall be the Chairperson of the Committee. The members of
the Committee may also choose such other officers as they may deem necessary.
§ 29-110. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to create a committee to develop and implement community
outreach projects, to aid in the flood hazard mitigation planning process and to develop a floodplain
management plan.
§ 29-111. Annual appropriation.
During the month of December in each year, the Committee shall certify to the governing body of
the Borough of Oceanport the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during
the ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely:
Expenses of Committee members in discharging official duties, including expenses incident to
attendance at professional meetings.
Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the costs of services for the prudent
promotion of the work.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 34/392
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for said purposes, which sum may thereafter be administered and disbursed by
the Committee.
§ 29-112. Annual report.
The Committee shall make an annual report to the Borough Council setting forth in detail its
operations, transactions and accomplishments for the preceding year.
§ 29-113. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make the Committee or any member thereof liable for the
death or injury of any person, or for any injury to any property.
Article X. Historical Committee
[Adopted 3-20-2008 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 29-114. Continuation.
It is recognized that a Borough Historical Committee had existed, but now is being formalized by
ordinance and shall forthwith be named and called the "Borough of Oceanport Historical Committee,"
hereinafter called the "Historical Committee."
§ 29-115. Compensation; reimbursement of expenses; clerical
assistance.
The members of the Historical Committee, including ex officio members, shall receive no
compensation for their services as members thereof, but may be reimbursed for reasonable and
necessary appropriations made available therefor, but only upon request to and approved by the
Borough Council.
§ 29-116. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Historical Committee shall be to:
Encourage the protection and preservation of historical landmarks and points of interests within
the Borough of Oceanport.
Encourage historical and genealogical research and publication of its results.
Make all information and acquisitions of the Historical Committee available to the public.
Advise the Borough Council on matters affecting the historical landmarks and points of interest.
Maintain an updated inventory or index of all historical documents, records, relics, landmarks and
points of interest within the Borough of Oceanport.
Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups, institutions and individuals within
the Borough of Oceanport in accord with the purposes of this article.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 35/392
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
Maintain liaison and communication with the public and private agencies and organizations of
local, state and national scope whose programs and activities have an impact on the protection
and preservation with respect to the historical points of interest, or who can be of assistance to the
Historical Committee.
Carry out other such duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 29-117. Membership; terms of office.
The Historical Committee shall consist of a minimum of five members, including ex officio
members, but this article provides for additional members at the discretion of the Mayor and
Council, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the majority of the
members of the Borough Council as a whole, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough
Council, along with ex officio members, as provided herein. Persons interested in historical
aspects of the Borough shall be eligible for appointment as members of the Historical Committee.
Vacancies on the Historical Committee shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments, except that vacancies occurring other than by the expiration of the term of the office
shall be filled only for the remainder of the unexpired term of the original appointee. All appointees
shall be appointed for a term of one year during the annual Borough reorganization meeting. Any
member who serves shall be eligible for reappointment. Generally, members must primarily reside
in the Borough of Oceanport. However, the Mayor and Council may appoint or reappoint up to one
regular member whom does not at the time of the appointment primarily reside in the Borough of
Oceanport if such members previously resided in the Borough of Oceanport and have an interest
in the history of the Borough.
The Mayor, and a member of the Borough Council approved by the Mayor, shall serve as ex officio
members of the Historical Committee.
The Historical Committee shall be encouraged to seek participation of other residents of the
Borough in all activities.
§ 29-118. Officers; rules and procedures; records.
The Historical Committee, at its annual meeting, shall designate a Chairperson, who shall serve for a
term of one year. At each annual meeting of the Historical Committee, its members shall elect, from
among themselves, all officers of the Historical Committee and establish rules and procedures for its
members to follow. The Historical Committee shall keep accurate records of its meetings and activities
and shall file an annual report with the Borough Council. The annual report shall cover the activities
and work of the Historical Committee and include recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this article.
§ 29-119. Intent.
This article shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Borough Council to protect and preserve
Oceanport historical documents, records, relics, landmarks and points of interest located in the
Borough of Oceanport, and it shall not be deemed to impair the powers of the Borough Council, the
Planning Board or other public corporations. It is also the intent that this Historical Committee
encourages public participation and education concerning the Borough's history and to serve as a
vehicle for that purpose.
§ 29-120. Zoning compliance.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 36/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
The Historical Committee shall also serve as an advisory committee to the Oceanport Planning
Board to the extent that the Oceanport Municipal Land Use Ordinance requires such advice or
review with regard to historical landmarks.
Regulations applying to the HD Zone District.
The HD (Historic District) Zone shall not regulate the use of land or buildings. It is for the
purpose of preserving cultural, social, economic and architectural history through the
preservation of historically significant buildings and to create an appropriate and harmonious
neighborhood for the historically significant buildings.
In addition to all other requirements of this article, no building or structure shall hereafter be
erected, reconstructed, altered, restored or demolished within the Historic District unless and
until an application for a building permit shall have been approved as to exterior architectural
features which are subject to public view from a public street, way or place. Evidence of such
required approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Planning Board.
Upon receiving an application for a building permit in the Historic Zone, the Construction
Official shall promptly forward three copies thereof to the Administrative Secretary, who shall
place it on the agenda of the next meeting of the Planning Board.
In reviewing the plans, the Planning Board shall give consideration to:
The historical or architectural value and significance of the structure and its relationship
to the historic value of the surrounding area;
The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials
proposed to be used; and
Any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems pertinent.
The Planning Board shall pass only on exterior features of a structure and shall not consider
interior arrangements, nor shall it disapprove applications except in regard to considerations
as set forth in the previous paragraph.
It is the intent of this section that the Planning Board be strict in its judgment of plans for
alterations, repair or demolition of existing structures deemed to be valuable according to
studies, approved by the Planning Board of the Borough of Oceanport, by qualified persons
using as the criteria of evaluation those developed by the National Trust for Historic
Preservation. A list of such structures designated by street address and block and lot number
is maintained by the Oceanport Historical Committee to guide the Planning Board in its
judgments.
It is the intent of this section that the Planning Board shall encourage any alterations or
repairs to structures on this list be made in the spirit of their architectural style, and that any
additions will be made in such manner as not to detract from a building's original appearance.
The buildings included on the list, referred to in Subsection B(5) above, are those structures
within the district that are deemed to be valuable for the period of architecture they represent
and important to the neighborhood within which they exist. It is intended that demolition of
these structures should be discouraged, as their loss will be common loss to the Borough and
the neighborhood. Moving of a structure on the list should be encouraged as an alternative to
demolition, if there is no other way to save the structure.
It is also the intent of this section that the Planning Board shall be lenient in its judgment of
plans for new construction or for alterations, repair or demolition of structures of little historic
value not shown on the list which are within the Historic District, except where such
construction, alteration, repair or demolition would seriously impair the historic value and
character of surrounding structures or the surrounding area.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 37/392
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
Demolition or removal may be forbidden or postponed for a period of six months (after public
hearing granted to the applicant, if desired) and the Planning Board shall, during that time,
consult civic groups and public agencies to ascertain how the Borough may preserve the
building and/or premises. The Planning Board is empowered to work out with the owner
feasible plans for preservation of structures where moving or demolition thereof would be a
great loss to the public and to the Borough.
When it is necessary to move a historic building to another site within the Borough to
preserve it, upon recommendation of the relocation plans by the Planning Board and approval
of the same by a vote of the Mayor and Council, said building may be relocated, provided that
it fulfills the area regulations of said zone as to lot size, setback and yard areas. Furthermore,
the Mayor and Council shall consult with the Police Department and Fire Department of the
Borough of Oceanport, along with any other appropriate parties (e.g., utility company, etc.) in
determining whether to approve a relocation plan.
The Planning Board shall have the power to engage experts to aid in its deliberations. The
Planning Board shall have the power to issue a certificate of approval if it approves of the
plans submitted to it for its review. A building permit shall not be issued until such certificate of
approval has been issued by the Planning Board.
The Planning Board, in passing on the appropriateness of exterior architectural features in
any case, shall keep in mind the purposes set forth in Subsection B(1) above, and shall
consider among other things the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of
the building or structure in question and the relation of such factors to similar features of
buildings and structures in the immediate surroundings, and the position of such buildings or
structures in relation to the street or public way and to other buildings and structures.
The Planning Board shall not consider features not subject to public view. The Planning
Board shall not make recommendations or requirements except for the purpose of preventing
developments obviously incongruous to the historic aspects of the surroundings and the
Historic District.
In case of disapproval, the Planning Board shall state its reasons therefor in writing and it
may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to appropriateness of design,
arrangement, texture, material, color and the like, of the building or structure involved.
Upon approval of the plans the Planning Board shall cause a certificate of appropriateness,
dated and signed by the Chairperson, to be issued to the applicant or affixed to the plans.
If the Planning Board shall fail to take action in any case within 60 days after receipt of any
application for a certificate of appropriateness or a permit for removal, the case shall be
deemed to be approved except where mutual agreement has been reached for an extension
of the time limit.
The Planning Board and the Mayor and Council may consult with the Historical Committee
with regard to any applications put before them; they are not, however, bound by the findings
or opinions of that body.
Article XI. Green Team
[Adopted 10-19-2017 by Ord. No. 979]
§ 29-121. Establishment.
The Oceanport Borough Green Team be and is hereby established as an advisory committee to the
Borough Administrator.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 38/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
§ 29-122. Purpose.
Under the Direction of the Borough Administrator, the general purpose for the Green Team shall
include but not be limited to:
Managing Oceanport Borough's participation in the Sustainable Jersey program;
Making recommendations to the Borough Administrator to pursue sustainable practices where
possible and implement the Borough Council's environmental goals;
At the recommendation of the Borough Council, working with the existing groups within the
Borough whose actions affect environmental issues so as to eliminate duplication and assure that
important tasks are covered;
Coordinating input and providing recommendations for social and other forms of media regarding
the sustainability program;
Creating, managing and organizing various ad hoc environmental groups within the Borough;
Soliciting and evaluating environmental ideas and suggestions from the community;
Promoting the cause of sustainability within the Borough;
Applying for and receiving grants and/or donations which shall be utilized to promote sustainability.
§ 29-123. Membership; term of office.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, shall appoint seven Borough
residents to serve as the Green Team. The Green Team shall elect from among its members a
Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary/Treasurer. Initially, three members shall be appointed to a threeyear
term, two members to a two-year term and two members to a one-year term. Thereafter, all
terms shall be for three years.
The Green Team may select Borough volunteers to work on the Green Team projects.
The names of the Green Team volunteers shall periodically be submitted to the Borough
Administrator, and the Green Team committee reports, minutes, etc., shall also be submitted to the
Borough Administrator.
§ 29-124. Annual report to Borough Administrator.
By December 20 of each year, the Green Team shall submit a detailed written report to the Borough
Administrator. The annual report shall provide an evaluation of the Green Team initiatives and
sustainable practices during the prior 11 months. The report may also include recommendations to the
Borough Administrator for sustainable practices in the upcoming year.
§ 29-125. Meetings.
The Green Team shall meet monthly. Additional meetings of the Green Team may be scheduled by the
Chair at his/her discretion.
Chapter 35. Contracts, Public
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 39/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 84.
Article I. Public Contracts
[Adopted 12-2-2004 by Ord. No. 782 (Ch. 5A of the 1970 Code)]
§ 35-1. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the municipality or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies or to those of its independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter
into an agreement or otherwise contract to procure services, including banking
services/relationships or insurance coverage services, from any professional business entity, if
that entity has solicited or made any professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or
made any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to a
campaign committee of any Borough of Oceanport candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Borough of Oceanport or County of
Monmouth party committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that is organized for the
primary purpose of promoting or supporting the Borough of Oceanport municipal candidates or
municipal officeholders in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection D within one calendar
year immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or agrees to, any contract or
agreement with the municipality or any department or agency thereof or of its independent
authorities for the rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or any other
no-bid consultants shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of money, or pledge of a
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Borough of Oceanport candidate or holder of
the public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Borough of
Oceanport or Monmouth County party committee, or to any PAC that is organized for the primary
purpose of promoting or supporting the Borough of Oceanport municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders between the time of first communications between that business entity and the
Borough regarding a specific professional services agreement and the later of the termination of
negotiations or the completion of the contract or agreement.
For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" means an individual including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The definition of a "business entity" includes
all principals who own 10% or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers or aggregate employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly controlled by the
business entity.
Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity" under this section may
annually contribute a maximum of $300 each for any purpose to any candidate, for Mayor or
Council, or $400 to the Borough of Oceanport or Monmouth County party committee, or to a PAC
referenced in this article, without violating Subsection A of this section. However, any group of
individuals meeting the definition of "professional business entity" under this section, including
such principals, partners and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not annually contribute for
any purpose in excess of $2,500 to all Borough of Oceanport candidates and officeholders with
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, and all Borough of Oceanport or Monmouth
County political parties and PACs referenced in this article combined, without violating Subsection
A of this section.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 40/392
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
"Child" shall be defined herein as a child or legally adopted son or daughter under the age of 18
years of age.
For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract shall be:
The Borough of Oceanport Council, if the contract requires approval or appropriation from the
Council.
The Mayor of the Borough of Oceanport, if the contract requires approval of the Mayor, or a
public officer who is responsible for the award of the contract is appointed by the Mayor.
§ 35-2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions, made by a
professional business entity to any municipal candidate for Mayor or Council or municipal or county
party committee or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed a violation of this section, nor shall
an agreement for property, goods or services, of any kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that
contribution was made by the professional business entity prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 35-3. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services, including banking or insurance
coverage services, with any professional business entity, the Borough or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the professional
business entity made under penalty of perjury that the bidder or offeror has not made a
contribution in violation of § 35-1 of this article.
The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of this article
that may occur during the negotiation or duration of the contract. The certification required under
this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the Borough and
shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
§ 35-4. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Borough candidate or officeholder or municipal or county party
committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a violation of § 35-1 of this article, if, within 30
days after the general election, the professional business entity notifies the Borough Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Borough candidate or municipal or
county political party or PAC referenced in this article.
§ 35-5. Violations and penalties.
All Borough of Oceanport professional service agreements shall provide that it shall be a breach of
the terms of the government contract for a professional business entity as defined in § 35-1C to
violate § 35-1B or to knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received, or to
make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
Any professional business entity as defined in § 35-1C and D who knowingly fails to reveal a
contribution made in violation of this article, or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 41/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
(1)
F.
contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Borough of Oceanport contracts for a
period of four calendar years from the date of violation.
Article II. Professional Service Contracts
[Adopted 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 855]
§ 35-6. Short title.
Professional Service Contracts.
§ 35-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
For purpose of this article shall mean services rendered or performed by a person authorized by
law to practice a recognized profession, whose practice is regulated by law, and the performance
of which services requires knowledge of an advanced type in a field of learning acquired by a
prolonged formal course of specialized instruction and study as distinguished from general
academic instruction, apprenticeship and training. See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6). For purposes of this
article, however, professional services shall not include professional artistic services as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6). Professional services shall include financial and/or insurance services.
§ 35-8. General provisions.
The Borough shall award all contracts or agreements for the provision of professional services on
the basis of qualification-based, competitive negotiation.
The Borough shall solicit requests for qualifications ("RFQs") annually.
The Council may direct the Borough Clerk to solicit RFQs no later than the 15th of November each
year.
Professional service contract RFQs shall be published by the posting of a public notice at least 10
days prior to the awarding of said contract.
The public notice shall be:
Prominently posted in the public place reserved for Sunshine Law[1] notices.
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
Mailed, telephoned, faxed, or hand delivered to at least two newspapers designated to
receive such notices because they have the greatest likelihood of informing the public within
the Borough, one of which shall be the Link News, the official newspaper of the Borough.
Posted on the official Borough website: www.oceanportboro.com.
Filed with the Borough Clerk.
The public notice shall, at a minimum, include:
A description of the professional services needed, including, where appropriate, a description
of tasks involved.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 42/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Threshold qualification requirements setting the minimum standards for qualifying to compete
for the particular services and tasks involved.
Notice that the submission requirements and selection criteria are on file and available in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
Deadline and place for all submissions.
Standardized submission requirements shall include:
Names, qualifications and roles of the individuals who will perform the task and, where
appropriate, a description of their experience with projects similar to the matter being
advertised.
References and, where appropriate, record of success.
Description of ability to provide the services in a timely fashion, including staffing familiarity
and location of key staff.
Cost details, including hourly rates of each individual or group of individuals who will perform
services and, where appropriate, estimates of time to be spent on the contract, anticipated
expenses and total cost of "not to exceed" amount.
All submissions shall be kept on file during the term of the related contract and shall be public
record upon the opening of all submissions.
In the event that compliance with part or all of the requirements of this article is impracticable as
regards a particular contract or agreement, the Borough Council may waive part or all of the
requirements by a majority vote of the full Council together with publication of a resolution setting
forth with specificity the reasons such waiver is required.
All candidates for appointment, having been confirmed by the Council, shall be subject to
applicable provisions of state statute regarding the fair or non-fair and open process.
The Borough reserves the right to disqualify any submission on the basis of a prior negative
experience as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.
Chapter 41. Court, Municipal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Court Established; Judge
[Adopted 12-16-1948 by Ord. No. 134 (Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 41-1. Establishment.
A Municipal Court for the Borough of Oceanport is established as of January 1, 1949, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
§ 41-2. Title of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Oceanport."
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 43/392
A.
B.
[1]
§ 41-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 41-4. Appointment and term of Judge.
There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 41-5. Compensation of Judge.
The Municipal Judge shall receive an annual salary which shall be fixed by the Mayor and Council and
which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever.
§ 41-6. Jurisdiction; powers and duties.
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise all the
functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, or by any other law.
§ 41-7. Location of Court.
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Borough Hall or at such other place as may be designated by
the Municipal Judge.
§ 41-8. Municipal Court Administrator.
There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall serve for a term of three years from the
date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall perform such
functions and duties as are prescribed for him by law, the rules of the courts and the Judge.
The Judge of a Municipal Court may designate, in writing, an Acting Administrator or Deputy
Administrator to serve temporarily for an absent Administrator or Deputy Administrator until the
absent Administrator or Deputy Administrator returns or a new Administrator or Deputy
Administrator is appointed. The Acting Administrator or Acting Deputy Administrator shall be paid
at a rate established by the Judge but not exceeding that established for the Administrator or
Deputy Administrator.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article II. Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 2-2-1984 by Ord. No. 480 (Ch. 16A of the 1970 Code)]
§ 41-9. Position created.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 44/392
[1]
[1]
The office of Municipal Prosecutor is hereby created in and for the Borough of Oceanport by and
subject to the provisions of this article, and the employment of a person to fill such office is hereby
authorized.
§ 41-10. Qualifications; term; appointment.
The person appointed to the office of Municipal Prosecutor shall be a duly licensed attorney in good
standing of the State of New Jersey and shall hold office for a term not exceeding one year or beyond
December 31 of the year of his or her appointment. However, if no replacement has been appointed to
fill the office after December 31 of the year of the appointment, said person shall continue to serve until
replaced or until his or her services are terminated by vote of the governing body. The Mayor shall
nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint the Municipal Prosecutor. Such
nomination shall be made at the annual organizational meeting of the governing body. If the Mayor fails
to nominate a person within 30 days of the organizational meeting or the Council fails to confirm any
nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of said 30 days, the Council shall appoint the
Municipal Prosecutor. No appointment shall be made except by vote of a majority of the members of
the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for
such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. This procedure for the
appointment of a Municipal Prosecutor, upon the nomination by the Mayor and confirmation by the
Council, shall also apply in the event of a vacancy in the office, with the Mayor being obligated to make
a nomination within 30 days from the date of the vacancy.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 16A-2B, regarding the person nominated to serve as Municipal Prosecutor until
December 31, 1984, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 41-11. Compensation.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council in a salary ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: The current salary ordinance is on file in the Borough office.
§ 41-12. Powers and duties.
The person appointed to the office of the Municipal Prosecutor shall represent the members of the
Police Department of the Borough of Oceanport in proceedings brought in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Oceanport as may, from time to time, be required by the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Oceanport.
Article III. Public Defender
[Adopted 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 697 (Ch. 6, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 41-13. Position created.
The office of Municipal Court Public Defender is hereby created in and for the Borough of Oceanport
by and subject to the provisions of this article, and the employment of a person to fill such office is
hereby authorized.
§ 41-14. Qualifications; term; appointment.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 45/392
[1]
[1]
The person appointed to the office of Municipal Court Public Defender shall be a duly licensed attorney
in good standing of the State of New Jersey and shall hold office for a term not exceeding one year or
beyond December 31 of the year of his or her appointment. However, if no replacement has been
appointed to fill the office after December 31 of the year of the appointment, said person shall continue
to serve until replaced or until his or her services are terminated by vote of the governing body. The
Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint the Municipal Court
Public Defender. Such nomination shall be made at the annual organizational meeting of the governing
body. If the Mayor fails to nominate a person within 30 days of the organizational meeting or the
Council fails to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of said 30 days,
the Council shall appoint the Municipal Court Public Defender. No appointment shall be made except
by vote of a majority of the members of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least three
affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case
of a tie. This procedure for the appointment of a Municipal Court Public Defender, upon the nomination
by the Mayor and confirmation by the Council, shall also apply in the event of a vacancy in the office,
with the Mayor being obligated to make a nomination within 30 days from the date of the vacancy.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 6-11B, regarding the person nominated to serve as Municipal Court Public
Defender until December 31, 1998, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 41-15. Compensation.
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to
time by the Borough Council in a salary ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: The current salary ordinance is on file in the Borough office.
§ 41-16. Powers and duties.
The person appointed to the office of the Municipal Court Public Defender shall provide all necessary
and desirable legal counsel and advice required for the defense of cases in the Municipal Court of the
Borough on behalf of those indigent defendants who are entitled by law to appointment of counsel and
as approved by the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 41-17. Application procedure; fee; waiver of fee.
Every person who makes application to the Oceanport Municipal Court for representation by the Public
Defender in any matter pending before the Court shall pay an application fee of $200. The Municipal
Court may waive this required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its
discretion, that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation. An applicant seeking a waiver shall submit a written request supported by facts that
payment of the fee would represent an unreasonable burden on the applicant. The Court may consider
the applicant's employment status, income, assets, number of dependents, financial obligations and
any other information relevant to a determination, in the discretion of the Judge, of what constitutes an
unreasonable burden on the particular applicant. Waivers shall be decided by the Court on a case-bycase
basis according to the particular circumstances of each applicant.
Chapter 50. Fire Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 11-30-2011 by Ord. No.
899. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 78.
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 103.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 46/392
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
Article I. Establishment and General Provisions
§ 50-1. Establishment.
The incorporated limits of the Borough of Oceanport as established under an act entitled "An Act to
Incorporate the Borough of Oceanport, in the County of Monmouth," Chapter 105 of the Laws of New
Jersey 1920 (approved April 6, 1920), shall constitute the fire district of the this Fire Department.
§ 50-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to further provide for the maintenance, regulation and control of the Fire
Department of the Borough of Oceanport, and for the adoption of the rules and regulations of the
Department.
§ 50-3. Supervision and control.
Mayor and Council or its designee is the supervisory authority as provided in the New Jersey Statutes.
The supervisory authority shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Fire Department. The
Mayor and Council shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the Fire
Department and for the discipline of its members (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-68).
§ 50-4. Rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council shall adopt by resolution rules and regulations relating to the organization and
operation of the Fire Department, which rules and regulations may, from time to time, be amended and
modified by further resolution.
§ 50-5. Composition of Department; election of officers.
The Fire Department of this Borough shall be named the Oceanport Volunteer Fire Department
and shall consist of the Port-Au-Peck Chemical Hose Company, the Oceanport Hook and Ladder
Fire Company and such other companies and apparatus as may be hereafter otherwise provided
for. The officers of said companies shall be such as are elected by the respective companies
under their charters and bylaws.
Election of officers.
Elections of officers shall be held as provided in the department rules and regulations.
Only residents of Oceanport, West Long Branch, Long Branch, Little Silver and Eatontown
may be elected to and hold any of the Departmental offices enumerated here in. If a
Departmental officer moves from one of the above mentioned towns, he/she shall relinquish
his/her position and the position will be filled by a member of that fire company meeting the
qualifications as enumerated in the rules and regulations to hold said position for the
unexpired term. If there is no qualified member from that company to hold the position then a
qualified member of another company recognized by the Borough shall fill the position for the
unexpired term.
Ranks and positions of the Fire Department:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 47/392
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
The following ranks and the number of positions at each rank are authorized for the fire
department:
Fire Chief One position
First Assistant Fire Chief One position
Second Assistant Fire Chief One position
Captain One position for each company
One position for fire police
1st Lieutenant One position for each company
One position for fire police
2nd Lieutenant One position for each company
One position for fire police
Chief Engineer One position for each company
Engineer As needed for each company
Each fire company may elect administrative officers for their company as required by their
company bylaws.
§ 50-6. Qualifications for membership.
Regular membership. No person under the age of 18 may become a regular member of the Fire
Department. Any applicant for membership must pass satisfactorily a physical examination by a
practicing physician, which examination must be made within one month prior to the filing of the
application for membership, and a certificate as to his physical condition, disclosed by such
examination and signed by the physician making such examination, must be presented to the
company with his application for membership in the Department.
Special membership. Any person 18 years of age or older may become a special member of the
Fire Department, provided that such person shall be an active member in good standing of the fire
department of any other municipality of the State of New Jersey. Applications for special
membership shall be subject to review and approval by the Borough Council.
Unless any applicant for special membership shall have furnished satisfactory evidence that
he or she was approved for membership in the fire department of another municipality, such
applications shall be subject to of the provisions of Article II of this chapter.
In the event that any special member shall cease to be an active member in good standing of
the fire department of another municipality for any reason, the special membership of such
person in the Oceanport Fire Department shall automatically terminate.
All applicants who shall become a special member of the Fire Department shall at all times be
subject to the provisions of Article II of this chapter regardless of their standing with the fire
department of any other municipality in the State of New Jersey.
All persons accepted for membership in the Fire Department must complete a one-year
probationary period, during which the member may be removed from the Fire Department by the
Mayor and Council on recommendation of the Fire Chief.
§ 50-7. Fire Committee creation and purpose.
Annually, the Fire Department shall establish the Borough of Oceanport Fire Committee. The
Committee shall be compromised of all line officers of Oceanport Hook and Ladder Company and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 48/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Port-Au-Peck Chemical Hose Company. In addition, the immediate ex-Fire Chief, Fire Marshal,
Fire Police Captain, OEM Director and one member from the Executive Board of each fire
company shall serve on the Fire Committee.
The OEM Director and Executive Board members shall be nonvoting advisors to the Fire
Committee.
The current Fire Chief shall be the chairman of the Fire Committee.
The purpose of the Fire Committee shall be to formulate policies and procedures for the
Oceanport Fire Department, and to establish, maintain and oversee a five-year plan for the
Department.
A decision of the Fire Committee may be appealed by a fire company upon a vote of the company
at their first regular meeting after the decision is made. The company must notify the Fire Chief in
writing within 10 calendar days of their meeting date or forfeit the right to appeal.
The Fire Chief will notify the Borough Administrator of an appeal. The Mayor and Council will
review the decision under appeal, or designate a person or committee to review the decision. The
findings of the reviewing authority will be final.
§ 50-8. Fire police appointments, terms of office and duties.
Fire police membership. The Mayor and Council shall appoint fire police officers who shall be
members of the Oceanport Fire Department. Appointments shall be based on the
recommendation of the Fire Police Captain and the approval of the Chief of Police. All members
shall possess and satisfy the qualifications required by N.J.S.A. 15:8-4 and any subsequent
amendments of said statute.
In addition to the qualifications hereinabove set forth, all fire police officers shall have been
certified by the State of New Jersey and the Monmouth County Fire Academy or an equally
qualified school. Copies of the certificates of the qualification for each appointee shall be filed with
the Oceanport Police Chief.
Upon their appointment, fire police officers shall serve a term of five years from the date of
appointment and during such term, they shall exercise and perform such duties as shall be
provided in N.J.S.A. 15:8-4 or any subsequent amendment thereto.
All fire police officers shall be under the control and supervision of incident commander of the
Oceanport Fire Department whenever performing any fire-related duties. However, whenever fire
police officers are dispatched to assist in non-fire-related activities, they shall be under the control
and supervision of the incident commander of that activity.
All other provisions of N.J.S.A. 15:8-4, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this chapter
§ 50-9. Internal management.
The several companies of the Fire Department shall have power to provide for the election of their
officers and members and manage their own affairs, subject to the Borough ordinance, rules and
regulations of said Department, constitution and bylaws of the company, and the approval of the Mayor
and Council, if said Mayor and Council shall see fit to exercise such right of approval in the interest of
the general welfare of the Borough.
§ 50-10. Suspension of companies.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 49/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
H.
Any company which shall refuse to obey or enforce obedience to any provision of this article or
direction of the Mayor and Council or officer of the Borough of Oceanport in accordance herewith shall
be suspended from fire duty in the Borough of Oceanport in the discretion of the Mayor and Council, in
addition to any other penalties herein provided, and its control over the apparatus in its charge shall
thereupon cease and revert to the Borough.
Article II. Membership
§ 50-11. Purpose.
This article is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq. for the health, welfare and safety of its
citizens and to implement N.J.S.A. 15:8-1.1.
§ 50-12. Membership in the volunteer fire company.
Membership in a volunteer fire company means membership in a volunteer fire company organized
pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes or Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, membership in a
volunteer fire company or similar organization constituted in a fire district pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-
70-1; membership in a junior firefighters auxiliary established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95; or
nonpaid membership in a part paid fire department or force established pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title
40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 50-13. Application for membership.
Any person desiring membership in the Oceanport Fire Department shall complete and file in duplicate
an application which shall contain the following information concerning the applicant:
Name.
Home address.
Birth date.
Social Security number.
Driver's license number.
Any conviction for the violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1:
Aggravated arson;
Arson;
Failure to control or report dangerous fires; or
Directly or indirectly paying or accepting any form of consideration for the purpose of starting
a fire or explosion.
Any conviction for the violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3, false public alarms.
Any conviction of a crime or a disorderly persons offense, which would indicate that the applicant
may be a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the Borough.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 50/392
I.
A.
B.
Such other information as the volunteer fire company deems relevant to the application, provided
that none of such information is prohibited by law.
§ 50-14. Investigation by Chief of Police.
Following the filing of such application, the volunteer organization shall transmit one copy of the
application to the Chief of Police of the Borough of Oceanport, who shall conduct an investigation
to ascertain the truth of the statements made by the applicant upon his or her application and any
such other investigation of the applicants background as may be deemed necessary for the
protection of the public good. If as the result of such investigation the applicant is found to have
been convicted of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1a, b, c and/or d or N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 or any other
crime or disorderly persons offense involving moral turpitude or other offenses which the Chief
believes would be inappropriate for membership, the Chief of Police shall consider the same in his
or her decision as to whether to recommend the applicant to the Mayor and Council as suitable. If
the Chief find that the applicant is unsuitable, he or she shall provide a list of reasons to the
applicant explaining said decision. The applicant may appeal the Chief's designation of
unsuitability to the Mayor and Council with the understanding that, upon appeal, any information
supplied to the Mayor and Council shall become a matter of public record.
In connection with said investigation, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting, and the Chief of
Police is authorized to submit the applicant's fingerprints and receive state criminal history record
information from the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification for use in considering
the suitability of all applicants covered by this article.
§ 50-15. Authorized agency.
This article is intended to make the volunteer fire company an authorized agency as defined by
N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1.
§ 50-16. Time limit of investigation.
The investigation by the Chief of Police authorized by this article shall be completed within 14 days of
receipt of the application and the fingerprinting of applicant.
§ 50-17. Approval of membership.
Upon consideration of the recommendation of the Chief of Police as to the suitability or unsuitability of
the applicant, and following the appeal of the applicant, if such appeal occurs, the Mayor and Council
shall vote to approve or disapprove the application. Only if a majority of the Council approves the
application shall an applicant be accepted as a member.
Chapter 55. Funds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund
[Adopted 3-1-2001 by Ord. No. 740 (Ch. 11 of the 1970 Code)]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 51/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
A.
§ 55-1. Fund established; legislative authority.
There is hereby established an account which shall be known and designated as the "Open Space
Dedicated Trust Fund" which shall be maintained in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 and 40A:5-1.
§ 55-2. Utilization of funds.
[Amended 7-22-2004 by Ord. No. 775]
The Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication to the fund of an
amount of $0.02 per $100 of assessed valuation of each annual tax levy commencing with the
year 2002. The funds shall also be permitted to accept donations and testamentary bequests.
Unless otherwise prohibited per prevailing regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection/Green Acres Division (as may be amended from time to time), the funds accumulated
within the trust fund shall only be utilized for the following purposes:
Costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of land for open space purposes;
Costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of land for passive or active recreational
purposes;
The construction and maintenance of improvements on/upon/in open space lands and/or
recreational lands;
Labor, equipment, and related costs associated with the acquisition, construction, ordinary
maintenance, and improvement of open space lands and/or recreational lands;
Acquisition of development rights (in lands of others) to be utilized for active and/or passive
recreational purposes; and
Reasonable and necessary costs incidental to the aforesaid purposes, including but not
limited to appraisal costs, engineering costs, attorney fees, bond issuance costs and other
reasonable and lawful expenses.
The Borough Council is to determine the properties or development rights to be acquired by gift,
purchase or by eminent domain proceedings, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq., within the
financial constraints it establishes.
§ 55-3. Sale of property.
Any property acquired with the funds from the Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund may be leased or
sold in accordance with any applicable law, provided that the proceeds of said sale are deposited into
the Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund, as set forth in § 55-1 of this article.
§ 55-4. Powers and duties of Planning Board.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(b)(3) of the Municipal Land Use Law of
the State of New Jersey, the Planning Board of the Borough of Oceanport is hereby authorized
and empowered to prepare a report recommending which parcels of land should be acquired in
fee and/or those parcels of land from which the Borough should acquire development rights only.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 52/392
B.
C.
The Planning Board shall submit to the Mayor and Borough Council a prioritized list of properties
which it recommends that the Borough acquire and/or properties from which it recommends that
development rights should be acquired. The Mayor shall review the list as submitted and make
recommendations to the Borough Council for a determination as to which properties are to be
acquired and shall state the amount of funds that should be made available for such acquisitions.
After selection of the properties to be acquired, referred to in Subsections A and B above, the
Borough may proceed to acquire, by gift, purchase or by eminent domain proceedings, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq., the identified parcels within the financial constraints established by the
Borough Council.
§ 55-5. Reviews and reports.
In the event that no property is acquired under this article for a period of five consecutive years, then
the Mayor and Borough Council shall review the activities of the Planning Board and the Mayor shall
issue a report to the Borough Council with recommendations and conclusions concerning the reserve
for open space acquisition.
Chapter 61. Health, Board of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 8-5-1920 by Ord. No. 2
(Ch. 9 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 61-1. Establishment.
There shall be established in and for the Borough of Oceanport a local Board of Health, pursuant to an
act entitled "An Act to Establish in This State Boards of Health and a Bureau of Vital Statistics and
Defining Their Respective Rights and Duties," approved March 31, 1887, and the supplements and
amendments thereto.
§ 61-2. Composition.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Oceanport shall be composed of five members, to be selected
and appointed by the said Mayor and Council at their next regular meeting after this chapter shall go
into effect.
§ 61-3. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of said Board of Health shall be nominated by the said Mayor and confirmed by the vote
of the Council, and in making said nominations the said Mayor shall designate one member who shall
hold his or her office for one year from the date of his or her appointment, one member who shall hold
his or her office for two years, and one member who shall hold his or her office for three years, and two
members who shall hold their office for four years from the date of their appointment; and thereafter at
the expiration of said respective terms, said appointments shall be made by the Mayor and Council in
the same manner for the term of four years; provided that, in case a vacancy shall occur in said Board
by death, resignation or removal, it shall be filled in the same manner in which the original
appointments were made, but for the unexpired term only.
§ 61-4. Removal from office.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 53/392
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Any member of said Board of Health may be removed from his or her office for cause, after an
opportunity has been given for a hearing and upon the vote of a majority of the Council.
§ 61-5. Powers and duties.
Within 10 days after this chapter shall go into effect, the said Board of Health shall meet and organize
and appoint the necessary agents and officers of said Board, establish rules for their own government,
and pass ordinances and make rules and regulations in regard to the public health in said Borough as
directed by law.
Chapter 64. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 4-1-1993 by Ord. No. 632
(Ch. 64 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reserved parking spaces — See Ch. 281.
Towing and storage — See Ch. 361.
Article I. Definitions
§ 64-1. Words and phrases defined.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them in
Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and shall be deemed to apply to such
words and phrases used herein.
Article II. Prohibited Parking; Prohibited Stopping or
Standing; Time Limit Parking
§ 64-1.1. Commercial parking prohibited during certain hours on
all streets.
[Added 8-20-2015 by Ord. No. 957]
No person shall park a commercial vehicle on any street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. weekdays and from 9:00 p.m. Friday through 6:00 a.m. Monday except when engaged in an
active job or service on that street.
In circumstances where a contractor is involved in an active job or service on that street that will
last more than 12 hours, the contractor may apply for a waiver permit to allow for the overnight
parking of a commercial vehicle on that street which shall be good for up to five days. The waiver
permit is to be reviewed and, when acceptable, issued by the Oceanport Police Department.
A violation of this section shall be subsequent to a penalty of $100 for a first offense. All
subsequent offenses shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of § 1-15.
Editor's Note: Former § 64-1.1, Overnight parking, as amended, was repealed 8-21-2008 by Ord. No.
849.
§ 64-2. Regulations not inclusive.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 54/392
A.
B.
C.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to
observe other or more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute, or as hereinafter provided.
§ 64-3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule I (§ 64-33) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 64-4. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II (§ 64-34) of any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II attached to and made part of this
chapter.
§ 64-5. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III (§ 64-35) (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III
attached to and made part of this chapter.
§ 64-6. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown on Schedule IV (§ 64-36) at any
time between the hours listed on said schedule of any day specified upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV attached to and made part of this chapter.
Article III. Parking Prohibited Temporarily for Snowplowing,
Snow Removal and Other Emergencies
§ 64-7. Parking prohibited during certain emergencies; duration
of prohibition.
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the streets, no person shall
be parked on the streets or parts of streets.
[Amended 8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 849]
The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until the streets
have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow
of traffic.
A violation of this section shall result in a penalty of $100.
[Added 8-20-2015 by Ord. No. 957]
§ 64-8. Procedure and method of notification of such
emergencies.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 55/392
A.
B.
Upon declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or sections of streets
where temporary "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires or
public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic.
Notification that the "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are being or will be posted shall be given
to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 64-9. Removal of unoccupied vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and
a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 64-10. Effectiveness contingent on erection of signs.
The effectiveness of this chapter is contingent on signs being erected as required by law.
Article IV. Vehicles Excluded from Certain Streets
§ 64-11. Trucks and buses over four tons excluded from certain
streets.
Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule VI (§ 64-38), except for the pickup or delivery of materials on such streets; said Schedule VI
being attached to and made part of this chapter.
Article V. One-Way Streets
§ 64-12. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 64-39), attached to and made part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Article VI. Through Streets, Stop Intersections and Yield
Intersections
§ 64-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
VIII (§ 64-40), attached to and made part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets.
Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street, except
when "YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY" signs are provided for in the designation.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 56/392
§ 64-14. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 64-41),
attached to and made part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 64-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule X (§ 64-42),
attached to and made part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield right-ofway
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Article VII. Loading Zones
§ 64-16. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 64-43), attached to and made part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as loading zones.
Article VIII. Taxi Stands
§ 64-17. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 64-44), attached to and made part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as taxi stands.
Article IX. Bus Stops
§ 64-18. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 64-45), attached to and made part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as bus stops.
Article X. Turn Prohibitions
§ 64-19. Left turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XIV (§ 64-46), attached
to and made part of this chapter.
§ 64-20. Right turn prohibition.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XV (§ 64-47), attached
to and made part of this chapter.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 57/392
§ 64-21. Right-turn-on-red prohibition.
No person shall make a right turn on red at any of the locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 64-48),
attached to and made part of this chapter.
§ 64-22. U-turn prohibition.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XVII (§ 64-49), attached
to and made part of this chapter.
§ 64-23. All turns prohibited.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 64-50), attached to
and made part of this chapter.
Article XI. Speed Limits
§ 64-24. Speed limits for certain streets designated.
The speed limits for the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 64-51) shall be given in
said schedule, attached to and made part of this chapter. Signs shall be installed in accordance with
the letter of authorization of the Commissioner of Transportation.
Article XII. No-Passing Zones
§ 64-25. No-passing zones designated.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 and 39:4-201.1, the following streets and portions of streets described in
Schedule XX (§ 64-52), attached to and made part of this chapter, are hereby designated as passing
or no-passing zones.
Article XIII. Pedestrian Crosswalks
§ 64-26. Pedestrian crosswalks designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-37, the following locations on streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XXI (§ 64-53), attached to and made part of this chapter, are hereby designated
as pedestrian/school crosswalks.
§ 64-27. (Reserved)
Article XIV. Handicapped Parking Spaces
§ 64-28. Handicapped parking spaces designated.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 58/392
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, 39:4-197.6 and 39:4-204 et seq., the following locations are hereby
designated as handicap parking spaces as described in Schedule XXIII (§ 64-55), attached to and
made part of this chapter.
Article XV. Penalties
§ 64-29. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 644; 9-18-1997 by Ord. No. 695]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. Any fine or penalty
imposed or levied for a violation of any provision of this chapter regarding parking may be paid to and
collected by the Violations Clerk without the necessity of a court appearance.
Article XVI. Effect and Short Title of Ordinance
§ 64-30. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 64-31. Repeal of prior ordinances.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Oceanport are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or
parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent prosecution or punishment of any person
for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of
this chapter.
§ 64-32. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as "The Traffic Ordinance."
Article XVII. Schedules
§ 64-33. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-3, no person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Asbury Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of Rossiter Place to Relwof
Avenue
Branch Avenue South Entire length
Branchport Avenue Both From the Borough of Oceanport-City of Long Branch
corporate line to the southerly curbline of the south leg
of Doreen Drive
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 59/392
Name of Street Side Location
Branchport Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Centennial Place to the
southerly curbline of Colonial Drive
Bridgewaters Drive Both From Relwof Avenue to the Oceanport Creek Bridge,
including both bridge approaches
Comanche Drive Both From the easterly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to
the southerly curbline of Shrewsbury Avenue
Crescent Place
[Added 4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 733]
Both From Eatontown Boulevard to Oceanport Avenue
Driveway Both Entire length
East Main Street North and east From the easterly curbline of Pemberton Avenue to a
point 50 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Bridgewaters Drive
East Main Street South and
west
From the easterly curbline of Pemberton Avenue to a
point 75 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Bridgewaters Drive
Eatontown Boulevard
(County Route No. 537)
Both From the Borough of Oceanport-Borough of West Long
Branch corporate line to the southerly curbline of
Monmouth Road (S.R. No. 71)
Gooseneck Point Road Both Entire length
Leonard Avenue
(Horseneck Point Road)
Both From the New Jersey Transit (New York-Long Branch)
Railroad Line to the easterly terminus at Oceanport
Creek
Main Street North From the westerly curbline of Oceanport Avenue to the
Borough of Oceanport-Borough of Eatontown
corporate line
Main Street South From the easterly curbline of Arcana Avenue to the
westerly curbline of Oceanport Avenue
Main Street South From the easterly curbline of Eatontown Boulevard to
the westerly curbline of the west leg of Hedge Drive
Maple Place
[Amended 12-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 888]
Both From the southerly curbline of Shrewsbury Avenue to
the southerly terminus of Maple Place
Monmouth Boulevard Both From the easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue to a point
75 feet east of the easterly curbline of Shrewsbury
Avenue
Monmouth Boulevard — From the Borough of Oceanport-City of Long Branch
corporate line to a point 100 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Comanche Drive
Myrtle Avenue (Seven
Bridge Road and City Route
29A)
Both From the Borough of Oceanport-Borough of Little
Silver corporate line to northerly curbline of Port-Au-
Peck Avenue
Oceanport Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Main Street/East Main
Street to the Borough of Oceanport-Borough of Little
Silver corporate line
Oceanport Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Pemberton Avenue to
the northerly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue
Oceanport Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to
the Borough of Oceanport-Borough of West Long
Branch corporate line
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 60/392
A.
A.1.
Name of Street Side Location
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Monmouth Boulevard to
the southerly curbline of Cayuga Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of Wolfhill
Avenue/Eatontown Boulevard to a point 600 feet east
of the easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue East From the northerly curbline of Fiore Court to the
southerly curbline of Iroquois Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue West From the northerly curbline of Fiore Court to northerly
curbline of Comanche Drive
Relwof Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Asbury Avenue to
Leeward Court
Shrewsbury Avenue North and east From Branchport Avenue to the southerly curbline of
Monmouth Boulevard
Shrewsbury Avenue South and
west
From the westerly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to
the southerly curbline of Monmouth Boulevard
Wardell Circle (access
roadway from Nicholson
Place)
Both From the southerly curbline of Nicholson Place to the
northerly curbline of Wardell Circle (on the access
roadway)
Wolfhill Avenue East From a point 475 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Pemberton Avenue to the southerly curbline of Main
Street
Wolfhill Avenue East From the northerly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to
northerly curbline of Branch Avenue
Wolfhill Avenue West From the northerly curbline of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to
the southerly curbline of Main Street
§ 64-34. Schedule II: No Stopping, Standing or Parking Certain
Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-4, no person shall permit a vehicle to be stopped,
standing or parked between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
East Main Street West 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. From 75 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Bridgewaters Drive to
Port-Au-Peck Avenue
East Main Street East 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. From Lake Avenue to Port-Au-Peck
Avenue
Fairfield Avenue Both 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Entire length
Springfield Avenue Both 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Entire length
Summerfield Avenue Both 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Entire length
Woodbine Way Both 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Entire length
Resident parking along Fairfield Avenue, Springfield Avenue, Summerfield Avenue and Woodbine
Way will be allowed during no parking hours by resident parking permit only. Special guest permits
shall be made available at the request of permit holders and at the discretion of the Borough.
[Added 6-21-2012 by Ord. No. 906]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 61/392
B.
C.
[1]
The above stopping, standing and parking prohibitions will be in effect during the official dates of
the Monmouth Park Racetrack racing season (approximately June 1 to September 1). Such
prohibitions will also be in effect during any period that wagering commonly known as
"simulcasting" is in effect (approximately from January 1 to May 31 and September 1 to December
31); provided, however, that the hours of prohibition during any such period shall extend from
11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. Signs will be removed when the legal requirement is no longer in
effect.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 64-35. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-5, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 64-36. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-6, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit
shown upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Time Limit/ Hours Location
East Main Street East 30 mins./8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Lake Avenue to a point 50 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Bridgewaters Drive
Main Street South 2 hrs./8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the easterly curbline of the west
leg of Hedge Drive to the westerly
curbline of Arcana Avenue
§ 64-37. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 64-37, Schedule V: No Parking Temporarily for Snowplowing, as amended, was
repealed 8-20-2015 by Ord. No. 957. See § 64-7.
§ 64-38. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-11, trucks and buses over four tons' registered weight are
hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials or passengers on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Bridgewaters Drive-Relwof Avenue Between East Main Street-Asbury Avenue and
Myrtle Avenue
Comanche Drive Between Monmouth Boulevard (County Road 33)
and Port-Au-Peck Avenue
East Main Street Between Oceanport Avenue and Bridgewaters
Drive
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 62/392
Name of Street Location
Evergreen Lane-Burnt Mill Circle Between Monmouth Road (New Jersey Route
No. 71) and Eatontown Boulevard (County Route
No. 537)
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between Monmouth Boulevard (County Road No.
33) and Branchport Avenue (County Road No.
29)
Wolfhill Avenue Between Eatontown Boulevard (County Road No.
537) and Main Street
§ 64-39. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
[Amended 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-12, the following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Wardell Circle North Easterly thoroughfare between the Wardell
Circle Inner Roadway and Monmouth
Boulevard
Wardell Circle South Westerly thoroughfare between the Wardell
Circle Inner Roadway and Monmouth
Boulevard
§ 64-40. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-13, the following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street, except where yield right-of-way signs are provided in the designation:
Name of Street Location
Asbury Avenue Between Myrtle Avenue and Relwof Avenue
Bridgewaters Drive Between East Main Street and Relwof Avenue
Comanche Drive Between Monmouth Boulevard and Pocono
Avenue
Comanche Drive Between Port-Au-Peck Avenue and Monmouth
Boulevard
East Main Street Between Oceanport Avenue and Port-Au-Peck
Avenue
Main Street Between Oceanport Avenue and the Borough of
Oceanport-Borough of Eatontown corporate line
Milton Avenue Between Asbury Avenue and Sea Girt Avenue
Milton Avenue Between Monmouth Boulevard and Asbury
Avenue
Monmouth Boulevard Between Myrtle Avenue and its western terminus
Pemberton Avenue Between Oceanport Avenue and Wolfhill Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between Branchport Avenue and Monmouth
Boulevard
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 63/392
Name of Street Location
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between East Main Street and Branchport
Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between Eatontown Boulevard/Wolfhill Avenue
and Oceanport Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between Monmouth Boulevard and Pocono
Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Between Oceanport Avenue and East Main Street
Wolfhill Avenue Between Eatontown Boulevard/Port-Au-Peck
Avenue and Main Street
§ 64-41. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-14, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Algonquin Avenue and Bayview Place/Mohawk
Avenue
Algonquin Avenue
Avon Avenue and Sea Girt Avenue Avon Avenue
Belmar Avenue and Sea Girt Avenue Belmar Avenue
Blackberry Bay Drive and Gooseneck Point Road Blackberry Bay Drive
Bridgewaters Drive and Relwof Avenue Bridgewaters Drive on northern corner of the
Bridgewaters Drive/Relwof Avenue center
roadway divider at that point at which traffic will
enter upon/cross Relwof Avenue in a
northwesterly direction
Bungalow Place and Bridgewaters Drive Bungalow Place
Center Street and Pleasant Place Center Street
Comanche Drive and Pocono Avenue Comanche Drive
Driveway (from Charles Park) and driveway Driveway (from Charles Park) in a eastbound
direction where it joins driveway that runs
north/south
Dwayne Street and Monmouth Park Place Dwayne Street
Elinore Court and Herbert Street Elinore Court
Elinore Court and Winhar Place Elinore Court
Evergreen Lane and Burnt Mill Circle Evergreen Lane
Herbert Place and Werah Place Herbert Place
Hiawatha Avenue and Bayview Place Hiawatha Avenue
Iroquois Avenue and Tohican Avenue Iroquois Avenue
Itaska Place and Seneca Place Itaska Place
Itaska Place and Tohican Avenue Itaska Place
Leeward Court and Relwof Avenue Leeward Court at that point which traffic will enter
upon Relwof Avenue/Bridgewaters Drive
Maple Avenue and Massarro Street/Maple Court Maple Avenue on the southeast intersecting
corner
Maple Court and Massaro Street/Maple Avenue Maple Court
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 64/392
Intersection Stop Sign on
Maple Place and Shrewsbury Avenue Maple Place
Manitto Place and Ausable Avenue Manitto Place
Manitto Place and Itaska Place Manitto Place
Manitto Place and Winhar Place Manitto Place
Monmouth Park Place and South Pemberton
Avenue
Monmouth Park Place
Morris Place and River Street Morris Place
Nicholson Place and northerly end of access
roadway to Wardell Circle
Nicholson Place
Park Street and Horseneck Point Road
[Added 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
Park Street
Pinetree Lane and Burnt Mill Circle Pinetree Lane
Pinetree Lane and Wittenburg Court Pinetree Lane
Port-Au-Peck Avenue and Pocono Avenue Port-Au-Peck Avenue
Relwof Avenue and Bridgewaters Drive Relwof Avenue for traffic flowing southerly on the
southern corner of the Bridgewaters Drive/Relwof
Avenue center roadway divider at that point which
traffic will enter or cross the through traffic from
Bridgewaters Drive/Asbury Avenue
Revere Drive and Colonial Drive Revere Drive
River Street and Shrewsbury River River Street 100 feet southeast of the intersection
with Morris Place on the southwest corner
Riverview Road and Lake Drive Riverview Road
Sea Girt Avenue and Bradley Avenue Sea Girt Avenue
Seawaneka Avenue and Genessee Avenue Seawaneka Avenue
Seawaneka Avenue and Oneida Avenue Seawaneka Avenue
Seawaneka Avenue and Pocono Avenue Seawaneka Avenue
Seneca Place and Ausable Avenue Seneca Place
Shapen Way and Morris Place
[Added 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
Shapen Way
Shore Road and Gooseneck Point Road All Shore Road entrances to Gooseneck Point
Road
Shrewsbury Avenue and Werah Place Shrewsbury Avenue
South Pemberton Avenue and Elizabeth Drive South Pemberton Avenue
Tohican Place and Sagamore Avenue Tohican Place
Trinity Place and Arcana Avenue Trinity Place
Vreeland Place and Morris Place Vreeland Place
Werah Place and Itaska Place Werah Place
Werah Place and Shrewsbury Avenue Werah Place
Werah Place and Smith Street Werah Place
Willow Court and Arcana Avenue Willow Court
Windward Court and Leeward Court Windward Court
Winhar Place and Smith Street Winhar Place
Winhar Place and Werah Place Winhar Place
Woodbine Way and Fairfield Avenue Woodbine Way
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 65/392
Intersection Stop Sign on
Woodbine Way and Springfield Avenue Woodbine Way
Woodbine Way and Summerfield Avenue Woodbine Way
§ 64-42. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-15, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as yield intersections:
Intersection Yield Sign on
Bridgewaters Drive/Relwof Avenue and Bungalow
Place
Bridgewaters Drive at that point which traffic will
cross Relwof Avenue to enter upon Bungalow
Place in an easterly direction
Bridgewaters Drive and Leeward Court and
Relwof Avenue
Bridgewaters Drive at that location which traffic
will cross or enter upon Leeward Court/Relwof
Avenue in a westerly direction
Bridgewaters Drive and Bridgewaters Drive Bridgewaters Drive at the most westerly side of
the intersection, at that point where traffic from
Bridgewaters Drive/Leeward Court/Relwof
Avenue flowing southerly will enter upon and
merge with through traffic from Asbury/Relwof
Avenue on Bridgewaters Drive
Burnt Mill Circle and Burnt Mill Circle Burnt Mill Circle on the southwest corner at the
north end of circle, from the west side making an
easterly approach into itself
Turf Drive and Turf Drive Turf Drive on the southwest corner at the north
end of circle, from the west side making a
northeasterly approach into itself
Wardell Circle and northern end access roadway
from Nicholson Place
The access roadway on the southern end of said
access roadway from Nicholson Place at that
point where the northern access roadway enters
onto Wardell Circle
Wardell Circle and southern end divided median
access roadway from Monmouth Boulevard
Wardell Circle at that point of the northerly end of
the east side of the divider median on the east
side of the roadway where said divided median
access roadway enters Wardell Circle in a
northerly direction
Wardell Circle and southern end divided median
access roadway from Monmouth Boulevard
Wardell Circle at that point which the west side of
Wardell Circle enters upon the west side of the
median divider, from the west side of the circle in
a southeasterly direction
Wardell Circle and Wardell Circle Wardell Circle on the southwest corner at the
north end of circle, from the west side making an
easterly approach into itself
§ 64-43. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-16, the following described locations are hereby designated
loading zones:
(Reserved)
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 66/392
§ 64-44. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-17, the following described locations are hereby designated
as taxi stands:
(Reserved)
§ 64-45. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-18, the following described locations are hereby designated
as bus stops:
(Reserved)
§ 64-46. Schedule XIV: Left Turn Prohibition.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-19, no person shall make a left turn at any of the following
locations:
Intersection Location
Crescent Place and Oceanport Avenue From Crescent Place onto Oceanport Avenue
from May 1 through September 30, between the
hours of 11:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Eatontown Boulevard and Burnt Mill Circle
[Added 4-5-2012 by Ord. No. 902; amended 12-
19-2012 by Ord. No. 911]
From Eatontown Boulevard onto Burnt Mill Circle,
from September 1 through June 30, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday
§ 64-47. Schedule XV: Right Turn Prohibition.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-20, no person shall make a right turn at any of the following
locations:
(Reserved)
§ 64-48. Schedule XVI: Right-Turn-on-Red Prohibition.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-21, no person shall make a right turn on red at any of the
following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 64-49. Schedule XVII: U-Turn Prohibition.
[Amended 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-22, no person shall make a U-left turn at any of the following
locations:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 67/392
Naamee off Sttrreeeett
East Main Street at Bridgewaters Drive
East Main Street and Lake Avenue
§ 64-50. Schedule XVIII: All-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-23, no person shall make a turn at any of the following
intersections:
(Reserved)
§ 64-51. Schedule XIX: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-24, the following speed limits for both directions of travel
along the following streets are hereby designated:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Crescent Place
[Added 10-20-2006 by Ord. No.
818]
35 Entire length
East Main Street
[Amended 5-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 865]
25 Entire length from the intersection of Main Street
and Oceanport Avenue to Port-Au-Peck Avenue
Main Street 35 Entire length
Port-Au-Peck Avenue 25 From Branchport Avenue to Pocono Avenue
Port-Au-Peck Avenue 40 From Wolfhill Avenue to Branchport Avenue from
October 1 through April 30
Port-Au-Peck Avenue 30 From Wolfhill Avenue to Branchport Avenue from
May 1 through September 30
§ 64-52. Schedule XX: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-25, no person shall pass in a no-passing zone on any of the
following streets and described locations, marked in accordance with the respective letters of
authorization:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Asbury Avenue Both From East Main Street to Myrtle Avenue, a
distance of 3,830 feet, the entire length
Bridgewaters Drive Both From East Main Street to Myrtle Avenue, a
distance of 3,830 feet, the entire length
Comanche Drive Both From Port-Au-Peck Avenue to Pocono Avenue, a
distance of 5,890 feet, the entire length
Crescent Place
[Added 10-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 818]
Both From Eatontown Boulevard to Oceanport Avenue,
a distance of 2,640 feet, the entire length
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 68/392
Name of Street Direction Limits
East Main Street Both From Oceanport Avenue to Port-Au-Peck
Avenue, a distance of 2,960 feet, the entire length
Main Street Both From Oceanport Avenue to Route 71, a distance
of 4,450 feet, the entire length
Port-Au-Peck Avenue Both From Wolfhill Avenue to Pocono Avenue, a
distance of 13,370 feet, the entire length
Relwof Avenue Both From East Main Street to Myrtle Avenue, a
distance of 3,830 feet, the entire length
Wolfhill Avenue Both From Main Street to Port-Au-Peck Avenue, a
distance of 1,960 feet, the entire length
§ 64-53. Schedule XXI: Pedestrian Crosswalks.
[Amended 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-26, the following locations are designated as mid-block
pedestrian crosswalks:
Intersection Location
East Main Street and Oceanport
Gardens
A pedestrian crosswalk midblock, from the southwesterly
side of East Main Street to the northeasterly side of East
Main Street. Said location is on East Main Street to a point
225 feet south of the southerly curbline of Bridgewaters
Drive, to a point 6 feet southerly thereof
Oceanport Avenue
[Added 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
At the Monmouth Park Racetrack Clubhouse from a point
265 feet north of the northerly curbline of Springfield
Avenue to a point 17 feet westerly therefrom
Port-Au-Peck Avenue
[Added 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 801]
Across from the Monmouth Park Racetrack Picnic Area
from a point 1,118 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Myrtle Avenue to a point 17 feet westerly therefrom
§ 64-54. Schedule XXII. (Reserved)
§ 64-55. Schedule XXIII: Handicap Parking Spaces.
In accordance with the provisions of § 64-28, the following locations are designated as handicap
parking spaces.
(Reserved)
Article XVIII. Installation of Signs; Effective Date;
Enforcement
§ 64-56. Signs to be installed.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be installed as specified in the letters of authorization.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 69/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 64-57. When effective; enforcement agency.
This chapter shall take effect as provided by law and shall be enforced by the Police Department.
Article XIX. Traffic Controls for Street and Highway
Construction and Maintenance Operations
[Added 3-20-2008 by Ord. No. 836]
§ 64-58. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for streets and highways.
The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur when traffic must be
moved through or around street construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above and
below ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic, and
that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to
better promote the public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls
and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force performing these operations.
The Borough of Oceanport in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey, does hereby adopt
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as
hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction,
maintenance operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor
or utility who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
§ 64-59. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or, in the case of a public utility, as required
under the public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway, to
contact the Police Chief, Captain or the Traffic Safety Bureau of the Oceanport Police Department
in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic
during such period of construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to their start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic
Safety Bureau of the Oceanport Police Department is in violation of this section.
Prior to the start of construction operations, the contractor shall assign a supervisory-level
employee to be the traffic control coordinator. The Traffic Safety Bureau of the Oceanport Police
Department shall be notified as to the name of this individual at the preconstruction meeting, along
with a method of contacting the individual on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week basis.
§ 64-60. Hazardous conditions.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Oceanport Police Department with at least two
emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the Police Department to correct
a hazardous condition, the Borough may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable
fees for such emergency service by the Borough shall be charged to the person, contractor or the
utility responsible for such conditions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 70/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
§ 64-61. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on any roadway in the Borough
before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. The Chief of Police or the officer in charge of the shift of
the Oceanport Police Department may adjust this time limit to permit work prior to 8:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m. This limitation shall not apply to work of an emergency nature or work requiring immediate
attention, nor shall it apply to work which can only be done within the restricted hours of the morning. If
such work is to occur, the Oceanport Police Department shall be notified immediately. If it is
determined by the officer in charge of the Traffic Safety Bureau that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or
health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 8:00 a.m. or 6:00 p.m. not to exceed
three days except on further application citing specific reasons and on approval of Traffic Safety
Management.
§ 64-62. Road closings and detours.
The Oceanport Police Department must approve any road closing in the Borough of Oceanport
and deem if necessary to use police officers for traffic control. Failure to do so will result in the job
being shut down.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the Oceanport
Police Department.
Should the contractor begin work prior to the work zone being properly established as described
herein, the Borough of Oceanport shall assume no responsibility for tort liability issues arising from
the contractor's premature start. All liability and consequences arising from a premature start are
solely the contractor's. It should be noted that at the conclusion of the workday, the detour route
will be discontinued and the area under construction reopened to traffic until the start of the
following workday.
Therefore, the contractor shall ensure that all of his equipment and materials are removed from
the roadway, the road clear of all debris and that all raised manholes, inlets and other
appurtenances have traffic control devices (i.e., drums) placed over them.
In the event that a manhole, inlet or other appurtenances is in the middle of a travel way and the
placement of a traffic device would impede the flow of traffic, the manhole, inlet or other
appurtenance will be ramped with fresh bituminous material (either cold or hot mix). The use of
millings to perform this operation will not be allowed.
§ 64-63. Traffic detours.
Certified traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites when determined
by the Oceanport Police Department's Traffic Safety Bureau that same is necessary to provide for
the expeditious movement of traffic.
The contractor shall notify the respective Police Department at least two working days in advance
of requiring certified traffic directors. The contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements
regarding the certified traffic directors.
Contractors wishing to utilize private certified traffic directors must supply to the Police Department
the certifications and training documents of all directors that will be in the roadway or controlling
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 71/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
§ 64-64. Stop work.
The Oceanport Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including the removal of
equipment and vehicles and stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of an open
excavation and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this article.
§ 64-65. Site preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the
roadway or sidewalk area until all construction, signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed.
It shall be the contractor's responsibility to maintain driveway access for all adjacent property
owners. In the event that the driveway access must be temporarily denied, the contractor shall
provide written notice to the Oceanport Police Department and the property owner at least five
working days in advance of the driveway closing.
The contractor shall present to the Oceanport Police Department all traffic control devices and
materials necessary to execute proper maintenance and protection of traffic operations for the
project. The number and type of traffic control devices shall be as deemed necessary by the
Oceanport Police Department. The contractor shall have all traffic control devices and materials
present for examination at least five working days prior to start of work.
All traffic control devices supplied are to be new or in good condition. Traffic devices damaged
under the work contract as a result of carelessness or mishandling by the contractor (i.e., running
over cones or barrels with his equipment or splashing tar on traffic control devices, etc.) shall be
replaced by the contractor within five working days.
The Oceanport Police Department reserves the right to reject any traffic control device which, in its
sole opinion, does not satisfy the criteria of M.U.T.C.D. specifications, is damaged or otherwise
incapable of providing the function for which it was intended. In this event, the contractor shall
replace the deficient traffic control device and/or materials within two working days. Upon
completion of a municipal contract project, all traffic control devices and materials become the
property of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 64-66. List of streets.
The following is a list of streets that must have a certified traffic director while work is being
conducted. Failure to have a certified traffic director will result in the job being shut down. All other
roads are at the discretion of the Chief, Captain or Traffic Bureau.
Port-Au-Peck Avenue.
Oceanport Avenue.
East Main Street.
Main Street.
Eatontown Boulevard.
Wolf Hill Avenue.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 72/392
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Asbury Avenue.
Relwof Avenue.
Bridgewaters Drive.
Comanche Drive.
Monmouth Boulevard.
Shrewsbury Avenue.
Branchport Avenue.
Pemberton Avenue.
Monmouth Road.
Myrtle Avenue.
Whenever a certified traffic director is required or requested for traffic control, the person,
contractor or utility is responsible for the costs of the certified traffic directors and equipment.
When the contractor chooses to use Oceanport police officers to direct traffic, officers will be
assigned by the Police Department and their rate of pay will be established by the Borough of
Oceanport. A reasonable fee will be added to the hourly rate to cover workers' compensation,
Medicare and the use of Police Department equipment and vehicles.
When the contractor chooses to use Oceanport police officers to direct traffic, payment to cover
the estimated cost of traffic control for the project must be delivered to the Borough of Oceanport
prior to the beginning of work.
§ 64-67. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be
imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine for not less than $250 and/or be
imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
Article XX. Traffic Regulations Applicable to Liberty Walk
Development
[Added 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1016]
§ 64-68. General parking.
Within the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Liberty Walk development
located in the Borough of Oceanport:
All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 73/392
B.
A.
B.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below,
except in areas covered by other parking restrictions.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Gosselin Avenue North All As indicated on site
plan
§ 64-69. Stop intersections.
Within the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Liberty Walk development
located in the Borough of Oceanport, the following described intersections are hereby designated as
stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Gosselin Avenue east terminus Gosselin Avenue
Gosselin Avenue west terminus Gosselin Avenue
§ 64-70. Speed limits.
Within the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Liberty Walk development
located in the Borough of Oceanport:
The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways is:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Gosselin Avenue 25 Entire length
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the above designated
speed limits authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 64-71. Tow-away zones.
Within the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Liberty Walk development
located in the Borough of Oceanport, any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic or block entrances or exitways, oil fills, or any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or present
in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's
expense.
§ 64-72. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty
as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 72. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Donated Leave
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 74/392
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
A.
[Adopted 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 814]
§ 72-1. Eligible employees.
A Borough employee shall be eligible to receive donated sick or vacation leave from a fellow employee
if the employee:
Has completed at least one year of continuous service with the Borough;
Has exhausted all accrued sick, vacation and administrative leave, all sick leave injury benefits, if
any, and all compensatory time off;
Has not, in the two-year period immediately preceding the employee's need for donated leave,
been disciplined for chronic or excessive absenteeism, chronic or excessive lateness or abuse of
leave; and
Has:
Suffered from a catastrophic health condition or injury;
Is needed to provide care to a member of the employee's immediate family who is suffering
from a catastrophic health condition or injury; or
Requires absence from work due to the donation of an organ (which shall include, for
example, the donation of bone marrow).
§ 72-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CATASTROPHIC HEALTH CONDITION OR INJURY
Either:
A life-threatening condition or combination of conditions; or
A period of disability required by his or her mental or physical health or the health of the
employee's fetus which requires the care of a physician who provides a medical
verification of the need for the employee's absence from work for 60 or more work days.
With respect to an employee's immediate family member, either:
A life threatening condition or combination of conditions; or
A period of disability required by his or her mental or physical health which requires the
care of a physician who provides a medical verification of the need for the family's
member's care by the employee for 60 or more work days.
§ 72-3. Participation in program; procedures.
In order to participate in the program, an employee must request the approval of his or her
participation in the program from the governing body, as a leave recipient or leave donor. The
employee's supervisor may make such a request on behalf of the employee for his or her
participation in the program as a leave recipient.
The employee or supervisor requesting the employee's acceptance as a leave recipient shall
submit to the Borough medical verification from a physician or other licensed health care
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 75/392
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
provider concerning the nature and anticipated duration of the disability resulting from either
the catastrophic health condition or injury, or the donation of an organ, as the case may be.
When the Borough has approved an employee as a leave recipient, the Borough shall, with
the employee's consent, post or circulate the employee's name along with those of the eligible
employees in a conspicuous manner to encourage the donation of leave time, and shall
provide notice to all negotiations representatives in the Borough.
If the employee is unable to consent to this posting or circulation, the employee's family may
consent on his or her behalf.
A leave recipient must receive at least five sick days or vacation days or a combination thereof
from one or more leave donors to participate in the donated leave program. A leave donor shall
donate only whole sick days or whole vacation days and may not donate more than 10 such days
to any one recipient.
A leave recipient shall receive no more than 30 sick days or vacation days, and shall not
receive any such days on a retroactive basis.
A leave donor shall have remaining at least 20 days of accrued sick leave, if donating sick
leave and at least 12 days of accrued vacation leave, if donating vacation leave.
A leave donor shall not revoke the leave donation.
While using donated leave time the leave recipient shall accrue sick leave and vacation leave and
be entitled to retain such leave upon his or her return to work.
Any unused donated leave shall be returned to the leave donors on a prorated basis upon the
leave recipient's return to work, except that if the prorating of leave days results in less than
one day per donor to be returned, that leave time shall not be returned.
Upon retirement, the leave recipient shall not be granted supplemental compensation on
retirement for any unused sick days which he or she had received through the leave donation
program.
§ 72-4. Prohibition of threats or coercion.
Borough employees shall be prohibited from threatening or coercing or attempting to threaten or
coerce other employees for the purpose of interfering with rights involving donating, receiving or using
donated leave time. Such prohibited acts shall include, but not be limited to, promising to confer or
conferring a benefit such as an appointment or promotion or making a threat to engage in, or engaging
in, an act of retaliation against an employee.
Article II. Personnel Policies
[Adopted 8-17-2006 by Ord. No. 815]
§ 72-5. Authority to adopt policies by resolution.
The Borough of Oceanport shall by resolution adopt and amend from time to time personnel policies
and procedures including rules concerning the hiring and termination of employees, terms and
conditions of employment, and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted pursuant to said resolution(s)
shall be applicable to all officials, appointees, employees, prospective employees, volunteers and
independent contractors of the Borough.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 76/392
[1]
§ 72-6. Implementation and enforcement.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible to implement and enforce the personnel practices adopted by
resolution authorized pursuant to this article. If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and
any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or federal or
state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices
adopted pursuant to this article shall prevail.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Bylaws
[Adopted 10-20-2006 by Ord. No. 817; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 72-7. Purpose.
The "Bylaws of the Borough of Oceanport" adopted pursuant to § 72-8, and referred to as the "bylaws"
or "rules," are established to work in conjunction and compliance with the laws set forth in state
statutes, and such law is not necessarily restated herein.
§ 72-8. Adoption of bylaws.
The Borough of Oceanport's bylaws, adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Council on September
21, 2006, are hereby designated as the bylaws of the Borough of Oceanport and shall be used as a
guide and reference for all Borough officials of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 72-9. Enforcement.
The governing body of the Borough of Oceanport is hereby charged with promulgation and
enforcement of the bylaws and with recommending timely changes to the manual containing them.
Such changes to the manual shall be made by resolution.
Chapter 75. Payroll Procedures
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Third-Party Payroll Disbursement
[Adopted 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 991]
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of these regulations is to abide by the requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-20.1
and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq., governing electronic disbursement controls for payroll purposes.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 77/392
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER or CFO
The individual statutorily responsible for supervising the accounts and finances of a local unit, and
shall include any certifying and approval officer appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17a, any
individual appointed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 18A:19-4.1, or such individual in similar capacity
legally appointed by the governing body of a local unit.
CONTRACT
Any written agreement entered into by a local unit and a disbursing organization for the purposes
authorized in these rules.
DEDICATED CASH ACCOUNT
A demand deposit bank account owned by the local unit and funded solely for use by a disbursing
organization in performing its duties and responsibilities in accordance with the contract.
DISBURSEMENT
Any payment of moneys, including any transfer of funds, by any means, to the dedicated cash
account established for use by a disbursing organization.
PAYMENT DOCUMENTATION
Includes transmittals, remittance forms, tax returns, releases, filings, reports, and tapes supporting
the disbursement of funds.
PAYROLL
The object and result of all preparations and calculations for, and the disbursement of, salaries
and wages, all withholdings therefrom, and additional liabilities related thereto.
THIRD-PARTY DISBURSEMENT SERVICE
Such service or services of the type described in these rules. Such service or services may
include the processing and disbursing of payroll and payroll agency obligations.
THIRD-PARTY DISBURSEMENT SERVICE ORGANIZATION or DISBURSING ORGANIZATION
An organization engaged either directly or indirectly to perform any of the services indicated in
these rules.
TRANSACTION
Any activity that, in accordance with sound fiscal practices, affects the general books of entry,
ledgers, records, or logs of a local unit.
§ 75-3. Authorization to use payroll service.
The Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, is authorized to use a payroll service to prepare
payment documentation, take possession of Borough funds, and make such disbursements itself
on behalf of the Borough.
The following payroll service providers shall be required to comply with these regulations:
Payroll service providers who use their own customized programming process to execute
disbursement for the Borough;
Payroll service providers who use a third-party processor to execute disbursements for the
Borough.
§ 75-4. Borough requirements.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 78/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
The appointment of a payroll service shall be pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq., and shall require the contractor to do the following, not by way of limitation: data
collection, agency report preparation, calculation of withholding, direct deposit of payroll
disbursements, and/or transfer of Borough funds to contractor's account for subsequent
disbursement of payment.
Any renewal or extension of a contract under these regulations shall be by resolution.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby appointed the approval officer and is responsible for
authorizing and supervising the activities of the payroll service and shall further be charged with
the reconciliation and analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the
disbursing organization.
If required by the contract between the Borough and the payroll service, the payroll service is
permitted to hold Borough funds pending transmittal to a payee.
§ 75-5. Payroll service requirements.
A payroll service must meet all of the following requirements:
Report any irregularities that may indicate potential fraud, noncompliance with appropriate
laws, dishonesty or gross incompetence on the part of the approval officer.
Report circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue operations or otherwise
interrupt the services provided to the Borough.
A payroll service must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5, requiring that the approval
officer be assured that the servicer has its own internal controls, and appropriately guard against
theft and other adverse conditions.
All contracts entered into pursuant to these regulations and the laws authorizing the same shall
comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.6, which sets out a series of mandatory
contractual terms and conditions.
§ 75-6. Establishment of service.
Upon the adoption of these regulations, the Borough Administrator and Purchasing Agent, with the
assistance of the Chief Financial Officer and the Borough Attorney, as necessary, are hereby
authorized and directed to enter into a contract for payroll service in accordance with all local public
contracting laws and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17. Appointment of the payroll service shall be by separate
resolution of the Borough.
Chapter 78. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 50.
Article I. Establishment
[Adopted 12-6-2001 by Ord. No. 747 (Ch. 16 of the 1970 Code)]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 79/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the organization, maintenance, regulation and control of the
Police Department and to provide for the adoption of rules and regulations relating to the organization
and operation of the Police Department.
§ 78-2. Appropriate authority.
[Amended 7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 867]
The Borough Council or its designee (a designated committee thereof or Borough Administrator) is
designated as the appropriate authority as provided in the New Jersey statutes. The appropriate
authority shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department. The Borough
Council shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department
and for the discipline of its members (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118).
§ 78-3. Duties of Department.
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and property; detect, arrest and
prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Borough of Oceanport; direct
and control traffic; provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide appearances in
court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies and provide training for the efficiency of its
members and officers. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-152)
§ 78-4. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be directly responsible to the
appropriate authority for its efficiency and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by
the appropriate authority, the Chief of Police shall:
Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police Department and any special
emergency directive for the disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers;
Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the Police Department;
Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the Police
Department to be exercised under the Chief's direction and control; and
Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as shall be prescribed on the
operation of the Police Department during the preceding month and make such other reports as
may be requested by the appropriate authority. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118)
§ 78-5. Discipline.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank
for any cause other than for incapacity, misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey
statutes and the Police Departments rules and regulations. (N.J.S.A. 40A-14-118)
§ 78-6. Positions and appointments.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 80/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
[1]
C.
The following ranks and the number of positions at each rank are authorized for the Police
Department:
[Amended 6-21-2012 by Ord. No. 907]
Chief of Police: one position.
Captain of Police: one position.
Lieutenant and Sergeants: No more than four positions one of which may be a Lieutenant.
Patrolman: eight positions.
Appointments; probationary periods.
The Mayor and Council shall appoint the members of the Police Department in accordance
with the requirements of New Jersey statutes. No person shall be appointed to the Police
Department who is not qualified as provided in said statutes. The Mayor and Council may
also require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department shall successfully
complete a physical, mental and psychological examination. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 and
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127)
Each policeman shall be first employed for a probationary term of at least 12 months so that
his/her fitness for the duties he/she is to perform may be determined before he/she is
permanently attached to the Police Department. The probationary term may be extended at
the discretion of the governing body for a period not to exceed six months at the expiration of
said twelve-month period. These periods of probationary employment shall be termed
"probationary periods." A probationary policeman so employed shall be deemed a
"probationer" and may be dropped from the rolls or discharged at any time during such
probationary period without notice and without hearing. The Mayor and Council may at any
time prior to the expiration of the probationary period of employment appoint such
probationary member of the Police Department as a permanent member of the Police
Department by official resolution. The continued employment of any probationary policeman
after the expiration of his/her probationary period of employment shall be deemed a
permanent appointment to the regular force.
[Amended 12-2-2004 by Ord. No. 783]
Special officers. The Mayor and Council may appoint, from time to time, special law enforcement
officers in accordance with New Jersey statutes for terms not exceeding one year. They shall
possess and exercise all the powers and duties provided by said statutes during their term in
office but shall not be continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall not be
entitled to tenure. The Police Chief may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty
to exercise the same powers and authority as regular members of the Police Department,
including the carrying of firearms and the power of arrest. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.)[1]
Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, regarding probationary trainees, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 12-2-2004 by Ord. No. 783.
§ 78-7. Rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall adopt by resolution rules and regulations relating to the
organization and operation of the Police Department, which rules and regulations may, from time to
time, be amended and modified by further resolution.
Article II. Police Services for Special Events
[Adopted 5-19-2005 by Ord. No. 791]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 81/392
A.
B.
C.
§ 78-8. Authority to charge for police services at special events.
The Borough of Oceanport is hereby authorized to charge the sponsors of nonmunicipal special events
for special police services as may be required.
§ 78-9. Rate to be charged.
The rate to be charged to the sponsors shall be as referenced in the most current contract in effect
between the Borough and the Borough's Police Department.
§ 78-10. Signing of agreement.
The Borough of Oceanport is hereby authorized to require the sponsors of the nonmunicipal special
events to sign the attached agreement, or a document substantially similar thereto.
Article III. Extra-Duty Assignments
[Adopted 5-6-2010 by Ord. No. 881]
§ 78-11. Performance of extra-duty assignment.
[Amended 6-16-2011 by Ord. No. 898]
Whenever the Chief of Police or his designee determines that an extra-duty assignment shall be
performed, such assignment shall first be offered to all eligible members of the Collective Bargaining
Unit, hereinafter referred to as CBU. If the eligible members of the CBU refuse or are otherwise unable
to work the assignment, it may be offered to other members of the Police Department not covered by
the CBU.
§ 78-12. Agreement.
A party requesting an extra-duty assignment, the Chief of Police or his designee shall enter into an
agreement providing for extra-duty assignments for which the Borough shall be compensated at the
rate set from time to time by resolution. Such agreements shall be in accordance with the following
standards:
The party requesting the assignment shall execute and deliver an agreement in a form approved
by the Borough Council by resolution from time to time. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
be authorized to execute any such agreement, provided that it has been submitted in the form
approved by resolution.
The Borough shall be responsible to provide all necessary claims for damage for personal injury,
including death or damage to property, which may arise or result from the Borough's performance
under the contract.
The party requesting the assignment of police officers shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Borough from any and all claims made by said police officers for injury or illness while performing
extra-duty assignments for said party. In addition, the party shall hold the Borough harmless from
any and all claims made by any third party for injury, illness or damage to property arising out of
the extra-duty assignment of a police officer.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 82/392
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
Any and all extra-duty assignments shall be determined and approved by the Chief of Police or his
designee. The Chief of Police or his designee may assign a patrol vehicle for use in performing
extra-duty if and in the event it is determined that the use of a patrol vehicle is necessary to
perform the contracted duty.
The work to be performed shall be considered "extra-duty assignment from independent
contractors" and will not be considered a regular-duty assignment. The assignment of extra-duty
assignments may be designated by the Chief of Police to any police officer as may be necessary.
§ 78-13. Fees and charges.
Payments due under such an agreement pursuant to an emergency as designated by the Police
Chief or his designee shall be paid 15 days from the date of billing.
When a party desires to contract with the Borough of Oceanport for needed extra-duty services by
a police officer, an escrow shall be posted based on the rates set forth per resolution, made
payable to the Borough of Oceanport. The Borough Administrator and Chief of Police are hereby
authorized to establish such rules and regulations that are necessary to implement this provision.
The escrow amount shall be determined by the CFO in conjunction with the Police Chief.
Rates for extra-duty assignments will be negotiated between the Collective Bargaining Unit and
the Borough of Oceanport and shall be set by resolution.
Article IV. Police Chaplain
[Adopted 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 984]
§ 78-14. Position created.
The position of Police Chaplain for the Borough of Oceanport Police Department is hereby created in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will be a volunteer position. The position of
Chaplain shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
§ 78-15. Qualifications.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained clergyman in good standing in the religious
body from which he/she is selected. The Chaplain shall have basic training and shall be a certified
Police Chaplain credentialed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Borough of Oceanport
Police Department and shall be qualified in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141.
§ 78-16. Duties.
The duties of Police Chaplain shall include, but not be limited to, assisting the Borough of Oceanport
Police Department in death notifications, station house adjustments and any other duties that may be
assigned by the Chief of Police.
§ 78-17. Rank and salary.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without rank or salary.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 83/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 78-18. Appointment.
The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Mayor persons that he/she believes meet the qualifications
of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141 as well as the rules and regulations of the Borough of Oceanport Police
Department with reference to Chaplains, if any. All applicants for the position of Chaplain shall be
reviewed by the Borough Administrator and Chief of Police to determine their qualifications in
accordance with this article, and the Borough Administrator and Chief of Police shall make
recommendations to the Mayor regarding the appointment as Chaplain. The Mayor shall appoint
Chaplains in accordance with this article, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 78-19. Term of office.
Persons appointed as Chaplain shall serve for a term of one year, to expire on December 31 next
succeeding the date of appointment or until their successors are appointed and qualified with the
recommendation of the Chief of Police.
Chapter 84. Political Fund-Raising
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 6-1-2000 by Ord. No. 734
(Ch. 15 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public contracts — See Ch. 35.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 72.
§ 84-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "An Ordinance Banning the Use of Government Buildings and
Equipment for Political Fund-Raising."
§ 84-2. Findings and purpose.
Whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or acceptance of political
contributions by public office holders and employees while in any room or building occupied in the
discharge of official duties.
Whereas, solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in rooms and buildings occupied in
the discharge of official municipal business undermines the efficiency of government by taking
officials and employees away from the people's business, and leads to the appearance of
improper influence of political contributions on government functions.
Whereas, prohibiting the solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in rooms and
buildings occupied in the discharge of official duties will address these harms and leave open
ample alternative venues for political fund-raising.
Whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not presently recognize the misuse of public property for
political fund-raising as a distinct offense.
Therefore, it is accordingly found and determined that the municipality's interests in an
independent and efficient government workforce and a government that is undermined by neither
the fact nor appearance of improper influence of political contributions on government decisions
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 84/392
A.
B.
require the prohibition of political fund-raising in rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of
official duties or through the use of public property.
§ 84-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CANDIDATE
Any individual seeking election to a public office of the federal, state, county or municipal
government, or school district or political party; and
Any individual who shall have been elected or failed of election to any such office.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE
Any person holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the municipal
government, or in any agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position is full-time
or part-time, compensated or uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or of
any municipal agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position is full-time or parttime.
MUNICIPALITY
The government of the municipality, including any officer, department, board, commission or
agency thereof.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION
Any loans and transfers of money or other things of value to any candidate, elected official or
representative of any political organization, or other commitments or assumptions of liability to
make any such transfer. Political contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
Any two or more persons acting jointly, or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination, election
or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county, municipal or school board office
or political party office. "Political organization" includes, but is not limited to, organizations defined
in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political committee," "joint candidates committee," "continuing political
committee," "political party committee," "candidate committee" or "legislative leadership
committee."
PUBLIC PROPERTY
All personal property owned, leased or controlled by the municipal government, including, but not
limited to, vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers, stationery including municipal letterhead,
postage and other office equipment.
SOLICIT
To ask for, by oral or written communication, a contribution as that term is defined herein.
§ 84-4. Soliciting or accepting political contributions in rooms or
buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties.
No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or receive payment of or a
commitment to pay any political contribution for any candidate, elected official or political organization
while in any room or building occupied in the discharge of official municipal business. This section shall
include solicitation or acceptance of political contributions made over a private cell phone or by use of
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 85/392
a private computer, if the person soliciting or accepting the political contribution, or using the cell phone
or computer for purposes of soliciting or accepting the political contribution, is in any room or building
occupied in the discharge of official municipal business.
§ 84-5. Prohibition against use of public property for political
fund-raising.
No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or receive payment of or a
commitment to pay any political contribution for any candidate, elected official or political organization,
while utilizing public property.
§ 84-6. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-
15, General penalty.
Chapter 96. Sewerage Authority, Regional
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 8-5-1965 by Ord. No. 242
(Ch. 19 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 96-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of Paragraph (c), Section 4, of the Sewerage Authorities Law of the State of
New Jersey (Laws of 1946, Chapter 138, as amended and supplemented; N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.),
there is hereby created a public body, corporate and politic, under the name and style of "The
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority."
§ 96-2. Jurisdiction; powers and duties.
The Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority is and shall be an agency and
instrumentality of the said six boroughs created by parallel ordinances duly adopted by their governing
bodies, and is a sewerage authority as contemplated and provided for by said Sewerage Authorities
Law and shall have and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by said
Sewerage Authorities Law and any other statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable
thereto.
§ 96-3. Composition.
The Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority shall consist of 12 members thereof,
and two of such members shall be appointed by the governing body of each of said boroughs, in
accordance with the provisions of said Sewerage Authorities Law.
§ 96-4. Certified copy to be filed.
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the Borough Clerk, shall forthwith be filed by said Borough
Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey.[1]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 86/392
[1] Editor's Note: Original § 19-5, When effective, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 103. Volunteer Incentives
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cadet Corps — See Ch. 14.
Fire Department — See Ch. 50.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Appendix A, Oceanport Volunteer Fire Department LOSAP Point System
Article I. Exemption From Fees
[Adopted 4-7-1994 by Ord. No. 645 (Ch. 35A, Art. IV, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 103-1. Definitions.
[Amended 10-16-2008 by Ord. No. 852; 2-5-2015 by Ord. No. 941]
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:
ACTIVE MEMBER
Individuals serving in the Borough of Oceanport in any volunteer organization who meet the
definition of either "active member" or "active life member" as established by the bylaws of the
voluntary organization as are in effect on the effective date of this article. Probationary members
are specifically excluded from this definition.
FAMILY
An active member or military, his or her spouse and all natural or adopted children under 21 years
of age who are unmarried and permanently occupying the same residence in the Borough of
Oceanport as the active member or military.
FEES
Those charges established by the governing body of the Borough of Oceanport which are fully
retained by the Borough of Oceanport as revenue. Specifically excluded is any portion of the fee
which is collected by the Borough on behalf of another entity, including but not limited to the State
of New Jersey, the County of Monmouth or an outside vendor.
MILITARY
Individuals who are active duty or retired from all branches of the United States Military.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION
The Fire Department and First Aid Squad of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 103-2. Incentives.
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 727; 10-16-2008 by Ord. No. 852]
All active members or military of a volunteer organization and their families shall be entitled to the
following benefits:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 87/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Exemption from fees for recreational programs, with the exception of enrollment fees for the
Summer Action Camp program.
Exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform Construction Code fees for the issuance of a
building permit required in connection with either the construction of an addition or completion of
repairs to an existing single-family dwelling.
Partial exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform Construction Code fees not to exceed
a maximum of $500 for issuance of a building permit required in connection with the construction
of a new single-family dwelling to be occupied by the active member or military.
Exemption from rental fees for indoor facilities, provided that such rental is for the actual use of the
active member or military or the member's family.
Exemption from miscellaneous fees, licenses and permits, including but not limited to cat licenses,
marriage licenses, certificate of continued occupancy for any dwelling personally occupied by the
active member or military and Planning Board fees required in connection with applications for
either use or bulk variances.
§ 103-3. Administration.
[Amended 10-16-2008 by Ord. No. 852]
On or about January 1 of each calendar year a volunteer organization shall submit to the Borough
Clerk a list of all individuals who meet the definition for active member or miltary status. Such list
shall be updated on a periodic basis by the volunteer organization to add those individuals who
have completed their probationary status or to delete individuals who have been dropped from
their membership or who no longer meet the criteria for active member or military status.
On a form provided by the Borough Clerk, each active member or military shall provide information
related to family status to assist the various municipal officials in the administration of this article in
order to be eligible for the benefits provided in this article.
All active members or military and their family must comply with all registration procedures and
complete all application forms established by the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 103-4. Exclusions.
No exemption shall be allowed for the following fees:
Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum registration has been
reached.
Fees and escrows required by the Planning Board in connection with any site plan or subdivision
application.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
Dog license fees.
Posting of performance guaranties where required or permitted by law.
Special service charges for records requests/Open Public Records Act requests.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 88/392
[1]
A.
B.
[Added 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1015]
Article II. Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 10-21-2004 by Ord. No. 780 (Ch. 10 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 103-5. Program created.
A length of service awards program (LOSAP) is hereby created in the Borough of Oceanport in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et
seq.) and N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1 et seq. to reward the members of the Oceanport Volunteer Fire
Department, the Oceanport Volunteer Fire Police, and the Oceanport Volunteer First Aid Squad for
their loyal, diligent and devoted service to the residents of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 103-6. Definitions.
The definitions as provided in N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1 are hereby included in the within article, as is cited in
full or as contemplated by the following:
ACTIVE EMERGENCY SERVICE
Participation in the affairs of the Fire Department, First Aid Squad or Fire Police, in accordance
with the bylaws established by the Fire Department, First Aid Squad or Fire Police and applied on
a consistent and uniform basis, and in accordance with the eligibility system as identified in
Appendix A[1] to the within article.
EMERGENCY SERVICE ORGANIZATION
The Oceanport Volunteer Fire Department ("Fire Department"), a duly incorporated fire
department, the Oceanport Volunteer First Aid Squad ("First Aid Squad"), a duly incorporated first
aid squad, and the Oceanport Volunteer Fire Police ("Fire Police"), a duly incorporated fire police
division.
LOCAL PLAN ADMINISTRATOR
The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 103-7. Defined contribution program.
The Borough's LOSAP shall provide for the finding of a fixed annual contribution by the Borough of
Oceanport to a deferred-income account for each active volunteer member who meets the criteria set
forth in this article. Such contributions shall be made in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
388 of the Laws of 1997 of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.) and N.J.A.C. 5:30-
14.1 et seq. The plan shall be administered in accordance with the Laws of the State of New Jersey,
the United States Internal Revenue Code, the within article, and other prevailing regulations, as may
be amended from time to time. The following provisions shall apply to this plan:
Annual contributions. The annual contributions to be made by the Borough of Oceanport for each
active volunteer member shall be $1,150 per year of active emergency service commencing with
the year 2005. There shall be no contributions for prior years of service. Additionally, under no
circumstances shall the total amount provided to any active volunteer member exceed the sum of
$1,150 per year, as provided by prevailing law.
Appropriations. Appropriations for the purpose of funding the Borough's LOSAP plan shall be
included as a separate line item in the Borough's budget, commencing in the year 2005.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 89/392
[1]
C.
D.
(1)
[2]
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
[3]
F.
G.
H.
(1)
I.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Period increases, was repealed 3-3-2011 by Ord. No. 892.
Estimated costs. The estimated cost of the LOSAP to the Borough of Oceanport has been
calculated to be approximately $69,000 per year.
Criteria for eligibility.
An active volunteer member shall be eligible to participate in the LOSAP plan immediately
upon commencement of the member's performance of active emergency services in the Fire
Department or First Aid Squad.
Annual contributions to the deferred-income account for each member shall only be made by
the Borough, however, for those active members who have earned the minimum number of
points for performing certain volunteer services, pursuant to the requirements set forth in
Appendix A (attached hereto)[2] for a twelve-month period.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
A volunteer who is an active volunteer member of more than one of the emergency service
organizations defined herein cannot receive more than the maximum annual benefit amount,
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.15.
In computing credit for those active volunteer members who also serve as paid employees
within a local governmental unit, credit shall not be given for activities performed during the
individual's regularly assigned work.
Determination as to eligibility. The Fire Department, First Aid Squad and Fire Police shall provide
the local plan administrator with a certified list as to active volunteer members who are initially
eligible to participate in the LOSAP as of January 1, 2005. Annually, in January of subsequent
years, the Fire Department, First Aid Squad and Fire Police shall provide to the local plan
administrator a certified list as to active volunteer members who are eligible to participate in the
LOSAP for that year, having complied with the approved point plan in Appendix A[3] in the prior
year. The local plan administrator shall forward said certified list to the Borough Council of the
Borough of Oceanport for approval, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.10.
Within 30 days of receipt of the certified lists from the Fire Department, the First Aid Squad and
the Fire Police, and any requested clarifications thereto, the Oceanport Borough Council shall, if
appropriate, approve the certified lists as being accurate and shall return the approved certified list
to the Fire Department, the First Aid Squad and the Fire Police for posting. Said approved lists
shall be posted for a thirty-day period for membership review. Appeals from the decisions of the
Borough Council shall be governed by N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.11. The decision of the Borough Council
as to such active members' eligibility shall be binding upon the plan administrator, participants,
beneficiaries and any and all other persons having an interest thereunder, subject to appropriate
judicial review.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
Terms of participation. The plan administrator shall have the right to require any active volunteer
member at the time of his or her becoming a participant to agree, in writing, to be bound by the
terms, covenants and conditions of the LOSAP and accompanying trust. Each participant shall
promptly furnish to the plan administrator all pertinent information required for the administration of
the LOSAP. The plan administrator shall rely upon all such information furnished.
Vesting. The active volunteer members shall not be permitted to receive a distribution of funds in
his or her LOSAP account until the completion of a five-year vesting period.
Termination of service.
Any participant who terminates services as an active volunteer member shall cease to
participate hereunder, and no contribution shall be made on his/her behalf. A former
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 90/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
[2]
[1]
participant may resume participation immediately upon returning to the service of the Fire
Department, the First Aid Squad or the Fire Police as an active volunteer member.
Any active volunteer member who was not fully vested and terminates service with the Fire
Department, the First Aid Squad or the Fire Police, and who subsequently returns to service
and again becomes a participant, shall be treated as a new participant for purposes of
eligibility.
Any active volunteer who is fully vested and terminates service with the Fire Department, the
First Aid Squad or the Fire Police and subsequently returns to service and again becomes a
participant shall receive credit for his/her former years of eligible service and shall resume
participation in the same manner as prior to his/her termination.
Should a volunteer fail to vest or otherwise terminate his/her association with the Fire
Department, the First Aid Squad or the Fire Police prior to the completion of the vesting
period, the funds placed in the LOSAP account on behalf of said volunteer shall revert to the
Borough of Oceanport (and not to the volunteer).
§ 103-8. Voter approval required.
This article shall not take effect unless, as required by law, it is approved by the voters of the Borough
of Oceanport as a public question at the next general election.[2]
Editor's Note: This article was approved by voters at the general election held 11-2-2004.
Editor's Note: Original § 10-5, Referendum question, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-9. Copies of regulations available to public.
A copy of the article and the Emergency Service Volunteer Length of Service Awards Act (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-183 et seq.) shall be made available to the public at the Oceanport Branch of the Monmouth
County Public Library and shall be kept on file in the Borough Clerk's Office located at 222 Monmouth
Boulevard, Oceanport, New Jersey.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 108. Affordable Housing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295.
Article I. Fair Share Provisions and Affordability Controls
[Adopted 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1019[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 108, Affordable Housing, adopted 2-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 961.
§ 108-1. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 91/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Borough of Oceanport shall comply with the following monitoring and reporting requirements
regarding the status of the implementation of its Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan:
Beginning on May 17, 2020, and on every anniversary of that date through July 1, 2025, the
Borough agrees to provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or Local
Government Services, or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided
to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal website, using forms
developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council
on Affordable Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services (NJLGS). The reporting shall
include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and
amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have been expended.
Beginning on May 17, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date through July 27, 2025, the
Borough agrees to provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within
the municipality through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such posting provided to
Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously developed for this purpose by COAH or any
other forms endorsed by the Special Master and FSHC.
By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Borough will post on its
municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its
plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a
realistic opportunity and whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic
opportunity and should be replaced and whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be
revised or supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
By March 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its
satisfaction of its very-low-income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the municipality has complied with its very-lowincome
and family very-low-income housing obligations.
§ 108-2. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings given in this section:
ACT
The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE
Constructed in compliance with the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.[1]
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT
The entity designated by the Borough to administer affordable units in accordance with this article,
N.J.A.C. 5:93,[2] and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING
A regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 92/392
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE
The average percentage of median income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing
development are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE
A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a low- or moderate-income household as
defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,[3] and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for
the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to the standards
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
A development included in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and includes, but is not limited
to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable housing
development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S)
Any mechanism in a municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT
A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to the Act and approved for crediting by the Court
and/or funded through an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT
A housing unit designed to meet the needs of, and exclusively for, the residents of an agerestricted
segment of the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein the
unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of the units are occupied by one
person who is 55 years of age or older; or 3) the development has been designated by the
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY
The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established by P.L. 1983, c. 530
(N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT
A structure in which households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are not
limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as
regulated by the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care
facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the
developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE
A facility that is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are
available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor and that offers
units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a
lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD
A household that has been certified by an administrative agent as a low-income household or
moderate-income household.
COAH
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 93/392
The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA
The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT
A housing unit with health and safety code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a
major system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or
load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER
Any person, partnership, association, company or corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner
or owners of a lot or any land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
land.
DEVELOPMENT
The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission
may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT
A development containing both affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is
not limited to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to residential use and
the creation of new affordable units through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant
residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD
A household with a total gross annual household income equal to 50% or less of the regional
median household income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT
A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income household.
MAJOR SYSTEM
The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, fire protection, or occupant service
components of a building, which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS
Housing not restricted to low- and moderate-income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME
The median income by household size for the applicable housing region, as adopted annually by
COAH or a successor entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD
A household with a total gross annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of
the regional median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT
A restricted unit that is affordable to a moderate-income household.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 94/392
[1]
[2]
[3]
NONEXEMPT SALE
Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the transfer of ownership between husband and wife;
the transfer of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of
divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of ownership
between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an
executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary; and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS
A process by which currently income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for purposes
of matching household income and size with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit
(e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT
The maximum housing value in each housing region affordable to a four-person household with an
income at 80% of the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits published
annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION
The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT
The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the rent paid to the landlord, as well
as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by
DCA for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT
A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability
controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC
The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD
A household with a total gross annual household income equal to 30% or less of the regional
median household income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT
A restricted unit that is affordable to a very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION
Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency,
replacement storm windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement
doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on 10-16-2016.
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 108-3. Applicability; mandatory set-aside.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 95/392
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
A.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing developments and affordable
housing units that currently exist and that are proposed to be created within the Borough of
Oceanport pursuant to the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
Moreover, this article shall apply to all developments that contain low- and moderate-income
housing units, including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and
moderate-income housing units, and including any developments funded with low-income housing
tax credits.
If the Borough permits the construction of multifamily or single-family attached residential
development that is "approvable" and "developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,[1] at a gross
residential density of six units to the acre or more, the Borough shall require that an appropriate
percentage of the residential units be set aside for low- and moderate-income households. This
requirement shall apply beginning on May 17, 2019. Where applicable within the Borough, this
requirement shall apply to any multifamily or single-family attached residential development,
including the residential portion of a mixed-use project, and including the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to a residential development, which development consists of five or more
new residential units, whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a variance granted by the
Borough's Land Use Board, or adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan
in areas in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation.
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on 10-16-
2016.
For any such development for which the Borough's land use ordinances (e.g., zoning or an
adopted redevelopment plan) already permitted residential development as of May 17, 2019, this
requirement shall only apply if the Borough permits an increase in approvable and developable
gross residential density to at least twice the permitted approvable and developable gross
residential density as of the effective date of this agreement. Nothing in this subsection precludes
the Borough from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a development not required to have
a set-aside pursuant to this subsection consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311h and other applicable
law.
For inclusionary projects in which the low and moderate units are to be offered for sale, the
appropriate set-aside percentage is 20%; for projects in which the low- and moderate-income units
are to be offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside percentage is 15%.
This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner or applicant for a zoning
amendment, variance, or adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in
areas in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular proposed
project. This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones otherwise identified in the
settlement agreement or Fair Share Plan, for which density and set-aside standards shall be
governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
§ 108-4. Alternative living arrangements.
The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-
5.8[1] and UHAC, with the following exceptions:
Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however, that the units or bedrooms
may be affirmatively marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative plan
approved by the Court;
Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 96/392
[1]
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
A.
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on 10-16-
2016.
With the exception of units established with capital funding through a twenty-year operating
contract with the Department of Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities,
alternative living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved by the Court.
The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as the administrative agent for
the purposes of administering the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
§ 108-5. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments, the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low- and Moderate-
Income Units Completed
25 0
25 + 1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 108-6. New construction.
Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing units:
The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and moderate-income units,
except that where there is an odd number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-low-income units
(affordable to a household earning 30% or less of regional median income by household
size). The very-low-income units shall be counted as part of the required number of lowincome
units within the development.
In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units within each bedroom
distribution shall be very-low- or low-income units.
Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured in conjunction with
realistic market demands such that:
The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be no greater than 20%
of the total low- and moderate-income units;
At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two-bedroom units;
At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be three-bedroom units; and
The remaining units may be allocated among two- and three-bedroom units at the
discretion of the developer.
Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured such that the number of
bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units within the
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 97/392
[1]
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[3]
[5]
(f)
(2)
B.
inclusionary development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by
having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
Accessibility requirements:
The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in all other
multistory buildings shall be subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7[1] and the following:
Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in other multistory buildings in
which a restricted dwelling unit is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or the casing for the
installation of a door, on the first floor; and
If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a) through (d) can be satisfied,
then an interior accessible route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d) above have been
satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et
seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,[2] or evidence that Oceanport has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in
the development accessible:
Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable entrance, upon the request of
a disabled person who is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an accessible
entrance shall be installed.
To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit funds within the Borough of
Oceanport's Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances
in 10% of the affordable units that have been constructed with adaptable entrances.
The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above shall be used by the
Borough of Oceanport for the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a disability who
occupies or intends to occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan and cost estimate to
the Construction Official of the Borough of Oceanport for the conversion of adaptable
to accessible entrances.
Once the Construction Official has determined that the design plan to convert the
unit entrances from adaptable to accessible meets the requirements of the Barrier
Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,[3] and that the cost estimate of such conversion is
reasonable, payment shall be made to the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund
in care of the Borough Treasurer, who shall ensure that the funds are deposited into
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately earmarked.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 98/392
[2]
[4]
(g)
(1)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(d)
(1)
D.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be required where an entity can
demonstrate that it is "site impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-
7.[4]
Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
Design:
In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and moderate-income units shall be
integrated with the market units.
In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units shall have access to all of the
same common elements and facilities as the market units.
Maximum rents and sales prices:
In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the administrative agent
shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD and the
calculation procedures as approved by the Court.
Regional income limits shall be established for the region that the Township is located
within based on the median income by household size, which shall be established by a
regional weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD.
To compute this regional income limit, the HUD determination of median county income
for a family of four is multiplied by the estimated households within the county according
to the most recent decennial census. The resulting product for each county within the
housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households from
the most recent decennial census in the Township's housing region. This quotient
represents the regional weighted average of median income for a household of four. The
income limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall be 80% of the
regional weighted average median income for a family of four. The income limit for a lowincome
unit for a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of the
regional weighted average median income for a family of four. The income limit for a
very-low-income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. These income limits shall be adjusted by
household size based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by household
size. In no event shall the income limits be less than those for the previous year.
The income limits are the result of applying the percentages set forth in Subsection D(1)
(a) above to HUD's determination of median income for the fiscal year 2017, and shall be
utilized until the Township updates the income limits after HUD has published revised
determinations of median income for the next fiscal year.
The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's eligibility for affordable
housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Township
annually by taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated pursuant to
Subsection D(1)(a) above over the previous year's income limits, and applying the same
percentage increase to the regional asset limit from the prior year. In no event shall the
regional asset limit be less than that for the previous year.
In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing units, the Township's
administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional
income limits established pursuant to the process defined above:
The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may increase
annually based on the percentage increase in the regional median income limit for
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 99/392
[2]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
each housing region determined pursuant to the above methodology. In no event
shall the maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be lower
than the last recorded purchase price.
The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for
the Northeast Urban Area, upon its publication for the prior calendar year. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant
to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the
regulations governing low-income housing tax credits.
The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each affordable development shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent
for restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no more than 52% of
median income.
The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall establish at least one
rent for each bedroom type for both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households, which very-low-income units shall be part of the low-income requirement.
The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each affordable development
shall be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for restricted ownership
units; in achieving this affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must be
available for at least three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales prices for each bedroom
type.
In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for compliance with the affordability
average requirements for restricted units other than assisted living facilities and age-restricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half-person household;
A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person household;
A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half-person household; and
A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person household.
In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with the affordability average
requirements for restricted units in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half-person household; and
A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person household or to two one-person
households.
The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be calculated so that the
monthly carrying cost of the unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan
equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes,
homeowner and private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 100/392
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as not to exceed 30% of the
eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may increase annually based
on the percentage increase in the regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be lower than
the last recorded purchase price.
The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be increased annually based on
the permitted percentage increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast
Urban Area. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant
to the regulations governing low-income housing tax credits.
§ 108-7. Utilities.
Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market units within an inclusionary
development.
Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth in the lease and shall be
consistent with the utility allowance approved by HUD for the Section 8 program.
§ 108-8. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the administrative agent shall, to the extent
feasible and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
§ 108-9. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as
may be amended and supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to
the requirements of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Oceanport takes action to
release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action, a restricted ownership unit must
remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall commence on the date the
initial certified household takes title to the unit.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 101/392
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a restricted ownership unit and upon
each successive sale during the period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the nonrestricted, fair market
value of the unit based on either an appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall execute and deliver to the
administrative agent a recapture note obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to the difference between the unit's
nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by
a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect despite the entry and
enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing certificate of occupancy or a
certified statement from the Construction Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 108-10. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be approved by the administrative
agent.
The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and in advance of the resale, to
assure compliance with the foregoing standards.
The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no distinction between the
condominium or homeowner association fees and special assessments paid by low- and
moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the administrative agent to increase the
maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the addition of
a bathroom. See § 108-13.
§ 108-11. Buyer income eligibility.
Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.1 et seq., as may be amended and supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall
be reserved for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income, and moderate-income ownership units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of median income.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon approval by the Borough
Council, and subject to the Court's approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a lowincome
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an insufficient
number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing region to permit prompt occupancy of the
unit and all other reasonable efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 102/392
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold to a moderate-income
household shall retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must occupy it as the certified
household's principal residence and shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the
administrative agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified household for a period not to
exceed one year.
The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted ownership unit when
the household is a low-income household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit (including principal, interest,
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly income.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon approval by the Borough
Council, and subject to Court's approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a lowincome
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an insufficient
number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing region to permit prompt occupancy of the
unit and all other reasonable efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold to a moderate-income
household shall retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must occupy it as a certified
household's principal residence and shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the
administrative agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of a hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified household for a period not to
exceed one year. Violations of this provision shall be subject to the applicable enforcement
provisions of § 108-20 of this article.
§ 108-12. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership
unit; subordination.
Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted ownership unit, the owner shall
apply to the administrative agent for a determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness
complies with the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue such
determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an owner nor a lender shall at any
time cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is determined by the
administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.5:80-26.6(b).
§ 108-13. Capital improvements to ownership units.
The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the administrative agent to increase the
maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of
the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or that add an additional bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that are permanently affixed to
the unit or were included when the unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable
resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 103/392
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
approved by the administrative agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The
purchase of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not
included in the base price may be made a condition of the unit resale, provided the price, which
shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the purchase of any property other
than central air conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the
purchaser must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds for
the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at the time of or as a condition of
resale.
§ 108-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may
be amended and supplemented, and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Oceanport takes action to release
the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must remain subject
to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and supplemented.
Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall contain deed restriction
language. The deed restriction shall have priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the County of
Monmouth. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the administrative agent within 30
days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls of this article despite the
occurrence of any of the following events:
Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the property containing the unit.
§ 108-15. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, and tenants shall be responsible for
security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease
for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent (except, in the case of units in
an assisted living residence, to cover the customary charges for food and services) without the
express written approval of the administrative agent.
Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not exceed 5% of the monthly
rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied
to the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this article.
No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be applicable to either the market units
or the affordable units in any development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
§ 108-16. Tenant income eligibility.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 104/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
A.
B.
Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13, as may be amended and
supplemented, and shall be determined as follows:
Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross household income
less than or equal to 30% of the regional median household income by household size.
Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross household income less
than or equal to 50% of the regional median household income by household size.
Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of the regional median household income by household size.
The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted rental unit when the
household is a very-low-income household, low-income household or a moderate-income
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40%
for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit
may be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households eligible for age-restricted
units) of its gross household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing
costs;
The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for households eligible for agerestricted
units) of eligible monthly income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living conditions;
The household documents the existence of assets with which the household proposes to
supplement the rent payments; or
The household documents reliable anticipated third-party assistance from an outside source
such as a family member in a form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of
the unit.
The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the existence of the circumstances in
Subsections A and B with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
§ 108-17. Municipal Housing Liaison.
The Borough of Oceanport shall appoint a specific municipal employee to serve as a Municipal
Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the Borough's affordable housing program, including
overseeing the administration of affordability controls on the affordable units and the affirmative
marketing of available affordable units in accordance with the Borough's Affirmative Marketing
Plan; fulfilling monitoring and reporting requirements; and supervising administrative agent(s).
Oceanport shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing Liaison and a
resolution appointing the person to fulfill the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal
Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or part-time
municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall be
duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New
Jersey before assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for Oceanport, including the following responsibilities, which may not
be contracted out to the administrative agent:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 105/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Serving as Oceanport's primary point of contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable
housing providers, administrative agents and interested households;
Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Oceanport's Fair Share Plan;
Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports as required by the Court
and by this article;
Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative agents, as
needed; and
Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls, compliance monitoring
and affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
Subject to the approval of the Court, the Borough of Oceanport shall designate one or more
administrative agent(s) to administer and to affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in
the Borough in accordance with UHAC and this article. An operating manual for each affordable
housing program shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of
the governing body and subject to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s) shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk, in the office of the Municipal
Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall supervise the work of the administrative agent(s).
§ 108-18. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under contract to and reporting to the
municipality. The fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for
which the services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent shall perform the
duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and 5:80-26.18 thereof, which includes:
Affirmative marketing:
Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable housing units in
accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Oceanport and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
Household certification:
Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with interested households;
Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross income and assets
upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of eligibility or
noneligibility;
Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate substantially in
the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J
and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living in the housing
region and eligible applicant households with members working in the housing region where
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 106/392
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
(1)
F.
the units are located;
Employing a random selection process as provided in the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the
Borough of Oceanport when referring households for certification to affordable units; and
Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable housing units in the Borough of
Oceanport: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the
Latino Action Network, STEPS, OCEAN Inc., the Greater Red Bank, Asbury Park/Neptune,
Bayshore, Greater Freehold, Greater Long Branch and Trenton branches of the NAACP, and
the Supportive Housing Association.
Affordability controls:
Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions and mortgages for
recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period, including the
recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the mortgage note are
effectuated and properly filed with the Monmouth County Register of Deeds or Monmouth
County Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or certifications pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
Resales and rerentals:
Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information between owners
and the administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information to low- (or verylow-)
and moderate-income households regarding the availability of restricted units for resale
or rerental.
Processing requests from unit owners:
Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners of restricted units who wish
to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount
of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this article;
Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of restricted units
who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would affect the selling price, such
authorizations to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air-conditioning systems;
Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted unit; and
Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
Enforcement:
Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable housing units for which tax bills
are mailed to absentee owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 107/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in
the processing of the project or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to any person, other
than a household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family homes), a notice as to the
maximum permitted rent, together with the telephone number of the administrative agent
where complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding them of the
notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the municipality's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund; and
Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each affordable housing program
administered by the Administrative Agent, to be approved by the Borough Council and the
Court, setting forth procedures for administering the affordability controls.
Additional responsibilities:
The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for submission to the Municipal
Housing Liaison in time to meet the Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article.
The administrative agent shall attend continuing education sessions on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
§ 108-19. Affirmative marketing requirements.
The Borough of Oceanport shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative Marketing Plan, subject to
approval of the Court, that is compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and
supplemented.
The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or
renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation, disability, age or
number of children to housing units which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially eligible
persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 4 and is required to be followed
throughout the period of restriction.
The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for all households that live
and/or work in Housing Region 4, comprised of Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean Counties.
The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the Affirmative Marketing Plan and for
the proper administration of the Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals
and resales and rerentals. The Administrative Agent designated by the Borough of Oceanport
shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable
units.
In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative agent shall provide a list of
counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 108/392
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
B.
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in advertising and publicizing
the availability of housing. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall consider the use of language translations where appropriate.
The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall begin at least four months
(120 days) prior to the expected date of occupancy.
Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several locations, including, at a minimum,
the County Administration Building and/or the County Library for each county within the housing
region; the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the municipality in which
the units are located; and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective
applicants upon request.
In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative agent shall provide specific
notice of the availability of affordable housing units in Oceanport, and copies of the application
forms, to the following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State Conference of
the NAACP, the Latino Action Network STEPS, OCEAN Inc., the Greater Red Bank, Asbury
Park/Neptune, Bayshore, Greater Freehold, Greater Long Branch and Trenton branches of the
NAACP, and the Supportive Housing Association.
The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable units shall be the responsibility
of the developer, sponsor or owner.
§ 108-20. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an affordable unit by an
owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household recertification,
acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage, recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation
of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on the
premises, and specific performance.
After providing written notice of a violation to an owner developer or tenant of a low- or moderateincome
unit and advising the owner, developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant for any
violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging a violation or
violations of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, the owner, developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or both, provided that each and every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions and not a continuation of
the initial offense;
In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit in violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, payment into the Borough of Oceanport
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit in violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 109/392
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a judgment that would
result in the termination of the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were a
judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against
the low- or moderate-income unit.
The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality, by means of an
execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the
costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including attorney's
fees. The violating owner shall have his right to possession terminated as well as his title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first purchase money
mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or
the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to
reimburse the municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally
responsible for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred
by the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed in
escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum
period of two years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within the two-year
period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to
and shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing affordable
housing units as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be
conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in
violation of the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were taken by
means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to
the low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for which
the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold under the terms of the
regulations governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the Sheriff's sale or
acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from
any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing units.
The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for complying with the
terms and restrictions of governing affordable housing units until such time as title is
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 110/392
A.
B.
conveyed from the owner.
§ 108-21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to this article shall be filed in
writing with the Court.
Article II. Development Fees
[Adopted 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1020]
§ 108-22. Purpose.
This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of development
fees that are consistent with COAH's regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8
and 32 through 38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing in accordance with a Courtapproved
spending plan.
§ 108-23. Basic requirements.
This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
The Borough of Oceanport shall not spend development fees until the Court has approved a plan
for spending such fees (spending plan).
§ 108-24. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
A development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not
limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable
housing development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL
The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a
proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person
having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE
Money paid by a developer for the improvement of property as authorized by Holmdel Builders
Association v. Township of Holmdel, 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE
The assessed value of a property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections 1,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 111/392
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES
Those strategies that minimize the impact of development on the environment and enhance the
health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resourceefficient
housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
§ 108-25. Residential development fees.
Imposition of fees.
Within the Borough of Oceanport, all residential developers, except for developers of the
types of developments specifically exempted below and developers of developments that
include affordable housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for all
new residential development, provided no increased density is permitted. Development fees
shall also be imposed and collected when an additional dwelling unit is added to an existing
residential structure; in such cases, the fee shall be calculated based on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the property due to the additional dwelling unit.
When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a "d" variance granted under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of
6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized, except that
this provision shall not be applicable to a development that will include affordable housing. If
the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development
fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the
filing of the variance application.
Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential developments.
Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the developer has made a
payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units, if permitted by ordinance or by
agreement with the Borough of Oceanport, shall be exempt from the payment of development
fees.
Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval prior to the adoption
of this article and any preceding ordinance permitting the collection of development fees shall
be exempt from the payment of development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial
change in the original approval. Where site plan approval is not applicable, the issuance of a
zoning permit and/or construction permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site
plan approval for the purpose of determining the right to an exemption. In all cases, the
applicable fee percentage shall be determined based upon the Development Fee Ordinance
in effect on the date that the construction permit is issued.
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which is less than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For purpose of
this section, "market value" shall mean the equalized assessed value of the existing
improvement as established by the Borough Tax Assessor. The cost of the repair,
reconstruction or improvements shall be determined by an itemized construction cost
estimate prepared and submitted to the Construction Official. The estimate shall be signed
and sealed by an architect or professional engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey, or
where no such professionals are retained, signed by the contractor or the homeowner. Where
prepared by the homeowner or contractor, the Borough Engineer may review such estimates
for accuracy. "Substantial improvement" is considered to commence when the first alteration
of any wall, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 112/392
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
B.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local building,
fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places, but a development fee shall be charged for any new dwelling
constructed as a replacement for a previously existing dwelling on the same lot that was
or will be demolished, unless the owner resided in the previous dwelling for a period of
one year or more prior to obtaining a demolition permit. Where a development fee is
charged for a replacement dwelling, the development fee shall be calculated on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the new structure as compared to the
previous structure.
Structural alterations that do not increase gross floor area of a building or structure or
increase the equalized assessed value of a property shall be exempted from paying a
development fee.
Nonprofit organizations constructing residential projects which have received tax-exempt
status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, providing current evidence
of that status is submitted to the Municipal Clerk, together with a certification that services of
the organization are provided at reduced rates to those who establish an inability to pay
existing charges, shall be exempted from paying a development fee.
Federal, state, county and local governments shall be exempted from paying a development
fee.
Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster, fire or flood shall be exempt from the
payment of a development fee. (This exemption applies only for the owner of record at the
time of the fire, flood, or natural disaster.)
§ 108-26. Nonresidential development fees.
Imposition of fees.
Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
developments specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
developments specifically exempted below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase
in equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used for
nonresidential purposes.
Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is demolished
and replaced. The development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference between the
equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvements and the equalized
assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvements, and such
calculation shall be made at the time a final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the
calculation required under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for nonresidential development.
The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market-rate development shall be
subject to a 2.5% development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 113/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from alterations, change in use within the existing footprint, reconstruction,
renovations and repairs.
Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of nonresidential
development fees in accordance with the exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide
Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), as specified
in Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption."
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the nonresidential development
fee pursuant to the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee
at such time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of
the nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three years after that event or after
the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential development fee
thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination of the property tax
exemption. Unpaid nonresidential development fees under these circumstances may be
enforceable by the Borough of Oceanport as a lien against the real property of the owner.
Federal, state, county and local governments constructing nonresidential housing shall be
exempted from paying a development fee.
§ 108-27. Collection procedures.
Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval for a development, the
approving authority or entity shall notify or direct its staff to notify the Construction Official
responsible for the issuance of a construction permit.
For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a copy of Form NRDF,
"State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential development shall complete
Form N-RDF as per the instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the Form N-RDF.
The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a construction permit shall notify the
Borough Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first construction permit for a development which is
subject to a development fee.
Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Borough Tax Assessor shall prepare an estimate
of the equalized assessed value of the development based on the plans filed.
The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy shall notify
the Borough Tax Assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a
property which is subject to a development fee.
Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the Borough Tax
Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the
improvements associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 114/392
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
I.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
Should the Borough of Oceanport fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount of the
development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the developer may
estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in Subsection b. of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
Except as provided in § 108-26A(3) hereinabove, 50% of the initially calculated development fee
shall be collected at the time of issuance of the construction permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the time of issuance of the
construction permit and that determined at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
Appeal of development fees.
A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a challenge with
the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board, collected
fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of Oceanport.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees imposed by filing a challenge
with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall
be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of Oceanport. Appeals from
a determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited
to the prevailing party.
§ 108-28. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable Housing Trust Fund to be
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Oceanport for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and nonresidential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall at
all times be identifiable by source and amount:
Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an affordable unit, where permitted by
ordinance or by agreement with the Borough of Oceanport;
Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in a townhouse or
other multistory attached dwelling unit development accessible;
Rental income from municipally operated units;
Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
Recapture funds;
Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
Any other funds collected in connection with Oceanport's Affordable Housing Program.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 115/392
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
In the event of a failure by the Borough of Oceanport to comply with trust fund monitoring and
reporting requirements or to submit accurate monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the
conditions of the judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance; or a
failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend funds within the applicable
required time period as set forth in In re Township of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015)
(aff'd 442 N.J. Super. 563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the Court; or
for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of funds, the Court may authorize the
State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services
(LGS), to direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be
expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent practicable, be utilized for affordable
housing programs within the Borough of Oceanport, or, if not practicable, then within the county or
the housing region. Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting evidence
of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering the evidence and providing the
municipality a reasonable opportunity to respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant condition(s),
and upon a finding of continuing and deliberate noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to
direct the expenditure of funds in the trust fund or impose such other remedies as may be
reasonable and appropriate to the circumstances.
Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be used to fund eligible affordable
housing activities approved by the Court.
§ 108-29. Use of funds.
The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by the Court. Funds
deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be used for any activity approved by the
Court to address the Borough of Oceanport's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls; housing
rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing units and related costs; accessory
apartments; a market-to-affordable program; Regional Housing Partnership programs; conversion
of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units; green building strategies
designed to be cost-saving and in accordance with accepted national or state standards; purchase
of land for affordable housing; improvement of land to be used for affordable housing; extensions
or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial assistance
designed to increase affordability; administration necessary for implementation of the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the
approved spending plan.
Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Oceanport for past housing activities.
At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on such fees shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to very-low-, low- and moderate-income households in affordable
units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of
development fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to very-low-income
households earning 30% or less of the regional median household income by household size for
Housing Region 2, in which Oceanport is located.
Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance, security deposit
assistance, low-interest loans, rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs. The
specific programs to be used for affordability assistance shall be identified and described
within the spending plan.
Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size may include buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income
units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30% or
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 116/392
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
less of median income. The specific programs to be used for very-low-income affordability
assistance shall be identified and described within the spending plan.
Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if permitted by ordinance or
by agreement with the Borough of Oceanport, and funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, shall be exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
The Borough of Oceanport may contract with a private or public entity to administer any part of its
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including its programs for affordability assistance.
No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may be expended on
administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or
consultants' fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative marketing program or a
rehabilitation program.
In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of the rehabilitation program
shall be included as part of the 20% of collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the
turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with the Court's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or related to
securing or appealing a judgment from the Court are not eligible uses of the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
§ 108-30. Monitoring.
The Borough of Oceanport shall provide annual reporting of Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to
the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to
Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund
activity, including the sources and amounts of funds collected and the amounts and purposes for which
any funds have been expended. Such reporting shall include an accounting of development fees
collected from residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
units on site (if permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the Borough), funds from the sale of units
with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income from Borough-owned affordable
housing units, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds collected in
connection with Oceanport's affordable housing programs, as well as an accounting of the
expenditures of revenues and implementation of the spending plan approved by the Court.
§ 108-31. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Borough of Oceanport to impose, collect and expend development fees shall
expire with the expiration of the repose period covered by its judgment of compliance unless the
Borough of Oceanport has first filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the
Court or with a designated state administrative agency, has petitioned for a judgment of
compliance from the Court or for substantive certification or its equivalent from a state
administrative agency authorized to approve and administer municipal affordable housing
compliance and has received approval of its Development Fee Ordinance from the entity that will
be reviewing and approving the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 117/392
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
If the Borough of Oceanport fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior
to the expiration of its judgment of compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds
remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into
the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985,
c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320).
The Borough of Oceanport shall not impose a residential development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its judgment of compliance,
nor shall the Borough of Oceanport retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The Borough of Oceanport also shall not expend any of its collected development
fees after the expiration of its judgment of compliance.
Chapter 115. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drugs — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 284.
Article I. Operation Restrictions for Licensees
[Adopted 11-5-1942 by Ord. No. 97 (Ch. 22, Art. III, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 115-1. Compliance required.
Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to permit, allow or suffer
the sale, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises except as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 115-2. Hours of operation.
[Amended 8-3-1978 by Ord. No. 420]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or permit, allow or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any
alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises
except as follows:
[Amended 6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 990]
On weekdays and Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following
day.
On Sundays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day.
On the last day of the calendar year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the
following day; except when the last day of the year falls on a Sunday, then between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day.
No licensee shall sell or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery of any alcoholic
beverage at retail in its original container for consumption off the licensed premises or allow,
permit or suffer the removal of any alcoholic beverage in its original or opened container from
retail licensed premises on or before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week; except
that on Sunday the sale of malt alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises shall be
permitted from 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 118/392
C.
D.
E.
The above hours shall be in accordance with the prevailing time then existing.
During the hours for which the sale of alcoholic beverages is hereinafter prohibited, the entire
licensed premises shall also be closed, and no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain
therein except the licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be construed to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages
on any day when otherwise prohibited by law.
§ 115-3. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LICENSEE
Includes any person, firm, association or corporation who shall be the holder of any license to sell
alcoholic beverages issued by the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, at the discretion of the Judge before
whom said matter shall be heard.
Article II. Licensing
[Adopted 6-5-1947 by Ord. No. 128 (Ch. 22, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 115-5. Number of retail consumption licenses.
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses outstanding in the Borough at the same time shall
not exceed seven.
§ 115-6. Number of retail distribution licenses.
The number of plenary retail distribution licenses outstanding in the Borough at the same time shall not
exceed one.
§ 115-7. Fee for retail consumption license.
[Amended 10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 937; 11-5-2015 by Ord. No. 959; 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 969; 11-2-
2017 by Ord. No. 981; 11-1-2018 by Ord. No. 993; 11-7-2019 by Ord. No. 1011]
The annual license fee for plenary retail consumption licenses shall be and is hereby fixed at $1,491.
§ 115-8. Fee for retail distribution license.
[Amended 10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 937; 11-5-2015 by Ord. No. 959; 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 969; 11-2-
2017 by Ord. No. 981; 11-1-2018 by Ord. No. 993; 11-7-2019 by Ord. No. 1011]
The annual license fee for plenary retail distribution licenses shall be and is hereby fixed at $894.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 119/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
Article III. Consumption or Possession by Minors
[Adopted 1-17-1957 by Ord. No. 193 (Ch. 22, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 115-9. Prohibition in public or private places; definitions.
[Amended 10-17-1991 by Ord. No. 619; 9-7-2000 by Ord. No. 736]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase, sell, consume or have in his
or her possession any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public or private street, highway, park,
footway or other public or quasi-public place or in a private residence or upon any private property
within the Borough of Oceanport, except as hereinafter provided or as may be permitted by state
statute.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit an underage person from consuming or possessing
an alcoholic beverage on private property in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or
rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission
of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN
A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage person pursuant to testamentary or
court appointment.
RELATIVE
The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by
blood or affinity.
§ 115-10. Prohibition in vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to consume or to have in his or her
possession any alcoholic beverage while in a motor vehicle on any public street or highway or while in
a motor vehicle in any public or quasi-public place in the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 115-11. Violations and penalties; suspension or postponement
of driving privileges.
[Amended 9-7-2000 by Ord. No. 736]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
In addition to the fine authorized herein, the court may suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privilege of any defendant convicted of violating the provisions of this article and may take
such other action regarding the driving privileges of such defendant as shall be provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, as amended.
Article IV. Permits for Sale or Possession in Public Places
[Adopted 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 800]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 120/392
§ 115-12. Permit required for sale or consumption in public
places.
No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic beverages on a public or quasipublic
street, alley or road of the Borough of Oceanport, or upon any public or quasi-public grounds,
parks or sidewalks, or in any automobile or other vehicle, or any other means of transportation, while
on the public or quasi-public streets, highways, alleys, avenues, public grounds, parks or sidewalks,
unless a license or permit has been issued for the same.
§ 115-13. Permit required for possession in public places.
No person shall possess any open bottle, can or other container which contains alcoholic beverages
on any public or quasi-public street, alley or road of the Borough of Oceanport or upon any public or
quasi-public grounds, parks or sidewalks, or in any automobile or other vehicle, or any other means of
transportation, while on the public or quasi-public streets, highways, alleys, avenues, public grounds,
parks or sidewalks, unless a license or permit has been issued for the same.
§ 115-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be liable, upon conviction, to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-15, General penalty, together with court costs.
Chapter 121. Amusements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 236.
Noise — See Ch. 267.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 284.
Article I. Amusement Devices
[Adopted 3-3-1983 by Ord. No. 470 (Ch. 23 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 121-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any machine which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a
score, including but not limited to such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball,
mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under
whatever name they may be indicated. It shall include video-type games or machines or similar
devices that use a display screen for points, lines, dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate
games or other types of entertainment. It shall not include nor shall this article apply to musicplaying
devices.
DISTRIBUTOR
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 121/392
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
Any person who supplies any automatic amusement device to another for use in his premises,
whether under lease or any similar arrangement.
OPERATOR
Any person in whose premises any automatic amusement device is placed or kept for operation.
PERSON
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
§ 121-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to license, regulate and control those automatic amusement devices
which are operated for the purpose of making a profit. The objective of this article is to regulate the
business of amusement devices so as to prevent nuisances to patrons and the public, fire hazards
from overcrowding, poor ingress and egress at premises where amusement devices are located, the
promotion of gambling, loitering or the creation of an unhealthy atmosphere for the youth of the
community or other foreseeable, undesirable effects of such devices.
§ 121-3. License required; exemptions.
Permit; license required. No person shall maintain or operate for profit in any store, building or
other place where the general public is invited to enter, or in any building or other place wherein
any club or organization meetings are held, within the Borough of Oceanport any automatic
amusement device without first obtaining a license therefor.
Exemptions. The license requirements of this article shall not apply to any church, fraternal, civic,
social or veterans organization or other religious groups, charitable or nonprofit organization which
operates any coin-controlled amusement device for the use of its members and their guests and
on premises owned or controlled by it.
§ 121-4. Application for license.
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made and delivered to the Borough Clerk
on forms to be supplied for the purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
The application for the license shall contain the following:
Name and address of the applicant.
Name under which the place is being operated and the location of the same.
Number and type of alcoholic beverage license, where applicable.
Number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
Location where each automatic amusement game is to be located.
Name and address of the person from whom each device is to be purchased, rented or
otherwise obtained.
Description of each automatic amusement game sought to be licensed, including for each
device the name of the manufacturer, model number and serial number.
The name and residence address of the manager and/or other person principally in charge of
the operation of the business premises.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 122/392
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 121-5. Limitations on number and location of machines.
The number of automatic amusement devices that may be located in any one location shall be
governed by the physical space available in any business location for the use of said devices,
except that the maximum number of automatic amusement devices per establishment shall be
three.
The following rules shall govern the location within all business premises of automatic amusement
devices:
Each device shall be located at least 10 feet from the entranceway to the premises in which
located and placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere with the free and unfettered
passage to and from the premises of patrons or users of the premises.
Each device shall have an unobstructed perimeter zone or distance of four feet around the
sides of the three linear borders of said device wherein the users of said device may use,
watch or wait to use said device. The area which is required hereunder for each such
machine shall not be encroached upon by the area of any other machine. It is the intent of this
article that, for purposes of preventing overcrowding and assuring safe passage of the
general public, each machine shall have its own unobstructed perimeter zone.
§ 121-6. Fees.
The fee for all applications for licenses pursuant to this article shall be $25 in addition to a licensing fee
of $25 per year.
§ 121-7. License term; transferability; renewal.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a term of one year, commencing on January 1
and expiring on December 31 of the year of issuance.
A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving notice to the Borough Clerk to
that effect and giving a description of the new machine, including manufacturer, model number
and serial number. A license may be transferred from one place to another by giving notice to the
Borough Clerk to that effect and supplying the required information as to the new premises. There
shall be a fee for all transfers from one place to another in the amount of $25 per place or transfer.
An application for renewal shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk no later than November 1,
together with a renewal fee.
§ 121-8. Gambling prohibited; supervision required.
No person shall, in his place of business, permit gambling in connection with the playing of any
mechanical amusement game.
An automatic amusement device may only be used or operated during the hours of operation of
the premises in which located, and when the operator or an employee of the operator is present in
the premises.
§ 121-9. Investigation of applicant and premises.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 123/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
The Chief of Police or his designee may make an investigation of the premises and the applicant to
determine the truth of the facts set forth in the application. The Fire Marshal shall inspect the premises
to determine whether the proposed automatic amusement devices comply with the requirements of this
article. The Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal shall, upon completion of their inspection, either
approve or disapprove the issuance of the license to said applicant. If the applicant is approved, the
Borough Clerk shall issue the necessary license upon the receipt of the license fee or fees as herein
provided.
§ 121-10. Revocation of license; posting of license.
Revocation of license. Anytime after the granting of said license, the Chief of Police or the Fire
Marshal may recommend to the Mayor and Council that it revoke the same if, after the hearing, it
finds that:
There is gambling on the premises;
The information furnished by the applicant on the application was false or incorrect;
There has been a violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey or of this or other
ordinances of the Borough of Oceanport; or
The presence of the machines has resulted in obscene and loud language disturbing to the
public or to other patrons of the premises or has created a nuisance, excessive noise, litter,
traffic or rowdyism by patrons.
Posting and displaying. An operator's license granted pursuant to this article shall:
Be posted in a conspicuous place of the location for which said license was granted.
State the name and address of the licensee.
State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each and every mechanical
amusement game for which said license was issued.
§ 121-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall
constitute a separate offense.
Article II. Games at Fairs and Exhibitions
[Adopted 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 705 (Ch. 41B, Art. II, of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 4-17-
2000 by Ord. No. 732]
§ 121-12. Purpose.
[Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 844]
The Amusement Games Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.) provides that owners and
operators of any amusement games, as that term is defined by New Jersey law, must be licensed
by the municipality within which such games are to be operated and conducted. The licensing
requirement also applies to any organization wishing to hold an agricultural fair or exhibition within
any municipality (N.J.S.A. 5:8-121).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 124/392
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.13, any municipality wishing to issue licenses of this nature to a
licensee other than an amusement park or agricultural fair and exhibition must be a designated
seashore resort.
It is hereby determined, declared and found that the Borough of Oceanport ("the Borough"),
having substantial frontage on the Shrewsbury River, which has been deemed a tidal estuary by
the Army Corps of Engineers, and being home to the Monmouth Park Race Track, which provides
significant recreation and entertainment to residents and visitors alike, the Borough is, pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1, a seashore resort for purposes of issuing licenses with regard to games of
chance.
§ 121-13. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL FAIR OR EXHIBITION
An event conducted by an association organized and approved by the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture for the participation in any or all state-sponsored programs relative to the promotion of
agriculture and the advancement of agriculture interests in New Jersey.
AMUSEMENT GAME(S)
Any game of skill or chance, or both, meeting the definition of those terms set forth in N.J.S.A. 5:8-
101.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Oceanport.
COMMISSION
The New Jersey Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
LICENSEE
The holder of a license pursuant to this article.
PERSON
An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, unincorporated
association and the like.
§ 121-14. License required.
[Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 844]
It shall be unlawful for any person to own and operate any amusement game within the Borough
without having first obtained a license to do so from the Borough.
§ 121-15. License term; fee.
All licenses shall be issued for the term set forth therein, but each license shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
There shall be a nonrefundable license fee of $5 for each license issued, but if the term of any
agricultural fair or exhibition exceeds 30 days, the nonrefundable license fee shall be $50.
All licenses shall be issued by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 121-16. Application for license; issuance.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 125/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
All applications for licenses shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the
Commission.
Applicants for the licenses shall be investigated by the Borough Police Department and they or
their principals or shareholders may be subject to fingerprinting.
No license shall be issued to any applicant if any of the principals or shareholders associated
therewith are not of good moral character or have been convicted of a crime, unless such
disqualification resulting from such conviction has been removed by the Commission.
No license shall be issued for any premises licensed under any alcoholic beverage license.
§ 121-17. Conduct of amusement games; hours.
Amusement games may be operated only on those days when there is conducted an agricultural
fair or exhibition within the Borough.
No amusement games may be operated prior to 10:00 a.m. and after 12:00 midnight on any day.
§ 121-18. Insurance requirement.
Any association organized and approved to conduct an agriculture fair or exhibition must obtain
comprehensive liability insurance coverage satisfactory to the Borough which names the Borough as
an additional insured therein. No amusement games licenses will be issued without proof of such
insurance coverage.
§ 121-19. License revocation or suspension; violations and
penalties.
Any licensee who violates the provisions of this article, the Amusement Games Licensing Law or
the rules and regulations of the Commission shall, after hearing before the Borough Council, be
subject to having said license revoked or suspended.
In addition to the provision of Subsection A hereof, any person convicted in Municipal Court of
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 127. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 267.
Article I. Dogs
[Adopted 7-5-1953 by Ord. No. 170 (Ch. 34, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 127-1. Licenses required; license fee; expiration; duplicate
tags.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 126/392
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[Amended 10-5-1967 by Ord. No. 258; 5-1-1980 by Ord. No. 442; 7-15-1982 by Ord. No. 464; 9-1-
1983 by Ord. No. 475; 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 890; 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1007]
Each and every dog shall be duly licensed and shall bear evidence of such license at all times in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
The annual fee for such license issued shall be as follows:
Annual license fee for a non-spayed or non-neutered (non-altered) dog: $18.
Annual license fee for a spayed or neutered (altered) dog: $15.
The foregoing license fees shall include the state charge of $1 for the dog registration tag fee, the
surcharge of $0.20 for the Pilot Clinic Fund of the State of New Jersey and, in the case of a nonspayed
or non-neutered (non-altered) dog, the charge of $3 for the Animal Control Fund of the
State of New Jersey.
Said licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of January of
each year. Any license purchased after February 28 shall be assessed an additional late fee of
$10.
In the event that any registration tag is lost, stolen or mutilated beyond recognition, that owner of
said dog shall secure a duplicate or new tag. The fee for said duplicate or new tag shall be the
sum of $1.
§ 127-2. Registration of dogs.
The registration of all dogs shall be under the supervision of the Borough Clerk as provided under
Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq.) and this article.
§ 127-3. Restraint of dogs required.
[Amended 4-5-1956 by Ord. No. 191]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit the same to run at large upon
the public streets or other public or private property in the Borough of Oceanport, or off the premises of
the person owning, keeping or harboring it, unless said dog is accompanied by a person who is
capable of controlling it and who has the dog securely confined and controlled on an adequate leash
not more than six feet in length.
§ 127-4. Dogs damaging property.
[Amended 11-15-1973 by Ord. No. 342]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or having custody and control of a dog shall suffer, permit or
allow such dog to commit any nuisance, urinate or defecate on or otherwise damage property of the
public or of another. The upsetting of a garbage can, chasing of vehicles, damaging lawns, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds, trees or any property of persons and the attacking of, snapping at or biting of a
person by a dog shall be deemed to be nuisances.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 34-4.1, Removal of feces, as amended 3-21-1991 by Ord. No. 610, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 127-5. Noise nuisances.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 127/392
A.
B.
[Amended 11-15-1973 by Ord. No. 342]
No person shall have, keep, harbor, maintain or permit to be kept on any premises owned or occupied
in whole or in part by him within the Borough of Oceanport any dog or animal which, by habitually
barking, howling or whining, disturbs the public peace.
§ 127-6. Vicious dogs; procedures upon complaint.
Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which habitually attacks other dogs or
domestic animals is hereby defined to be a vicious dog for the purposes of this section. It shall be the
duty of the Chief, Acting Chief or any member of the Police Department to receive and investigate
complaints against dogs, and when any dog complained against shall be deemed by such Chief,
Acting Chief or member of the Police Department to be a vicious dog, as herein defined, said officer
shall report the facts to the Judge of the Borough, who shall thereupon cause the owner or person
harboring such dog to be notified, in writing, of the complaint against such dog and to appear before
said Judge at a stated time and place. The Judge, at the time set for such hearing, shall inquire into
the facts and give all interested persons an opportunity to be heard under oath and to be represented
by counsel, and the Judge shall decide in accordance with the evidence before him, and if the Judge
shall decide that such dog complained of is a vicious dog, as defined by this section, notice of such
decision shall be given to the owner or person harboring such dog. No dog which has been so
determined to be a vicious dog shall be permitted to be upon any street or public place in the Borough
except while securely muzzled and under leash, and the owner or person harboring any such vicious
dog who shall suffer or permit such dog to run at large upon any street or public place in said Borough
while not securely muzzled and under leash shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 127-7. Appointment of Animal Control Officer; contracts
authorized for enforcement.
[Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to appoint an Animal Control Officer or other designated
authority whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. The Mayor and Council shall
also have the power to enter into a contract with one or more persons for the exercise of the duty of
Animal Control Officer and to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 127-8. Seizure and detention; reclaiming or disposal
procedures.
[Amended 4-5-1956 by Ord. No. 191; 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
The Animal Control Officer or any other person appointed for the purpose shall take into custody
and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or
disposed of as provided in this section any and all dogs off of the premises of the person owning,
keeping or harboring said dog which is not accompanied by a person who is capable of controlling
it and who does not have the dog securely confined and controlled on an adequate leash not more
than six feet long.
When said dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be
given, or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice cannot be given, in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and if the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
seizure and detention, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or
person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a license and registration tag for said dog,
the Animal Control Officer or other designated authority may cause the dog to be destroyed in a
manner causing as little pain as possible.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 128/392
A.
§ 127-9. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-15-1973 by Ord. No. 342]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article II. Cats
[Adopted 11-7-1991 by Ord. No. 620 (Ch. 34, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 127-10. Definitions.
Certain words, phrases and terms in this article are defined for the purposes herein as follows:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY
Any person or agency designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions
of this article.
CAT
Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE
Any cat which has attained the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY
Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are
kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY
The Board of Health of the Borough of Oceanport or any designated representative thereof
charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the
provisions of this article.
NEUTERED
Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER
When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every person having a right of property (or
custody) in such cat and every person who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or
maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by that
person.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or institution commonly recognized by law as
a unit.
§ 127-11. Rabies vaccination.
Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any cat over
seven months of age within the Borough of Oceanport unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed.
The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those held by a state or
federal licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 129/392
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or
pet shops.
Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance
with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization,
published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided in
Subsection D.
Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such vaccination for a specified
period of time by the local Board of Health upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such
cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 127-12. Licensing requirements.
Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of
licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the Borough Clerk or other official
designated by the Mayor and Council to license cats in the Borough a license and official
registration tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license number securely
fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall include
but are not limited to breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10
days after such acquisition or age attainment. The requirement will not apply to a nonresident
keeping a cat within the Borough for no longer than 90 days.
Cats brought into jurisdiction.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of Oceanport any cat
licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall
keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the Borough of Oceanport for a period of
more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for
each such cat.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of Oceanport any
unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the Borough of
Oceanport for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall state the breed, sex, age,
color and markings of the cat for which the license and registration are sought and whether it is of
a long- or short-haired variety and also the name, street and post office address of the owner and
the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information on said application and the
registration number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Borough Clerk or other local official designated to license cats in the Borough.
License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
Borough and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the
Borough.
Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of exemption; requirement for license.
Neither the Borough Clerk nor any other official designated by the Mayor and Council to license
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 130/392
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
cats shall grant any such license and official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner
thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a
rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the recommendations
of the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of Human
Services or has been certified exempt as provided in § 127-11 of this article. The rabies
inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian
permitted by law to do the same.
License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $11 for each unneutered
cat and $8 for each neutered cat.
Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The person applying for the license
and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the
renewal of a license and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
said license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on the last day of
January in the following year.
Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the licensing year for any
cat in the Borough. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence of compliance.
Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Borough Clerk may issue
a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $1.
Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of any health official, police officer, animal control
officer or other authorized person.
Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article.
Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Borough and shall be placed in
a special account separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough and shall be used for
the following purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure; local
prevention and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; and
administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpected balance remaining in such special
account shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of
the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third fiscal year following, and at the end
of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the general
funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid
into the special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 127-13. Prohibited acts.
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat shall willfully allow such animal
to have free access beyond the property owned by such person without any attempt at restraint so
as to permit such cat to soil or defile or to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, gutter, street,
thoroughfare or park, in or upon any public property or in or upon the property of persons other
than the owner or person having the care, custody and control of such cat.
[Amended 5-6-1999 by Ord. No. 712]
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat shall willfully allow such animal
to have free access beyond the property owned by such person without any attempt at restraint so
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 131/392
C.
A.
B.
as to permit it to soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds,
trees or any property of persons other than the owner or person having the care, custody or
control of such cat.
[Amended 5-6-1999 by Ord. No. 712]
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat to
remove any feces left by such cat on any sidewalk, gutter, street, thoroughfare, park or other
public area or private property not his or her own.
§ 127-14. Seizure; impoundment.
Any person appointed for the purpose shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded any male or female cat running at large in the Borough contrary to
any of the provisions or sections of this article.
When any cat so seized has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be given,
or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice cannot be given, in accordance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said cat
has not claimed said cat and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its seizure and detention and
if the cat shall be unlicensed at the time of this seizure and the owner or person keeping or
harboring said cat has not produced a license and registration tag for said cat, the designated
authority may cause the cat to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 127-15. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-6-1999 by Ord. No. 712]
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, for each offense.
§ 127-16. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall in any way be construed as relieving any person from complying with
any state statutes or other regulations pertaining to the licensing and registration of cats, and this
article is intended to be supplementary to any provisions of any such other laws.
Article III. Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 797]
§ 127-17. Purpose.
This article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or on any other property
owned or operated by the Borough of Oceanport, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 127-18. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein, unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 132/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED
To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible material with the intention of
feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish
and/or game.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE
All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 127-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Borough of Oceanport, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in
zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
No person or persons shall create or foster any condition or allow any condition to exist or
continue which results in a congregation or congestion of waterfowl, or in an accumulation of
waterfowl feces or droppings or in damage to flora or fauna on any public property, or in a public
health nuisance or in a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or the waterfowl.
[Added 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
§ 127-20. Enforcement.
The primary parties responsible for the enforcement of the within article and the issuance of a
complaint for any violation thereof shall be the Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer.
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to cease the feeding
immediately.
§ 127-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article IV. Pet Solid Waste
[Adopted 8-16-2007 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 127-22. Purpose.
This article is to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of
Oceanport so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 133/392
§ 127-23. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning stated herein, unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE
That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER
Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have any custody
of any pets, whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PET
A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for amusement or
companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE
Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement.
PLAYGROUND
The area within a public park or school ground that is cordoned off or open, on which play
equipment such as swings, a jungle gym or other children's recreational activity equipment are
located.
PROPER DISPOSAL
Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarding in a
refuse container which is regularly emptied by some municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designated to convey domestic sewerage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 127-24. Disposal required.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pets' solid waste
deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 127-25. Control of dogs; disposal of waste.
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall permit such dog to soil or
defile or commit any nuisance on any sidewalks, street or thoroughfare, in or upon the property of
persons other than the owner or person having the care, custody or control of such pet. The upsetting
of a garbage can, chasing of vehicles, damaging lawns, shrubbery, flowers, grounds, trees or any
property of persons and the attacking of, snapping at or biting of a person or other animal by a pet
shall be deemed to be a nuisance. Such persons owning or having the care, custody or control of a
pet, which pet has caused its pet solid waste to be deposited upon Borough property or upon the
property of another, shall immediately remove such pet solid waste or cause it to be removed or shall
dispose of it in a proper disposal manner. No person shall walk or otherwise have in his or her custody
or control any pet upon any public property, including streets, sidewalks, public parks, waterfront areas
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 134/392
A.
and alleys, unless the person has in his or her possession, and in plain view, readily usable materials
or implements sufficient to remove and to dispose lawfully of any pet solid waste that may be
deposited on the ground by the pet.
§ 127-26. Distribution of information.
Information on this article and the benefits of proper disposal of pet solid waste shall be distributed with
the pet licenses.
§ 127-27. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistant animal shall be exempt from the
provisions of this article while such animal is being used for that purpose.
§ 127-28. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Oceanport Police Department, the Board of
Health of the Borough of Oceanport and the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 127-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty
as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 140. Bicycles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 12-5-1968 by Ord. No.
271 (Ch. 26 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 64.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE
A device having a wheel or wheels with tires 12 inches or more in diameter, connected by a frame
of metal or wood, and so arranged as to be propelled by human power. The term "bicycle" as used
in this chapter shall not include children's tricycles or baby carriages.
§ 140-2. Bicycle regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the Borough of Oceanport unless such
person rides or operates such bicycle in accordance with the following rules and regulations:
Lights on bicycles. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with
a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
rear. In addition to the red lamp, a red reflector may be mounted on the rear, of a type approved by
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 135/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
I.
the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to
300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-10).
Audible signal device required. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a
bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-11).
Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the
braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement (N.J.S.A. 39:4-11.1).
Position of hands and feet; carrying another person. A person propelling or riding on a bicycle
shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall
he ride with his feet removed from the pedals, or with both hands removed from the handlebars,
nor shall he practice any trick or fancy riding in a street. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped (N.J.S.A. 39:4-12).
Hitching on vehicles prohibited. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway, and no operator of any
vehicle shall knowingly allow any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skates, sled or toy
vehicle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle (N.J.S.A. 39:4-14).
Rights and duties of persons on bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes and all supplements thereto except as to those provisions thereof which by
their nature can have no application (N.J.S.A. 39:4-14.1).
Regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those
exceptions stated herein.
Operating regulations. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or
one proceeding in the same direction.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride in single file except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders
shall use such path and shall not use the roadway (N.J.S.A. 39:4-14.2).
Riding on sidewalks.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the
riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place no person shall
disobey the same.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-ofway
to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 136/392
J.
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the
curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in
such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 140-3. Bicycle safety programs.
The Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to provide
within the Borough of Oceanport bicycle safety programs in conjunction with the Board of Education of
the Borough of Oceanport and in conjunction with the Division of Motor Vehicles, the County of
Monmouth, or any volunteer or service organization. Such bicycle safety programs may include
lectures, courses in traffic safety, voluntary inspections of bicycles and publication of printed material to
parents and children in the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 140-4. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, or by impounding of such person's bicycle for a period
not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination thereof.
Chapter 154. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 12-21-2006 by Ord. No.
819. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 223.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295.
§ 154-1. Location of numbers.
Home, building or other structure identification name or number shall be numeral type and located
within four feet of the door frame which faces the nearest public street.
In the event the front door frame does not face the street, the home, building or other structure
identification number shall appear on the corner of the building nearest the driveway or private
road.
§ 154-2. Size requirements.
Home, building or other structure identification numerals shall be no less than four inches in height
on all structures less than 50 feet from the road right-of-way.
For homes, buildings or other structures that are more than 50 feet from the road or are not clearly
visible, numerals must also be displayed on a sign attached to a tree, fence or post visible from
both directions on the nearest roadway which permits travel. Said signs shall be placed at a height
of at least three feet to assure that they will not be blocked by accumulated snow. Numerals
displayed on street-front signs shall not be less than three inches in height.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 154-3. Contrast of numerals with background.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 137/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
All numerals affixed to any home, building, other structure or sign shall be colored/tinted in a
contrasting color to their immediate background.
§ 154-4. Applicability.
Effective January 1, 2007, any home, building or other structure, which requires a permit or certificate
of occupancy, shall be required to comply with the building identification requirement.
§ 154-5. Enforcement.
The Oceanport Police Department and the Zoning Officer are hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 154-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons convicted of a violation of any of the provision of this ordinance shall be subject
to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 158. Business Licensing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 2-2-1989 by Ord. No. 585
(Ch. 41B, Art. I, of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 204.
Sales and auctions — See Ch. 301.
Payment of taxes as condition of permit issuance — See Ch. 348, Art. III.
§ 158-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain an office or place of business or to
conduct, engage in or carry on any business, trade or occupation within the Borough of Oceanport
without first complying with the provisions of this chapter and obtaining a license therefor as provided
herein.
§ 158-2. Application.
Application for a license shall be made to the Borough Clerk within 30 days after the effective date
of this chapter. All such applications shall be made in writing and shall contain the following
information:
The name of the applicant; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the president and
secretary shall be set forth; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners shall be
set forth.
The name under which the business is to be conducted.
The present residence of the applicant.
The address at which the business is to be conducted.
The specific nature of the business.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 138/392
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
The residence of the applicant during the past five years.
Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business herein described
denied or revoked. If such license has been denied or revoked, the applicant shall set forth in
detail the facts leading to such denial or revocation.
The details of any conviction for crimes of the first, second, third or fourth degree, the date of
the conviction and the place where said conviction was obtained.
The business telephone number of the applicant.
If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent thereof.
Prior to the issuance of a license, the Borough Clerk, in his discretion, shall have the authority to
cause a routine police check to be made of the applicant to verify the validity of such information.
The applicant shall certify that it supplies the information knowing the Borough of Oceanport shall
rely thereon in issuing a license, and the applicant further agrees to comply with all laws and
ordinances of the Borough applicable to the operation of said business.
The application shall be made upon forms supplied by the Borough Clerk.
Commercial landscapers may not operate within the Borough of Oceanport without first procuring
a license to be issued by the Borough Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
There shall be no restriction on the number of such licenses which may be issued.
[Added 2-1-1996 by Ord. No. 671]
§ 158-3. Payment of delinquent taxes required.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, as a condition of issuance or renewal of a license, all delinquent
property taxes or assessments on the property must be paid. The license shall be revoked or
suspended if property taxes are not paid for three consecutive quarters or more. The license shall be
restored upon payment of taxes.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-4. Applicability.
Any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the requirement to obtain a mercantile license if, by
himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in a
business or occupation or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to
perform any part of such business or occupation within the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 158-5. Payment of fees.
All license fees shall be due and payable to the Borough Clerk on the first day of January of each
year, the term thereof commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 thereafter.
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses shall be paid in
advance at the time of the application to the Borough Clerk.
§ 158-6. Fee; special registration; veteran's exemption.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 139/392
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The license fees to be paid annually. All businesses, trades and occupations conducted within the
Borough of Oceanport shall pay a license fee of $25 for each year, or part thereof, in which they
shall operate said business.
The Borough Clerk may issue a special registration certificate and authorize the waiver of the
payment of license fees or other charges to public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal,
religious or other nonprofit enterprise for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal,
religious or other similar purpose. However, the applicant shall submit the usual application form in
the manner required by this chapter and shall operate in accordance with all other requirements.
Any person holding a valid license issued by the Monmouth County Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from the payment of any fees required by this
chapter. This exemption shall only apply to the payment of fees and shall not exempt the holder of
any such license from the obligation to register in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 158-7. Renewal.
Prior to November 1 of each year, the Borough Clerk shall mail to all valid licensees of the Borough a
statement of the time of expiration of the license currently held by the licensee, a renewal application
and specify the amount of the renewal fee. However, the failure of the Borough Clerk to send out such
notice or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse a licensee for failing to obtain a
mercantile license, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating without having received a valid
license.
§ 158-8. Issuance of license not to be construed as approval of
use.
The acceptance of a mercantile license application or fee or the issuance of such license or any
renewal thereof shall not be construed or considered as an approval by the Borough of the use or
activity being conducted by the applicant or licensee. It shall be the obligation of the applicant or
licensee to comply fully with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations and obtain from
all governmental agencies all consents, permits and approvals required in order for the applicant or
licensee to lawfully conduct its activity.
§ 158-9. Display of license; change in location.
The person, firm or corporation conducting said business shall display the license issued
hereunder at the principal place of business in a conspicuous place.
The licensee shall notify the Borough Clerk within 10 days after a change in the location of any
licensed business.
§ 158-10. Revocation; appeal.
The Borough Clerk shall have the right to revoke any license whenever the holder thereof or any of the
licensees, agents or servants violate any provisions of this chapter, the laws of the State of New Jersey
or any rules or regulations promulgated as herein provided. After written notice of the revocation has
been served upon the licensee, an appeal may be filed with the governing body within 10 days of the
service of said notice. The governing body shall thereupon conduct a hearing in the matter within 30
days after receipt of the notice of appeal and shall render a decision within 15 days of the date of said
hearing.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 140/392
A.
[1]
B.
C.
§ 158-11. Enforcement.
The primary party responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the issuance of a complaint for
any violation thereof shall be the Zoning Officer of the Borough. However, the Construction Official or
any other Borough official or police officer shall also be authorized to issue a complaint for any
violation of this chapter.
§ 158-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty. Each
day after the initial violation shall be considered a new and individual violation.
Chapter 170. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 3-2-1995 by Ord. No. 663
(Ch. 30 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licensing — See Ch. 158.
Fees — See Ch. 204.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Noise — See Ch. 267.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 170-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials
designated.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Oceanport a State Uniform Construction Code
enforcing agency to be known as "Oceanport Uniform Construction Code Enforcement Agency,"
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire
Subcode Official, Electric Subcode Official, Elevator Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a person qualified for such
position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,[1] as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of
any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person, provided
that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at one office location,
except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
§ 170-2. Appeals from decisions of enforcing agency.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 141/392
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
All appeals from decisions of the enforcing agency shall be filed with the Monmouth County
Construction Board of Appeals established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127 in accordance with the
procedure provided in N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 170-3. Fees.
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed in Subsections A
through H hereof and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
The fee for plan review, which shall be computed at 25% of the construction permit fee, shall
be paid at the time the construction permit shall be granted. Plan review fees shall not be
refundable.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896]
The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid before a certificate is
issued. This fee shall be in addition to the construction permit fee.
The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on the basis of the
volume or cost of construction, the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the
number of electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors
(smoke and heat) at the unit rates provided herein, plus any special fees.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The minimum fee for a basic construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing,
electrical or fire protection work shall be $75. The minimum fee for a basic construction permit
covering any or all building residential shall be $75. The minimum fee for a basic construction
permit covering any or all nonresidential shall be $150.
For change of contractor, the fee shall be $75.
Building volume or cost. The fees for new construction or alteration shall be as follows:
Fees for new construction shall be based upon volume of the structure. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the
amount of $0.030 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of all use groups and
types of construction as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of the building subcode,
except that the fee shall be $0.029 per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-
4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, and the fee shall be $0.0007 per cubic foot for structures on farms,
including commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the maximum fee for
such structures on farms not to exceed $1,050.
[Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 766; 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975;
9-21-2017 by Ord. No. 978]
Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be based upon the estimated cost of the
work. The fee shall be in the amount of $30 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $20 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $15 per $1,000 of
estimated cost above $100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant
shall submit to the enforcing agency such cost data as may be available, produced by the
architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A
bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The enforcing agency shall make
the final decision regarding estimated cost.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for new construction for the added
portion.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 142/392
(4)
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
E.
(1)
F.
Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be computed as the sum of the fees
computed separately in accordance with Subsection C(2) and (3) above.
Plumbing fixtures and equipment. The fees shall be as follows:
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee shall be in the amount of $20 per fixture connected to the plumbing system for all
fixtures and appliances except as listed in Subsection D(2) below.
The fee shall be $100 per special device for the following: grease traps, oil separators, watercooled
air-conditioning units, refrigeration units, utility service connections, backflow
preventers, steam boilers, hot-water boilers (excluding those for domestic water heating), gas
piping, active solar systems, sewer pumps, interceptors and fuel oil piping. There shall be no
inspection fee charged for utility gas service entrances.
Electrical fixtures and devices. The fees shall be as follows:
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
For from one to and including 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be in the amount of $75.
For each additional 25 receptacles or fixtures or part thereof, the fee shall be in the amount of
$15. For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting
outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience receptacle or similar fixture, and
motors or devices of less than one horsepower or one kilowatt or less.
For each motor or electrical device greater than one horsepower and less than or equal to 10
horsepower, and for transformers and generators greater than one kilowatt and less than or
equal to 10 kilowatts, the fee shall be $30. For pool bonding, the fee shall be $50. The fee for
a five-year bonding certificate shall be $125.
For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower and less than or equal to 50
horsepower; for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 200
amperes; for each transformer or generator greater than 10 kilowatts and less than or equal
to 45 kilowatts; and for each utility load management device, the fee shall be $55.
For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower and less than or equal to 100
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes
and less than or equal to 1,000 amperes, and for transformers and generators greater than 45
kilowatts and less than or equal to 112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $150.
For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel greater than 1,000 amperes, and for each transformer or
generator greater than 112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $525.
For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those in plug-in appliances shall
be counted, including control equipment, generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or
other devices consuming or generating electrical current.
For each solar-powered system for R-5, the fee shall be $225.
For each residential HVAC replacement, the fee shall be $50. For each commercial HVAC
replacement, the fee shall be $150.
Fire and other hazard protection equipment. Sprinklers, standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat),
pre-engineered suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not connected to the plumbing
system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums:
The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $100; for 21 to and including 100 heads or
detectors, the fee shall be $125; for 101 to and including 200 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be $160; for 201 to and including 400 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $415; for 401 to
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 143/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
G.
and including 1,000 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $575; for over 1,000 heads or
detectors, the fee shall be $735. In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number of
each shall be counted separately and two fees, one for heads and one for detectors, shall be
charged.
[Amended 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for each standpipe shall be $175.
[Amended 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall be $115.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not connected to the plumbing system shall
be $55.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $75.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for each incinerator shall be $400.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896]
The fee for each crematorium shall be $400.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896]
The fees for elevator device inspections and tests shall be as follows:
Semiannual inspections (six-month routine).
Device
Fee
(each)
Traction and drum elevators
1 to 10 floors $151
10+ floors $194
Hydraulic elevators $108
Roped hydraulic elevators $151
Escalators and moving walks $151
Annual inspection (one-year periodic).
Device
Fee
(each)
Traction and drum elevators
1 to 10 floors $216
10+ floors $259
Hydraulic elevators $162
Roped hydraulic elevators $216
Escalators and moving walks $346
Dumbwaiters $86
Manlifts, wheelchair and stairway chairlifts $130
Auxiliary device charge if included:
Oil buffers $43
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 144/392
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Device
Fee
(each)
Counterweight governor and safeties $86
Auxiliary power generator $54
Three-year inspections:
Device
Fee
(each)
Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators $270
Five-year inspections:
Device
Fee
(each)
Traction elevators
1 to 10 floors $367
10+ floors $410
Hydraulic/roped elevators $162
Acceptance inspections.
Device
Fee
(each)
Traction and drum elevators
1 to 10 floors $243
10+ floors $405
Hydraulic elevators $216
Roped hydraulic elevators $243
Escalators/moving walks $216
Dumbwaiters $54
Manlifts, wheelchair and stairway chairlifts $54
Elevator devices in Use Group R-3 or R-4 $162
Alterations $54
Auxiliary device charges if included.
Device
Fee
(each)
Oil buffers $43
Counterweight governor and safeties $108
Auxiliary power generator $81
Plan review fees.
Device
Fee
(each)
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 145/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
(8)
[2]
(9)
(10)
H.
Device
Fee
(each)
Single-family access Use Group R-2 $50
Use Groups R-3 and R-4 $50
All other use groups $260
Certificates and other permits. The fees are as follows:
The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $82 for a structure of less than 5,000
square feet in area and less than 30 feet in height, for one- or two-family residences (Use
Group R-3 of the Building Code) and structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d). The fee for all other use groups shall be $150.
[Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 766; 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896]
The fee for removal of an oil tank (either underground or aboveground) shall be $75.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896]
The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount of $0.75 per square foot
surface area of the sign, computed on two sides only for double-faced signs. The minimum
fee shall be $150.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of 10% of the new construction
permit fee that would be charged by the enforcing agency pursuant to this chapter. The
minimum fee shall be $135, except for one- or two-family structures (Use Group R-3 of the
building subcode) of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than 30 feet in height and
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings subject to N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), for
which the minimum fee shall be $85.
[Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 766; 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change of use group shall be
$120.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $160.
[Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 766; 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
There shall be no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy, except for a temporary
certificate of occupancy extension, where the fee shall now be $30.
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975; 9-21-2017 by Ord. No. 978]
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection H(8), regarding the fee for a certificate for satisfactory
completion of work done under a construction permit, as amended, was repealed 6-2-2011 by
Ord. No. 896.
The fee for residential resale and/or rental occupancies shall be as provided in Chapter 40,
Housing Code.[2]
Editor's Note: Former Ch. 40, Housing Code, was repealed by Ord. No. 831; see now Ch.
295, Property Maintenance.
The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the alternate systems and
nondepletable energy source provisions of the energy subcode shall be $274 for one- and
two-family structures (Use Group R-3 of the building subcode) and for light commercial
structures having the indoor temperature controlled from a single point. The fee for all other
structures shall be $1,369.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 146/392
(11)
(12)
[3]
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $500
for Class I structures and $100 for Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission
of an application for a variation shall be $200 for Class I structures and $50 for Class II and
Class III structures.
For cross connections and backflow preventers that are subject to testing, requiring
reinspection every three months, the fee shall be $75 for each device when they are tested
(thrice annually) and $150 for each device when they are broken down and tested (once
annually).
[Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
Surcharge fee.
In order to provide for the training and certification and technical support programs required
by the State Uniform Construction Code Act,[3] the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00371 per cubic foot of volume of new
construction. The fee for all other construction shall be $1.90 per $1,000 of value of the
construction. The surcharge fees provided herein shall be automatically adjusted without the
necessity of an amendment to this chapter in accordance with modification of these fees by
the state from time to time.
[Amended 8-15-2002 by Ord. No. 755; 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 766; 6-2-2011 by Ord. No. 896;
6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 975]
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending September 30,
December 31, March 31, and June 30, and not later than one month next succeeding the end
of the quarter for which it is due.
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year to the Bureau of
Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected
in the fiscal year.
Grading/plot plan application.
[Added 5-6-1999 by Ord. No. 713; amended 12-7-2000 by Ord. No. 739; 6-22-2017 by Ord. No.
975]
The fee for a single, residential lot application to change, alter or modify the existing grade of
the lot shall be a fee of $125 per lot. If such application is made in connection with an
application for a building permit, the building permit shall not be issued until the grading plan
application fee provided herein shall have been paid.
For other residential and nonresidential applications, the fee shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer for a sum equal to the number of anticipated inspections at the rate of
$125 per inspection, including single-residential requiring more than one inspection. The
applicant shall deposit with the Construction Official the amount determined by the Borough
Engineer to establish an escrow account on behalf of the applicant. The Borough Engineer
will bill against the escrow account, and any remainder shall be returned to the applicant. If
such application is made in connection with an application for a building permit, the building
permit shall not be issued until the grading plan application fee provided herein shall have
been paid.
In the event any complicated structures, retaining walls, storm sewers or other items are
proposed, the Borough Engineer will prepare an estimate for inspection fees for the applicant.
A building permit shall not be issued until the escrow amount provided herein shall have been
paid. If such application is made in connection with an application for a building permit, the
building permit shall not be issued until the grading plan application fee provided herein shall
have been paid.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 147/392
[1]
A.
B.
§ 170-4. Municipal enforcing agency fees.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials, prepare and submit to the
Mayor and Council, annually, a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating
expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
A copy of the Construction Official's report recommending a fee schedule and setting forth
enforcing agency revenues and expenses shall be filed with the Department of Community Affairs
when prepared and a copy of the ordinance, together with the fee schedule, shall be filed with the
Department when enacted or amended.
Chapter 183. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 10-7-1971 by Ord. No.
305 (Ch. 35, Art. II, of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 183-1. Power to establish curfew.
The Mayor of the Borough of Oceanport or, in his absence or in the event of his inability to act, the
President of the Borough Council or the Chairman of the Police Committee of the Borough of
Oceanport is hereby empowered to establish a curfew in the Borough of Oceanport on such occasion
and during such periods of time as are necessary to preserve the public peace or to preserve order in
the Borough or to prevent injury to persons or property.
§ 183-2. Method of establishment.
The Mayor of the Borough of Oceanport or, in his absence or in the event of his inability to act, the
President of the Borough Council or the Chairman of the Police Committee shall establish a curfew by
setting forth the hours and dates on which persons, or certain persons according to their age, shall be
forbidden to appear on public streets or in any public place in the Borough, or to appear or congregate
outside of private property in the Borough. A written statement setting forth the hours and dates of the
curfew, and the persons who shall be subject to same, shall be filed with the Borough Clerk of the
Borough and posted in at least 10 public places in the Borough, and then said curfew shall be in effect.
§ 183-3. Violations.
Any person who is subject to the curfew, after the curfew is in effect, and who appears on a public
street or in any public place or who appears or is part of a congregation outside of private property
shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 183-4. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 190. Drug-Free Zones
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 148/392
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Substance Abuse Committee — See Ch. 29, Art. VI.
Article I. Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 10-19-1989 by Ord. No. 593 (Ch. 33, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 190-1. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), the Drug-Free
School Zone Map[1] produced on or about October 21, 1987, by Thomas K. Rospos, P.E., Municipal
Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas
within the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such
school property.
Editor's Note: The Drug-Free School Zone Maps are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk, where
they may be examined during regular business hours.
§ 190-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 190-1 of this article shall
continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or
within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to
reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and
drug-free school zones.
§ 190-3. Notification of changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any private or parochial school, is
hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and
the Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used for
school purposes.
§ 190-4. Filing of map; availability of copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original of the map approved
and adopted pursuant to § 190-1 of this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a
certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is
hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the Monmouth County Clerk and to the office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 190-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 149/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 190-1 of this article was
prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of
this state and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
following:
The location of elementary and secondary schools within the municipality.
The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such schools or a school
board.
That such school property is and continues to be used for school purposes.
The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as school property was
owned by a school or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987,
that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or
relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that
statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 190-1 of this article. The failure of the map approved herein to depict the location and
boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence of such
depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map,
shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not owned by or
leased to a school or school board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the preparation, approval and
adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have been complied with.
Chapter 204. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licensing — See Ch. 158.
Construction codes fees — See Ch. 170.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 279, Art. II.
Property maintenance fees — See Ch. 295.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Application Fee
Article I. Planning Board Fees
[Adopted 4-16-1981 by Ord. No. 452 (Ch. 35A, Art. I, of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 12-16-
1999 by Ord. No. 727]
§ 204-1. Planning Board fees.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 150/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
[Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851; 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1005]
The Development Application Fee Schedule set forth in Article XI of this chapter shall pertain to
applications filed with the Oceanport Planning Board.
Revision of plat or plan prior to hearing. An applicant seeking or required to revise or amend a
preliminary or final plat or plan prior to a hearing with respect thereto shall pay a fee equal to 20%
of the original site plan or subdivision plat fee for each occasion that such revised or amended plat
or plan must be reviewed by the Borough Engineer.
§ 204-2. Variance and interpretation application fees.
The Development Application Fee Schedule set forth in Article XI of this chapter shall pertain to
applications filed with the Oceanport Planning Board.
[Amended 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1005]
If an application requests more than one form of relief, then the fee charged shall be the higher
amount had the application been for a single form of relief.
Notwithstanding the fee schedule hereinabove set forth in Subsection A, the fee for any
hardship/bulk variance involving a single- or two-family property, regardless of the district in which
such property may be located, shall be calculated in the same manner as if such property were
located in the R-1 to R-5 District.
[Added 9-1-1994 by Ord. No. 657]
§ 204-3. Review deposits.
[Added 10-17-1991 by Ord. No. 618]
For every application for subdivision or site plan approval, the applicant shall pay to the Borough
the review deposits as set forth in the Development Application Fee Schedule in Article XI of this
chapter in addition to all other filing fees. No submission shall be deemed complete until such time
as the applicant shall have posted with the Borough, in cash, certified check or money order, the
amount of escrow as set forth in said Development Application Fee Schedule.
[Amended 5-6-1999 by Ord. No. 714; 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1005]
Upon the determination of completeness, the Municipal Engineer shall review the submission to
determine whether the escrow amount set forth herein and posted by the applicant is adequate to
fund the review of the submissions. The Municipal Engineer shall consider the following criteria in
making such determination:
The presence or absence of public water and/or a public sanitary sewer serving the site.
Environmental considerations, including but not limited to geological, hydrological and
ecological factors required to be addressed by an environmental impact report.
The presence of critical areas as identified by the Borough of Oceanport Master Plan.
The traffic impact of the proposed development.
The impact of the proposed development on existing aquifers and water quality.
The Municipal Engineer shall then determine whether the escrow amount specified is sufficient,
excessive or insufficient. Such determination shall be filed with the municipal agency and the
applicant. In the event that the amount posted is deemed to be excessive or that no escrow
amount is required, the same shall be refunded within 30 days. In the event that additional
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 151/392
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
moneys are required, then the municipal agency shall make a determination which shall be
deemed binding upon the parties.
In the event that the applicant or the municipal agency disagrees with the determination of the
Municipal Engineer of the escrow fee amount, then the municipal agency shall make a
determination which shall be deemed binding upon the parties.
All such escrow funds shall be utilized by the Borough to pay the cost of any professional fees
incurred by the municipality for review and/or testimony in connection with the applicant's
submission. All sums not actually so expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 60 days
after the final determination by the municipal agency.
When 80% of the escrow amount has been expended and the municipal agency determines that
additional funds are required, a letter shall be sent to the applicant indicating the additional escrow
amount which shall be deposited by the applicant. In the event that the applicant shall fail to post
the additional escrow amount, the municipal agency shall have the power to deny the application
on those grounds. No building permit shall be issued until all application and professional fees
have been paid.
Article II. Returned Checks
[Adopted 11-1-1984 by Ord. No. 494 (Ch. 35A, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 204-4. Fee to be paid to Borough.
[Amended 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 763]
The Borough Treasurer and Tax Collector are hereby authorized and directed to collect from any
payee whose check to the Borough of Oceanport has been returned unpaid a fee of $20 for each
check returned to the Borough. Said fee shall be collected for any check returned, whether by stop
payment, insufficient funds, uncollected funds or any other reason. Further, said fee shall be collected
for any returned check to any department, division or other branch of government of the Borough of
Oceanport.
Article III. Copies of Public Records
[Adopted 10-17-1991 by Ord. No. 618 (Ch. 35A, Art. III, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 204-5. Reproduction fees.
The following fee schedule shall pertain to requests for the reproduction of all public records:
In connection with any action, whether civil or otherwise, pending in the Municipal Court, a fee of
$15 shall be charged for the reproduction of each set of documents, regardless of the number of
pages, and a fee of $25 for the reproduction of each videotape.
For all other public records, a fee for the reproduction thereof shall be charged as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Article IV. Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 8-21-1997 by Ord. No. 694 (Ch. 35A, Art. V, of the 1970 Code); amended 10-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 886]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 152/392
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
§ 204-6. Tax sale certificate duplicates.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall provide any party entitled to redeem a
certificate pursuant to this section (N.J.S.A. 54:5-45) two calculations of the amount required for
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. A fee of $50 may be assessed for each subsequent
calculation required by the Tax Collector. A request for redemption calculation shall be made in
writing to the Tax Collector.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1, the Tax Collector may charge a lienholder of a tax lien $50
for the calculation of the amount due to redeem the tax lien, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-
97.1. Any request for a redemption calculation shall specify the date to be used for the calculation,
which shall be the date of the notice. Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality shall be liable
for an incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the municipality shall not become part of the lien and
shall not be passed on to any party entitled to redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
Article V. Vital Statistics
[Adopted 7-19-2007 by Ord. No. 825]
§ 204-7. Marriages, civil union, domestic partnerships, death
licenses and records.
The following is established as the fee to be paid for licenses:
Marriage license: $28.
Civil union license: $28.
Domestic partnership: $28.
The Registrar of Vital Statistics of the Borough shall keep a record of all marriages, civil unions,
domestic partnerships, births and deaths and shall report to the appropriate authorities as required
by law. The fee for certified or certification copies of marriages, civil unions, domestic partnerships,
birth or death certificates shall be $15 each.
For any search of files and records of marriages, civil unions, domestic partnerships, births or
deaths when the correct year is supplied by the applicant, the Registrar shall be entitled to a fee
as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:8-64.
§ 204-8. Miscellaneous fees and services.
For marriage, civil union or domestic partnership ceremonies performed by the Mayor of Oceanport,
the fee shall be $100.
Article VI. Zoning Documents
[Adopted 9-20-2007 by Ord. No. 830]
§ 204-9. Zoning fees.
[Amended 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 948]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 153/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
[1]
Zoning permit application shall be $35 plus a technology fee of $10.
Zoning book fee. The cost for a copy of the Borough's zoning book shall be $20.
§ 204-10. Tax Map revision fees.
When application for development requires revisions to the Borough's Tax Maps, which may
include costs in regard to reviewing deeds and/or filed maps and revising said tax maps
accordingly, a fee will be required for each type of subdivision (see below fee schedule). This fee
also includes costs incurred by the Borough's Assessor's office in establishing additional line items
and revisions to the Mod 4 database or any database similarly used by the Assessor. These fees
will also pertain to any lot consolidation performed by a resubdivision, site plan and condominium
plan submitted for approval.
The follow fees will be paid prior to or as a condition of final approval or issuance of a
development permit.
Number of Lots or Units Tax Map Revision Fee
Lot consolidation $250
Less than 20 $85 per lot/unit ($250 minimum)
20 but less than 100 $1,650 plus $65 per lot/unit in excess of 20
100 but less than 200 $6,800 plus $50 per lot/unit in excess of 100
200 or more $12,000 plus $40 per lot/unit in excess of 200
Where an applicant sells or leases property necessitating subsequent revisions to the Borough's
Tax Maps, the applicant or present owner (if different from the applicant) shall be responsible for
additional Tax Map revisions. Subsequent fees shall be the same as above and paid prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Article VII. Special Events, Boat Ramps and Athletic
Facilities
[Adopted 7-17-2008 by Ord. No. 847; amended 7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 916; 12-3-2014 by Ord. No.
940]
§ 204-11. Events requiring road closure or traffic control.
[Added [1]]
The following is established as the fee to be paid for an event requiring road closure or traffic
control on any roadways within the Borough of Oceanport.
Event involving one to two roads: $100 per day.
Event involving two to five roads: $200 per day.
Event involving five to 10 roads: $300 per day.
Event involving 10 or more roads: $500 per day.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former § 204-11, Athletic facilities use fees, as amended.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 154/392
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
§ 204-12. Boat ramp fees.
The following are established as the fees to be paid for the use of a Borough of Oceanport boat
ramp at Blackberry Bay Park:
The daily use fee for putting in and retrieving a boat:
Residents: $10.
Nonresidents: $20.
A seasonal use permit allowing for unlimited use by a single boat shall be:
Residents: $50.
Nonresidents: $100.
§ 204-13. Athletic facility use fees.
Games:
Youth fee:
Resident fee: $25 per game.
Nonresident fee: $50 per game.
Non-youth fee:
Resident fee: $35 per game.
Nonresident fee: $70 per game.
Practices:
Residents: $100 per team for one two-hour practice per week for 12 weeks.
Nonresidents: $200 per team for one two-hour practice per week for 12 weeks.
For profit camps: $500 (no more than five days).
For profit tennis lessons: $500 for the period of May 1 to September 30, with a maximum usage of
10 hours per week, with a two-hour per one court maximum per day.
§ 204-13.1. Special events requiring first aid and/or Fire
Department presence.
[Added 6-18-2015 by Ord. No. 952]
The following is established as the fee to be paid for a nonmunicipal sponsored event requiring a
first aid and/or Fire Department presence:
Event hours one through four: $200 per department utilized.
Events greater than four hours: $50 per hour per department.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 155/392
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
The above fees may be waived or reduced by the governing body subject to good cause.
Article VIII. Public Buildings
[Adopted 12-3-2014 by Ord. No. 940]
§ 204-14. Public building rental fees.
The following are established as the fees to be paid for use of a Borough building by a resident of
Oceanport:
Blackberry Bay Pavilion: $100.
Old Wharf House: $100.
Port-Au-Peck Firehouse: $100.
The following are established as the fees to be paid for use of a Borough building by a nonresident
of Oceanport:
Blackberry Bay Pavilion: $200.
Old Wharf House: $200.
Port-Au-Peck Firehouse: $200.
Article IX. Food Handlers and Mobile Food Vendors
[Adopted 5-7-2015 by Ord. No. 949]
§ 204-15. Food handler and mobile food vendor license fees.
The fee for a food handler's license is hereby fixed as follows:
For establishments less than 1,000 square feet: $75.
For establishments between 1,000 and 2,000 square feet: $125.
For establishments greater than 2,000 square feet: $250.
For multiple establishments owned/controlled and located on same premises which total more
than 5,000 square feet: $2,000 (total).
The fee for an individual mobile food vendor's license: $35.
Article X. Recreation Program Fees
[Adopted 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 976]
§ 204-16. Action Camp.
The following range of fees is hereby established for early registration, May 1 through June 15:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 156/392
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Resident $190 to $250
Resident sibling $175 to $250
Nonresident $225 to $300
The following range of fees is hereby established for registration after June 15:
Resident $215 to $275
Resident sibling $200 to $275
Nonresident $250 to $350
The fee for each year shall be set by resolution of the Borough Council.
Article XI. Development Application Fees
[Adopted 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1005]
§ 204-17. Development Application Fee Schedule.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Oceanport hereby approves and adopts the
revised/updated application fees/escrow charges and other charges as set forth on the attached
Development Application Fee Schedule.[1]
Editor's Note: The schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The attached Development Application Fee Schedule shall be effective upon adoption and
publication in accordance with New Jersey law.
The attached Development Application Fee Schedule shall not affect any development
applications which, in good faith, were submitted to the Borough of Oceanport prior to the adoption
of this article.
Upon adoption, Borough/Planning Board officials are authorized to distribute the Development
Application Fee Schedule to Planning Board applicants (and other members of the public who
wish to review the same).
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with this article are hereby
repealed, but only, however to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency, it being the legislative
intent that all other ordinances or parts of ordinances now existing and in effect, unless the same
are in conflict or inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article, shall remain in full force and
effect.
Chapter 210. Firearms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 8-6-1931 by Ord. No. 51
(Ch. 41 of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 284, Art. I.
§ 210-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 157/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun, spring gun, gas gun or any
other device which impels a projectile through the use of force is prohibited in the Borough of
Oceanport.
§ 210-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the applicable laws and regulations of the
State of New Jersey.
Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under the supervision of the Police
Department.
§ 210-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 223. Fire Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 50.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295, Art. II.
Article I. Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-2-1920 by Ord. No. 5 (Ch. 8, §§ 8-6 to 8-8 and 8-10, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 223-1. False fire alarm.
Any person who shall cause to be given any false alarm of fire in this Borough or who shall intermeddle
with, injure or destroy any of the property appertaining to or belonging to said Fire Department or fire
alarm system shall be punished as provided in § 223-4 of this article.
§ 223-2. Driving over or damaging hoses and apparatus.
Any person who shall willfully drive or cause to be driven any vehicle over any hose or other fire
apparatus or shall in any manner willfully damage, deface or injure any hose or other apparatus at any
time shall be punished as provided in § 223-4 of this article.
§ 223-3. Interference with fire apparatus.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 158/392
No person or persons shall interfere with, impede or delay any fire apparatus in the Borough of
Oceanport in any manner or for any cause under their control. Any person or persons violating this
section shall be punished as provided in § 223-4 of this article, upon complaint of the Chief, foreman of
a company or driver of any apparatus.
§ 223-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-19-1972 by Ord. No. 324]
Any person or persons who shall violate any section of this article shall be liable, upon conviction, to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article II. Establishment and Management.
[Adopted 7-18-1985 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 37 of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 2-1-1990 by
Ord. No. 601]
§ 223-5. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be fully enforced in the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 223-6. Designation of enforcement agency.
[Amended 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 1023]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Borough of Eatontown Bureau of Fire Safety for the Borough of
Oceanport.
§ 223-7. Applicability.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations
adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of the
Borough of Oceanport, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings and buildings owned
or operated by the federal or state government or interstate agencies, and shall faithfully comply with
the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 223-8. Inspection of life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 223-6 of this article shall carry out the periodic inspections
of the life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community
Affairs.
§ 223-9. Administration.
The local enforcing agency established by § 223-6 of this article shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention
of the Borough of Oceanport and shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official,
who shall be the Fire Marshal and the Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau. The Bureau Chief shall
report to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 223-10. Fire Official; inspectors and other employees.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 159/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under the supervision of the Fire
Official, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport and shall
be certified as a fire official by the State of New Jersey. In making this appointment, the appointing
authority may make the appointment from recommendations provided by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
[Amended 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of two years, commencing on January 1 next
succeeding the effective date of this article.
[Amended 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the
local enforcing agency shall be State of New Jersey certified fire inspectors, appointed by the
Mayor and Council upon the recommendation of the Fire Official.
Removal from office. The Fire Official and inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency
shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and Council for inefficiency or misconduct. The Fire
Official and each inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard by the appointing authority or a designated hearing officer.
§ 223-11. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 27D-208),
any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of Monmouth County.
§ 223-12. Additional registrations and fees.
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and the regulations of the
Department of Community Affairs, the following additional registrations and fees shall be required:
Mercantile businesses, repair shops, service businesses and business and professional offices
and all other uses not otherwise provided in this section shall be inspected yearly, with a fee
schedule of:
Size
(square feet) Fee
First 1,000 $40
Each additional 1,000 $5
Factories shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
Size
(square feet) Fee
First 1,000 $40
1,001 to 3,500 $50
3,501 to 6,000 $60
6,001 to 10,000 $70
In excess of 10,000 $80
Warehouses shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 160/392
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
Size
(square feet) Fee
First 2,000 $40
2,001 to 5,000 $50
In excess of 5,000 $60
All other types of structures and facilities not otherwise described or included in this § 223-12 shall
be inspected yearly with the same fee schedule as that pertaining to mercantile businesses.
Multifamily housing and dwellings with a fee schedule of:
Each building: $40 annually.
Each dwelling unit: $10 every five years.
Common areas, utility areas: inspection annually.
Church meeting halls: $25 annually.
All commercial enterprises named in § 223-12 of this article must register annually with the Bureau
of Fire Prevention and shall pay all inspection fees not later than December 1 of each year. All
new enterprises shall register within 60 days of commencement of business activity.
[Amended 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
Anyone who obstructs, hinders, delays or interferes by force or otherwise with the Fire Marshal or
any member of the local enforcing agency in the exercise of any power or the discharge of any
function or duty under the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be subject to a
fine not to exceed $2,500 per occurrence.
[Added 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
False statements. Anyone who prepares, utters or renders any false statement pertaining to
reports, documents, plans or specifications permitted or required under the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each occurrence.
[Added 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
§ 223-13. Permit fees.
The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be as follows:
Permit Fee
Type 1 $25
Type 2 $100
Type 3 $200
Type 4 $300
Type 5 $1,000
An applicant who shall fail to obtain a required permit prior to commencing the operation, process
or activity for which a permit was required shall be required to pay a permit fee of double the
amount of the applicable permit fee.
[Added 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
Any person or entity who shall fail to obtain a required permit after being ordered to do so while
continuing the operation, process or activity shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 161/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 1-15, General penalty, per day during which the operation, process or activity continues.
[Added 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
§ 223-14. Fire lane parking.
The Fire Official may require and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for
the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus.
Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free from obstructions and vehicles and marked in a
manner prescribed by the Fire Official in accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Transportation regulations regarding highway signs and markings.
Violations of the fire lanes shall be punishable by a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15,
General penalty.
[Amended 9-2-1999 by Ord. No. 721]
To the extent that the provisions of this section shall be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:70-3.2(a)F311 of the Uniform Fire Safety Code, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
[Amended 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
§ 223-15. Rapid-entry system in residences and businesses.
[Added 9-19-2002 by Ord. No. 756]
Required. The Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Borough of Oceanport shall require the owner(s)
of all of the following types of new and existing building(s) or structure(s) to have installed on their
building(s) or structure(s) a rapid-entry key box, to be located not less than six nor more than eight
feet from grade above the main entrance on the hinge side of the entry door:
All hotels, motels or multiple dwellings that:
Have locked main entrances for security purposes at any time during the day or night;
and
Have common corridors to living units or spaces.
Any sprinklered or interconnected alarmed residential or commercial building or structure.
Any industrial, commercial, institutional, retail or similar business building or structure,
including public and private schools, consisting of 12,000 square feet or more.
Any public or private educational institution.
Any other building or structure deemed necessary by the Fire Official.
Approval of system; owner to provide keys upon request. The type of rapid-entry key box system
to be installed shall be approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention prior to the purchase of the
same. In addition to providing a rapid-entry key for the system installed to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, the Bureau may request and the owner of the building or structure concerned shall
provide keys for the following areas within the building or structure:
Boiler rooms;
Sprinkler control valves;
Electrical rooms;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 162/392
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
[1]
Elevators and elevator control rooms, and
Such other room(s) or door(s) requested by the Bureau of Fire Prevention where entry may
be required.
Key to self-contained living areas, units or rooms. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other
section of this chapter, no official, employee or member of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or Fire
Department shall request nor shall an owner be required to provide a key to any self-contained,
individual living space area, unit or room.
When deemed necessary, the Fire Official may require the owner of a building structure to
purchase and install locking Fire Department connection cap(s) with a type to be approved by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
When deemed necessary, the Fire Official may require the owner of a building structure to
purchase and install a keyed electric override switch with a type to be approved by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention for the following:
Exhaust fans for parking structure(s);
Electric-operated doors for parking structure(s); and
Electric-operated perimeter gates.
§ 223-16. Legal counsel.
The Borough Attorney is hereby designated as legal counsel to the Bureau of Fire Prevention in its
capacity as the local enforcing agency under the provisions of this article.
§ 223-17. Provisions to remain in effect.
All provisions of the Borough of Oceanport Fire Prevention Ordinance being amended herein which are
not modified by this article shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 229. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 5-16-2013 by Ord. No.
914.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 328.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 229, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 9-
17-2009 by Ord. No. 871.
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose
and Objectives
§ 229-1. Statutory authorization.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 163/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility
to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport, of Monmouth
County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 229-2. Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Oceanport are subject to periodic inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of natural and man-made obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately
anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, inadequately
elevated or otherwise inadequately protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§ 229-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
§ 229-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 164/392
D.
E.
Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
Article II. Definitions
§ 229-5. Definitions; word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE)
The elevation shown on a community's Advisory Flood Hazard Map that indicates the advisory
stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent-or-greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA)
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to flooding from the one-percent annualchance
event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD MAP
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the
areas of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
APPEAL
A request for a review of the Borough Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a
request for a variance.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM)
with a one-percent-annual-or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design
and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA
An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 165/392
A.
B.
seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING
A non-basement building built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have
the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard area, to have the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the base
flood elevation by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high
hazard, "elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION
The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than 0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 166/392
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so to render the structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the
municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE
A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and
landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal
dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from the relatively steep slope to a
relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 167/392
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES
Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent
construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
condition before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that
would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
Article III. General Provisions
§ 229-6. Applicability.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 168/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Oceanport, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 229-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Oceanport, Community No. 340320, are
identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth County, New Jersey
(All Jurisdictions)," dated June 20, 2018.
Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions) as shown on
Index and Panel(s) 34025C0183G, 34025C0184G, 34025C0191F, 34025C0192F, and
34025C0203G, whose effective date is June 20, 2018.
Advisory Base Flood Elevations and Advisory Flood Hazard Maps titled Long Branch East
NW, dated December 12, 2012, Long Branch West NE, dated December 12, 2012, and Long
Branch West SE, dated December 12, 2012. These documents shall take precedence over
previous panels and FIS in construction and development regulations only. Where the Special
Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) and the Advisory Flood Hazard Area (AFHA) Maps conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood
Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents are on file at 315 East Main Street, Oceanport,
New Jersey.
§ 229-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions
of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Borough of Oceanport from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 229-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 229-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 169/392
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
§ 229-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Oceanport, any officer or
employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article IV. Administration
§ 229-12. Establishment of development permit.
[Amended 8-17-2017 by Ord. No. 977]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in § 229-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the heating system(s), water heater(s), air-conditioning
condenser(s), electric meter, electric service panel, and any other attendant utility that services the
building. The minimum elevation requirement shall be base flood elevation or advisory base flood
elevation, whichever is more restrictive, plus two feet as provided for in § 229-17A and B. The
elevation information for each and every utility listed above shall be provided on the architectural
and grading plans.
Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been floodproofed.
Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for
any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 229-17B; and
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
§ 229-13. Designation of local administrator.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
The Borough Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 229-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 170/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
Duties of the Borough Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
Permit review.
Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied.
Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required.
Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the
floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of § 229-18A
are met.
Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of the area of special flood
hazard to determine if the proposed development alters sand dunes so as to increase
potential flood damage.
Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood level in accordance
with § 229-19B(4).
Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation and floodway data have
not been provided in accordance with § 229-7, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, the Borough Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer § 229-
17A, Specific standards, Residential construction, and § 229-17B, Specific standards,
Nonresidential construction.
Information to be obtained and maintained.
Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 229-12C.
In coastal high-hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the provisions of § 229-19B(1) and (2)(a) and (b) are met.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
Alteration of watercourses.
Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 171/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(4)
A.
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 229-15.
Substantial damage review.
After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to structures due to flood
and nonflood causes.
Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantially damaged structures and
provide a letter of substantial damage determination to the owner and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of § 229-17, Specific standards,
Subsections A, Residential construction, B, Nonresidential construction, and C, Manufactured
homes.
§ 229-15. Variance procedure.
Appeal Board.
The Planning Board as established by the Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Borough Engineer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board or any taxpayer may appeal such
decision to the Superior Court, as provided by law.
In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board, shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program of that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 172/392
(j)
(k)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
B.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors of § 229-15A(4) and the purposes of this chapter, the
Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
The Borough Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
[Amended 6-7-2018 by Ord. No. 989]
Conditions for variances.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 229-15A(4)(a) through
(k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in § 229-15A(4), or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 229-16. General standards.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 173/392
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is
required:
Anchoring.
All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Construction materials and methods.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
Utilities.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding; and
For all new construction and substantial improvements the electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
Subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 174/392
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
C.
minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 229-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in
§ 229-7, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, or in § 229-14B, Use of other base flood
data, the following standards are required:
Residential construction.
New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities,
elevated at or above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation whichever is
more restrictive, plus two feet;
Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade two feet above) the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the
advisory base flood elevation plus two feet, whichever is more restrictive. And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
Either:
Elevated to or above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation whichever
is more restrictive, plus two feet; and
Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade two feet above the depth number specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified) or at or above the advisory base flood elevation plus two feet,
whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
Or:
Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two feet, or advisory base flood
elevation plus two feet (whichever is more restrictive), the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided
to the official as set forth in § 229-14C(2)(b).
Manufactured homes.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 175/392
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(2)
B.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 229-16A(2).
All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area of special flood
hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at
or above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation, plus two feet (whichever is
more restrictive).
§ 229-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 229-7 are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
If § 229-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements must comply with
Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been provided and no
floodway has been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 2/10 (0.2) of a foot at any point.
§ 229-19. Coastal high-hazard areas.
Coastal high-hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 229-7. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters
from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
Location of structures.
All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the mean high tide.
The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except in an existing
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
Construction methods.
Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on piling or
columns so that:
The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
piling or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation, advisory base flood
elevation or as required by the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), whichever is
more restrictive; and
With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member open so as not to impede the
flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided for in § 229-19B(4).
Structural support.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely anchored on piling
or columns.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 176/392
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
C.
The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loading
values each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval).
There shall be no fill used for structural support.
Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the
structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design
and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for compliance with the provisions of § 229-19B(1) and (2)(a) and (b).
Space below the lowest floor.
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the
enactment of this chapter shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless
breakaway walls, open wood latticework or insect screening are used as provided for in
this section.
Breakaway walls, open wood latticework or insect screening shall be allowed below the
base flood elevation, provided that they are intended to collapse under wind and water
loads without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be
designed for a safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds
per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading of 20
pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes)
may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the
designs proposed meet the following conditions.
Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would
occur during the base flood; and
The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be
subject to collapse, displacement or other structural damage due to the effects of
wind and water load acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and
nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local
building standards.
If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage and not for human habitation.
Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be submitted to the Building
Subcode Official for approval.
Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones VE and V on the
community's DFIRM which would increase potential flood damage.
Chapter 230. Food Handling and Mobile Food Vendors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 5-7-2015 by Ord. No. 949.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 204.
§ 230-1. Purpose.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 177/392
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and permitting for food handling, mobile
food vendors and setting of fees for same.
This chapter seeks to regulate food handlers and mobile food vendors through the annual
issuance of licenses. This chapter will assist the Borough with keeping record of all food handler
establishments including mobile food vendors within the Borough. License fees will cover the cost
of enforcement and administrative duties.
This chapter seeks to protect the character of existing commercial areas and to provide sufficient
space in appropriate locations for each use. The Borough seeks to locate mobile food vendors in
areas to better serve mobile populations. The Borough seeks to promote a desirable visual
environment through limiting the interaction of each respective use.
§ 230-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FOOD
A raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for
use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER
Any establishment or person who regularly and principally prepares, cooks or serves food,
whether seating on the premises is provided or not, or food is available for public consumption.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR
Any movable restaurant or retail food establishment in or on which food and beverage are
transported, stored, or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary locations. Only the
following mobile units shall be authorized to obtain an annual mobile retail food license to stop and
stand on public property, public rights-of-way and/or public streets and sidewalks as designated
hereinafter, none of which shall exceed 35 feet in length.
PERSON
An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association and principle or agent thereof.
§ 230-3. Food handler's license required.
No food handler shall engage in or be employed within the Borough in the business of or service
of preparing, selling or processing food intended for human consumption without having first
applied for a license as a food handler upon written application with the Board of Health.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of, or to offer to sell or dispose of, any food
stuffs, goods, wares or merchandise within the Borough of Oceanport, without first obtaining a
license and having paid the required license fee.
§ 230-4. Application for license.
Any person desiring a license shall file with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport or as
otherwise designated an application which shall contain the following information:
Name of the applicant.
If a trade name is used, whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, association or
corporation.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 178/392
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
Address of applicant and telephone number.
Two business references.
Place or places of the residence of the applicant for the preceding three years.
Description of goods or services to be sold.
For facilities with multiple food establishments.
As to the application, there must be appended, when applicable, a corporate resolution from the
firm authorizing the person signing the application to act as its representative and certifying that
the information is correct and accurate.
Whether the applicant, in previously operating in this state under a license, has had such license
revoked or suspended and, if so, the reasons therefor.
In the case of a mobile food vendor, the description of the vehicle and state license number.
§ 230-5. Renewal of registrations.
All food handler licenses will expire December 31 of each year.
§ 230-6. Transfer of licenses prohibited.
A food handler license is granted to a food handler as defined in § 230-2 and may not be transferred to
any other person for any other purpose whatsoever.
§ 230-7. Availability of license.
Every food handler holding a license in accordance with this chapter shall be required to prominently
display license while engaged in the business use. A food handler must produce the license at the
request of any person solicited, police officer or any other official of the Borough of Oceanport. Mobile
vendor licensees shall be required to display the mobile vendor license prominently when located in a
permitted location. Being the lawful holder of a Borough of Oceanport mobile food vendor license shall
not be a valid defense to a citation for failure to prominently display the license in violation of this
chapter.
§ 230-8. Hours of operation for mobile food vendors.
Weekdays: Sunday through Thursday, mobile food vendors shall operate between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Weekends: Friday and Saturday, mobile food vendors shall operate between the hours of 9 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
In the event any additional hours are desired, a licensee may apply to the governing body for
extended hours.
§ 230-9. Supplemental regulations.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 179/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
Mobile food vendors shall not provide or allow any dining area, including but not limited to tables,
chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup counters.
All licensees shall comply with all applicable state statutes, all applicable Borough of Oceanport
ordinances, and any other law or regulation which may be applicable under the given
circumstances.
No person or vehicle shall stand or be parked in a fixed location for the purpose of displaying or
selling wares, merchandise or services on any public or private property where to do so causes or
is likely to cause a crowd, impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or produce annoying sounds,
noises or disturbances which interfere with the quality of life of the residents.
It shall also be unlawful to strew or litter, or cause to be strewn or littered, the public streets or
sidewalks with refuse or waste matter of any kind or to anywise interfere with the comfort or
convenience of the residence or business of the occupants or owners of adjacent properties.
No person or vehicle shall stand or be parked for the purpose of displaying or selling wares,
merchandise or services on any public or private property within a distance of 200 feet of the
nearest public school in the Borough of Oceanport during school hours. School hours shall mean
any time between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on weekdays, exclusive of Saturdays, during such days
as said schools may be in session.
Mobile food vendors shall comply with all ordinances, laws and regulations relating to noise in
effect by the Borough of Oceanport, County of Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
§ 230-10. Enforcement.
Unless otherwise specified herein, this chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Oceanport Police Department, the Health Officer or any other Borough official as so designated.
§ 230-11. Fees.
Fees for licenses shall be set in accordance with the Fee Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Fees.
Chapter 236. Games of Chance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 121.
Article I. Sunday Conduct
[Adopted 7-16-1987 by Ord. No. 550 (Ch. 37A of the 1970 Code)]
§ 236-1. Games lawful on Sunday.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be lawful to hold, operate and conduct on the
first day of the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday," a specific game or games of
chance commonly known as a "raffle" or "raffles" pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 180/392
A.
B.
the Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., provided that there has been compliance with the
licensing requirements in such law made and provided.
Article II. Authorization to Grant Raffle and Bingo Licenses
[Adopted 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 236-2. Authorization of Clerk to grant licenses.
The Borough Council designates the Municipal Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport as the person
having the authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses pursuant to the terms of
N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 236-3. Filing of provisions.
The Municipal Clerk shall file a certified copy of this article with the Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission.
Chapter 243. Helistops
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 11-7-2019 by Ord. No.
1012. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 243-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HELISTOP
An area of land utilized for the landing and takeoff of helicopters for noncommercial and
emergency purposes. A helistop shall not provide for, nor include, fueling or maintenance of
helicopters. Helicopters shall not be parked at the helistop except when loading and discharging
passengers.
§ 243-2. Prohibited activities.
Helistops shall specifically exclude, and it shall be prohibited to conduct or allow, maintenance, fueling,
storage of fuels or helicopter parking or storage. The helicopters shall only be permitted on the helistop
for loading and discharging of passengers, not to exceed 15 minutes on the ground, except in cases of
emergency. Emergency use can be so declared by the Mayor of Oceanport, the Chief of Police of
Oceanport and the Deputy Chief of Police of Oceanport.
§ 243-3. Trips and usage.
The helistop owner/operator shall be allowed to land and take off between sunrise and sunset
only. The operation of the helistop shall start no sooner than May 1 and must cease on November
1 each year. Operation and landing of helicopters at the helistop before sunrise or after sunset and
between November 1 and through May 1 shall be prohibited.
The number of flights in and out of the helistop shall be consistent with the temporary certificate of
license issued for the helistop by the New Jersey Department of Transportation, Bureau of
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 181/392
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
A.
B.
Aeronautics. The number applies to the helistop regardless of helicopter owner or operator.
The helistop owner/operator shall provide notice to the Borough Administrator of each takeoff and
landing, at least 24 hours in advance if possible, but never less than four hours in advance of any
takeoff or landing. The notice shall be provided by telephone communication and email so that a
record of each takeoff and landing can be retained. Failure to notify the Borough Administrator of a
planned takeoff or landing may result in a reduction in the number of takeoffs and landings that the
Borough will allow.
Under no circumstances shall the helistop allow any more than 10 takeoffs and 10 landings
between the valid dates of the license referenced hereinabove.
Under no circumstance shall refueling of the helicopter be permitted at the helistop.
The helistop owner/operator shall comply with all Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs).
§ 243-4. Violations.
Should the helistop owner/operator allow more takeoffs and landings to occur than are allowed within
the temporary certificate of license, or more than the maximum allowed (10 takeoffs and 10 landings),
the helistop owner/operator shall be responsible for a per-passenger fine for the offending takeoff or
landing of not more than $2,000 for each passenger in the helicopter that exceeds the aforementioned
takeoff and landing numbers.
Chapter 250. Land Use Procedures
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 12-16-1976 by Ord. No.
392 (Ch. 41A of the 1970 Code).[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This chapter has been enacted in conformance with the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law (c. 291, P.L. 1975) to revise administrative procedures for land use and development
(including subdivision of land and zoning) in the Borough of Oceanport. Where conflicts or
inconsistencies exist between this chapter and other chapters or sections of the Code, § 250-25 of this
chapter has provided for the repeal of such inconsistencies. Action will be taken in the future by the
Mayor and Council to amend other sections of the Code in conformity with this chapter and the Land
Use Law.
Article I. Establishment, Organization and Powers of
Planning Board
§ 250-1. Establishment; composition.
[Amended 12-7-1978 by Ord. No. 423; 12-7-1995 by Ord. No. 669; 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), in the Borough
of Oceanport, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following four classes:
Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of the governing body to be
appointed by the Mayor, provided that, if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of
the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member for purposes of this
section in the event that there be among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 182/392
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
a member of the Board of Education. The Mayor shall have the additional authority to appoint one
alternate Class II member.
Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it. The governing body may also
appoint one alternate Class III member.
Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of
Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that one member may be a member of the
Board of Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board member
unless there be among the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Recreation Committee and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member of the
Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board. For
the purposes of this section, membership on a municipal board, commission or committee whose
function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary and not required by
statute, shall not be considered the holding of municipal office. The Mayor shall have the authority
to appoint two alternate Class IV members.
§ 250-2. Terms.
[Amended 12-7-1978 by Ord. No. 423]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the Mayor's official tenure, or, if
the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members composing
Class II and Class III and alternates, if any, shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of
their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes
first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class
IV term, whichever occurs first.
[Amended 12-7-1995 by Ord. No. 669; 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so determined
that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointments as determined by resolution of the governing body;
provided, however, that no term of any member shall exceed four years, and further provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
Alternate Class IV members shall serve for terms of two years; provided, however, that in the
event that two alternate members of Class IV are appointed, the initial terms of such members
shall be for one and two years, respectively. Such alternate members shall be designated by the
Chairman as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve in rotation during the absence
or disqualification of any regular member or members of Class IV.
§ 250-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 183/392
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
§ 250-4. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV and
select a Secretary who may be either a member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee
designated by it.
§ 250-5. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning Board may annually
appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Planning Board
Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 250-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts and other staff and
services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not exceed, however, exclusive of gifts or grants,
the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use in regard to the compensation of counsel,
experts and staff.
§ 250-7. Powers in fulfillment of dual function as Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
[Added 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25, the Planning Board shall also carry out all of the functions and
duties carried out by a Zoning Board of Adjustment. Accordingly, the powers of the Planning Board
shall incorporate those provided in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40-55D-69 et seq., and amendments
and supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this article.
It is further the intent of this article to confer upon the Planning Board as full and complete powers
as may lawfully be conferred upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board to interpret and construe the
provisions of this or any term, clause, sentence or work thereof and the Zoning Map in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
§ 250-8. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and
taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the physical development of
the municipality, including any areas outside its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear
essential relation to the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
To administer the provisions of Chapter 336, Subdivision of Land, and any site plan review
requirements contained in the ordinances of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of said
ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 184/392
[2]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance[2] pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Zoning.
To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by state or federal law
or regulations.
To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process.
To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after referral as to any
proposed development regulation submitted to it, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
26a, and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the governing
body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses, to
grant variances pursuant to Section 57c of c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c) from lot area,
lot dimensional, setback and yard requirements, provided that such relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to
this subsection, notice of a hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the
governing body for the aid and assistance of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
Article II. Procedural Requirements
§ 250-9. Time limitations.
Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the
date of submission of a complete application to the Planning Board or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from
the date of Planning Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer, the Municipal Engineer and
the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary
of the Planning Board before it will be accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
45 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the
Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to exercise its ancillary powers
before the granting of a variance as set forth in § 250-8G of this chapter, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after submission by the developer of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
Final approval.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 185/392
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
[1]
Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
submission of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plat
unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 250-10. Site plan approval.
Preliminary approval. A developer shall submit to the Borough Administrator a site plan and such
other information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary site plan approval have been met. If an application for
development is found to be incomplete, the developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of
the submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. If the proposed
development complies with this chapter, the Board shall grant preliminary site plan approval. If
application for site plan is for 10 acres or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days. If complete application is for more than 10 acres, the Planning Board
shall have 95 days to grant or deny the application. If the Planning Board fails to act within the
time periods aforementioned, preliminary approval shall be deemed to be granted.
Final site plan approval. Upon submission of a complete application, as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-50, to the Borough Administrator, the Planning Board shall have 45 days, unless extended
by consent of the applicant, to grant or deny final site plan approval. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval.
§ 250-11. Procedure for filing applications.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, pursuant to the provisions of
c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55d-1 et seq.), shall be filed with the Borough Administrator. The
applicant shall file, at least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board, 13 copies of a
sketch plat, three copies of an application for minor subdivision approval, three copies of an application
for major subdivision approval or three copies of an application for site plan review, conditional use
approval or planned development. At the time of filing the application, but in no event less than 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of
the Board.
§ 250-12. Citizens' Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory Committee to assist or
collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to
vote or take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 250-13. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 250-13, Environmental Commission, as amended, was repealed 4-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 998. Former Art. II, Zoning Board of Adjustment, as amended 12-7-1998 by Ord. No. 423,
which immediately followed this article, was repealed 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 726.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 186/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
Article III. Administrative Provisions
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
§ 250-14. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a
particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter nor
participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 250-15. Meetings.
Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for
development to process.
Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on the request of any two
Board members, which meetings shall be held on notice to its members and the public in
accordance with all applicable legal requirements.
No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present.
All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as otherwise required by any
provision of c. 291, P.L. 1975.
All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such
meetings shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, c.
231, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
§ 250-16. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the persons
appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any
interested party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged
a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 250-17. Fees.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning Board or any member of its
administrative staff which are not otherwise provided by ordinance may be provided for and adopted as
part of the rules of the Board, and copies of said rules or of the separate fee schedule shall be
available to the public.[1]
Editor's Note: For a listing of fees pertaining to applications filed with the Planning Board, see Ch. 204,
Fees, Article I.
§ 250-18. Hearings.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 187/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Rules. The Planning Board shall make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such body,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or this
chapter.
Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate shall have power
to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents
presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, c. 38,
P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development shall be taken
under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not
represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to
time and number of witnesses.
Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the Board may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either a
stenographer or mechanical or electronic means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
§ 250-19. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., or pursuant to the determination of the municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give
notice thereof as follows:
Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the municipality at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing.
Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax duplicate or
duplicates located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearing and whether located within or without the municipality in which the applicant's land is
located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the said
current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the said current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, vice president, secretary
or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving property located within 200 feet of
an adjoining municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to be given pursuant to § 250-
19B of this article to the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located within
200 feet of the subject premises.
Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning Board of a
hearing on an application for development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the Commissioner of
Transportation of a hearing on an application for development of property adjacent to a state
highway.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 188/392
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the Director of the Division of State
and Regional Planning in the Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include
a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
Section 6b of c. 291, P.L. 1975.
All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date
fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding
the hearing on the application for development.
Any notice made by certified mail, as hereinabove required, shall be deemed to be complete upon
mailing, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the
location and times where and when any maps and documents for which approval is sought are
available, as required by law.
§ 250-20. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Collector of the municipality shall, within
seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Article III, § 250-19B, of this chapter.
§ 250-21. Decisions.
Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in writing as a resolution of the
Board, which resolution shall include findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the date of decision to the
applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision
shall also be mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by
the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Municipal
Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other public
documents in the municipality.
§ 250-22. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or the Borough Clerk in the
event of appeals to the governing body, without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be
sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 250-23. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every application for development
submitted to the Planning Board shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such application, or, if it is
shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 189/392
[1]
[1]
by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the
making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Appeals, which immediately followed this article, was repealed 12-16-
1999 by Ord. No. 726.
Article IV. Miscellaneous
§ 250-24. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in c. 291, P.L. 1975, such term is intended to
have the meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 250-25. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan Review Ordinance and
any other ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport which contains provisions contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall be and are hereby, to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 250-26. Ordinances continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, Section 81, the substantive provisions of the existing
Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of
Oceanport and the development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and effect and
shall be read in pari materia with this chapter. [1]
Editor's Note: Former § 41A-41, Pending applications, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 12-5-1999 by Ord. No. 725.
§ 250-27. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures Ordinance of Borough of
Oceanport."
§ 250-28. Copies to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a copy of this chapter with the
County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also file with the said County Planning
Board copies of all other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
Chapter 261. Littering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 2-1-1990 by Ord. No. 602
(Ch. 42A of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch.325, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 190/392
[1]
[2]
§ 261-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise dictates, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and
construction of this chapter:
LITTER
Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has been discarded, whether made
of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any
bottle, jar or can; any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material; or any
garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish; grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste;
newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or
construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.[1]
LITTER RECEPTACLE
A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 261-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place litter of any nature upon
any public or private property other than in a litter receptacle.
§ 261-3. Illegal dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or road, on or off any right-ofway,
any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber
tires, appliances or furniture, or on private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 261-4. Provision and servicing of receptacles required.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public places which exist in the
municipality: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by
the public, including schools, government buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline
service stations' islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat
moorage and fueling stations, boat launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of
these events shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 261-5. Containerization of sweepings.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 191/392
A.
[1]
B.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or
occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All litter
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 261-6. Overflowing waste bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to permit open or overflowing
waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 261-7. Litter from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked on any public roadway
unless such a vehicle is constructed, covered or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping,
sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any
materials which constitute litter have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage
a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause the public
property to be cleaned of all such materials and shall pay the costs therefor.
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat in violation of
this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to
have violated this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 261-8. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or demolition site to
permit the accumulation of litter before, during or immediately following completion of any construction
or demolition project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas
convenient to construction areas and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with
such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 261-9. Responsibility of owners, tenants and other principals.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any structure to keep
and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting the building or structure free from obstructions or
nuisances of every kind, and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free from litter.
§ 261-10. Distribution of handbills.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be placed or to hire another person to place
any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building or
vehicle within the community in such a manner that it may be removed by natural forces.
§ 261-11. Collection of costs.
In the event that the owner or possessor of private property or lands shall refuse or neglect to abate or
remedy the condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the municipality may cause the
condition to be abated and remedied. Upon the removal of any materials, prohibited by this chapter to
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 192/392
[1]
A.
be stored or abandoned on lands, by or under the direction of the Road Supervisor, in cases where the
owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove the materials within five days of receiving a
notice of the violation, such officer shall certify the cost thereof to the municipality, which shall examine
the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
lands, and it will be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon said lands. The fines shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 261-12. Enforcement.
The primary parties responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the issuance of a complaint for
any violation thereof shall be the Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement Officer.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 261-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall refuse or neglect after written notice to comply with the demands therein made
or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each
day during which it continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The imposition and
collection of any fine or penalty prescribed by this section shall not bar the right of the municipality to
collect the cost of the removal of the materials as hereinabove specified, and said remedies shall be
cumulative.
Chapter 267. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 5-24-2007 by Ord. No.
822. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 121.
Dogs — See Ch. 127, Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 170.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 279.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 284.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 267-1. Enumeration of unnecessary noises.
The making, creation or permitting of any unreasonable, disturbing or unnecessary noise in the
Borough of Oceanport is hereby prohibited, especially between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Consequently, no person shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., permit any noise to
emanate from any source or instrument, whether natural or artificial, or use equipment outside a fully
enclosed principal dwelling on a property in the Borough of Oceanport such that the noise created
thereby is plainly audible at the boundary line of such property. When an officer can hear plainly
audible music or other noise beyond the property line of the noise-generating property or can hear
plainly audible noise on a complainant's property before 8:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m., or any
unreasonably, disturbing or unnecessary noise at any other time, there is a violation of this chapter.
The following activities, among others, are declared unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to exclude those not
included herein:
The sounding of a horn or signaling device on an automobile, motorcycle or other motorized
vehicle, except as a warning of danger, and then only for such period of time as is reasonably
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 193/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
necessary for giving such warning.
The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any electronic
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound with louder amplified volume than is necessary for the normal sensitive
hearing of the person so playing, using or operating such instrument or device and such persons
who are voluntary listeners thereto or in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants.
The use, operation or playing of any loudspeakers, amplifiers or other machines or devices for the
producing of sound which is cast upon a public street for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public.
The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise, such as
barking or jabbering, shall disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
Creating an audible noise by landscape, erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday by a landscaper or contractor for hire, except in the case of
urgent matters and the interest of public safety and health. Any of the aforementioned performed
by a property owner or tenant thereof between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and Sunday between the
hours of 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
[Amended 7-19-2012 by Ord. No. 908]
The making, creation or permitting of any unreasonable, disturbing or unnecessary noise in the
Borough of Oceanport is hereby prohibited, especially between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. Consequently, no person shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., permit any
noise to emanate from any source or instrument, whether natural or artificial, or use equipment
outside a fully enclosed principal dwelling on a property in the Borough of Oceanport such that the
noise created thereby is plainly audible at the boundary line of such property.
§ 267-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE
Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is live entertainment or a portable or personal
vehicular sound-amplification or -reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass
component of the music at the property line as described hereinabove is sufficient to verify plainly
audible sound. The law enforcement officer need not determine the title, specific words or the
artist performing the song.
§ 267-3. Enumeration of loud and offensive noises
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this
section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument or instruments or singing or
talking in such a manner or in such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, repose,
peace or tranquility of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type residence, dwelling, hotel or
structure, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 194/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
The playing of music outdoors, either live or recorded, after 10:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday is hereby prohibited.
The keeping of any animal or bird which has been causing or causes frequent or long-continued
noise which disturbs the comfort and repose of any person within the vicinity.
The shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
The sound of any horn or signal device on any automobile or other vehicle, while not in motion or
occupied, as well as any structure, for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time, except as
a danger signal.
§ 267-4. Exceptions.
The within prohibitions shall not apply to any public works projects for construction deemed to be in the
public's welfare, safety and for the public good and only with prior approval from the Mayor and
Council.
§ 267-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any of the foregoing provisions concerning unnecessary noise
shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Each day that this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 269. Nursing Homes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Transportation Services
[Adopted 4-2-2015 by Ord. No. 944]
§ 269-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for transportation services for nursing homes.
§ 269-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NURSING HOME
Any private hospital, institution, care center, convalescent home, old-age home, nursing home,
and any other establishment or institution for the care, treatment, lodging or nursing of persons
mentally ill, mentally deficient or mentally or developmentally delayed or disabled, acutely or
chronically ill, or who are crippled, convalescent, infirm or in any way afflicted, or who reside
therein for any purpose whatsoever. The definition of "nursing home" as set forth in Chapter 390
shall also be incorporated herein.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 195/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
§ 269-3. Ambulance or equivalent-type service required.
All nursing homes within the Borough of Oceanport, County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey shall
be and are hereby required to own, lease, rent, possess, or have immediately available an ambulance
or van-type vehicle suitable to be used as an ambulance for the conveyance of nonambulatory as well
as emergency patients as the need so arises.
§ 269-4. Proof of availability of ambulance or equivalent-type
vehicle; failure to provide proof; multiple use of municipal
services.
[Amended 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1003]
All nursing homes, as defined in this article, shall file proof of the availability of such emergency
vehicles with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport within 60 days from the final
passage of this article and on or before January 1 of each and every year thereafter. The
emergency vehicle shall be maintained in proper working order so as to be able to serve the
transportation needs of the population and patients receiving services from the facility, at all times.
Any nursing home, as defined in this article, that fails to file proof of availability of such vehicles, or
calls upon the Borough of Oceanport's emergency services for assistance and/or transportation of
patients for emergent or nonemergent reasons, shall be in violation of this article.
If, after 60 days from the final passage of this article and on or before January 1 of each and every
year thereafter, the nursing home fails to file proof of such emergency vehicles with the Borough
Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport, the Borough Clerk shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
the nursing home's violation of this article.
The Oceanport Police Department or Oceanport First Aid Squad shall make the determination if
the call for assistance was warranted. If it is determined that the call for assistance was not
warranted, that particular entity of the Borough of Oceanport shall notify the Oceanport Code
Enforcement Officer that the nursing home is in violation of this article.
§ 269-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or organization that shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 279. Parks and Recreation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 932.[1]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 279, Parks and Playgrounds, consisting of Art. I,
General Rules and Regulations, adopted 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 731 (Ch. 44A of the 1970 Code), as
amended, and Art. II, Use of Facilities, adopted 4-17-2008 by Ord. No. 840, as amended.
§ 279-1. Definitions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 196/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
As used in this article:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Oceanport in the County of Monmouth.
BOROUGH-APPROVED RECREATION SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS
Those entities that have been officially recognized, by ordinance, as being charged with the
responsibility of planning, promoting, organizing and operating specific recreation sports programs
on behalf of the Borough, for the benefit of the Borough, its residents and, in certain instances, the
residents of neighboring communities.
COUNCIL
The Borough Council of the Borough of Oceanport.
GROUP
Four or more persons.
PARK, FIELD, COURT, PLAYGROUND, FACILITY or PARK PROPERTY
Blackberry Bay Park;
Gatta Field;
Somers Park;
Trinity Park;
Old Wharf Place;
Community Center Field;
Community Center; and
Any other park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the Borough
owned or used by the Borough, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERMITTEE
Any person or persons to whom a facility use permit is issued.
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership, association, team corporation, company or organization of any kind.
RESIDENT ORGANIZATIONS
Any person, firm partnership, association, team, corporation or organization of any kind whose
membership is comprised of 75% or more of Oceanport residents.
VEHICLE
Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn, or self-propelled. The term shall
include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the Borough parks.
§ 279-2. Prohibited activities.
No person in a public park, facility or recreation area shall:
Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 197/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
monuments, stake posts or other boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;
Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No
person over the age of six years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex;
Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials or
make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency;
Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or
run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written
permit issued hereunder;
Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or
seeds of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area;
Climb any tree or walk or stand upon monuments, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or
upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes;
Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant;
Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal,
wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall be or she remove or have in his or her possession the young of
any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is
made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, or deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight;
Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond,
lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer
or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may
result in the pollution of such waters;
Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or shall be left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles
are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such areas as
may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas by the Recreation Committee.
Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such shall be in
accordance with posted directions thereat and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
Park, store or place a motor vehicle when the parks and/or playgrounds are not open for public
use. (This section shall not apply to municipal vehicles.)
Park, store or place a motor vehicle along the roller hockey rink located at Blackberry Bay.
Hit any type of golf ball.
Use or possess a motorized toy, model miniature or remote control aircraft.
Park, store or place any motor vehicle or other personal property when the owner of the subject
vehicle/property (or owner's agent) is not presently utilizing the subject park or playground area.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 198/392
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
A.
B.
C.
D.
This section shall not apply to municipal vehicles, nor shall it apply during periods of emergency,
as proclaimed by the Mayor or any other duly appointed authority.
Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or
any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping device.
Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
Walk a dog in or permit a dog into the playground area of any park.
Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor
shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be
used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or
the like, except in those areas designated by the Commission for those purposes.
Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such
as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes except in those areas set
apart for such forms of recreation.
Rollerblade, skateboard, roller skate or ride a bicycle on any tennis or basketball court.
Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any
waters, except at places designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
Sell, rent or lease (or advertise for same) any vehicle, vessel, boat, personal watercraft, bicycle,
motorcycle or any other personal property, without first having obtained a permit from the Borough
of Oceanport.
Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between the closing hour of the park at
night and the opening hour of the park the following morning, or be on or remain on or in any boat
during the closed hours of the park.
§ 279-3. Conduct.
While in a public park, facility or recreation area, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and
orderly manner and, in particular, no person shall:
Bring alcoholic beverages or drink the same at any time, nor be under the influence of intoxicating
liquor in a park unless Council approval by resolution has been previously secured for the event;
Have in his or her possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any
firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent thereto. This
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any
other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. At the
discretion of the Council, permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks in
designated park areas;
Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas clearly marked by signs
bearing the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area." Nothing herein shall be construed
as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are
permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in length
and shall be curbed;
Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or any other park
structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated by the Recreation Commission
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 199/392
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
for the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under six years of age;
Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Council. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park or on any
highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto;
Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use or abet in the use of any
area in violation of posted notices;
Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Council;
Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas as are designated as skating fields,
provided that a safety signal is displayed;
Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to breach the public peace;
Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Borough of Oceanport he or she claims to have
upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with any ordinance, rule or regulation;
Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in
any activity under the authority of a permit;
Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made
as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Council;
Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor
shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
§ 279-4. Hours.
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks and other outdoor facilities shall be open
to the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The opening and closing hours for
each individual park shall be posted therein for public information and shall be determined from
time to time by resolution of the Council.
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Borough of Oceanport
at any time and for any interval of time, either temporary or at regular and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Borough of Oceanport shall find
reasonably necessary.
Under normal circumstances, all municipal parks and outdoor recreational facilities shall open at
8:00 a.m. and close at dusk, with the exception of the lighted tennis courts at Blackberry Bay
which shall close at 10:00 p.m.
The use of any indoor facilities must terminate by 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise approved by the
Council.
§ 279-5. Dogs.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 200/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
B.
Under any circumstances or at any time permit any such dog to enter into or onto any park
property unless such dog is accompanied and controlled by a person of the age of seven years or
over and is securely confined by an adequate leash not more than six feet in length;
Under any circumstances or at any time permit any such dog to injure or damage any vegetable
garden, flower garden, lawn, plant, tree, shrubbery, grounds or any other property in or on any
park;
Under any circumstances or at any time permit any such dog to bark, cry, whine, howl or
otherwise disturb the peace or quiet within or surrounding any park property;
Under any circumstances or at any time permit any such dog to harass any person or animal on
park property or cause any injury to any person or other animal on park property;
Under any circumstances or at any time fail to immediately remove all feces deposited in or on
any park property by any such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local health authority
or as otherwise established by the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 279-6. Permits for facility use.
Facility use permit availability. Oceanport's recreational facilities are available for use by groups
and individuals who make requests based upon availability. Applications are not required for the
unreserved use of parks, fields, courts, playgrounds and other outdoor recreational facilities,
except as required below. An individual or group that has reserved a particular park, field, court,
playground or recreational facility and is in possession of a facility use permit will receive priority
over an individual or group lacking such a permit.
Facility use permits required. A facility use permit shall be required for the use of any Oceanportowned
park, field, court, recreational facility or playground for use under any of the following
circumstances:
Except as otherwise determined by resolution of the Council, when there are "organized"
groups (as defined in Subsection B(4) below) of more than four participants or 50 spectators
in attendance.
Any equipment is needed to be installed temporarily on the field, playground, court or facility,
including, but not limited to goals, nets and lining of the field of play. No permanent
installations of equipment may be made.
Any field, playground, court or facility will be used for any sport or purpose other than for
which it was specifically created.
The field, playground, court or facility will be used for organized games or activities. Games
and/or activities will be considered "organized" if:
There is a referee, umpire or other official present; or
Teams are part of a league; or
Teams have uniforms; or
There is a charge for any team, player or participant for participating; or
There are trophies, medals or other prizes offered to individuals or teams; or
Spectators are invited.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 201/392
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
(1)
F.
The game or event is sponsored by a business or organization.
A person or group elects to reserve a park, field, court, playground or other recreational
facility for exclusive use for a specific period of time.
The field, playground, court or facility will be used for sports or other training, exercise,
instruction or other activity conducted by an individual paid to provide said services.
Facility use permit application submission date.
All requests must be made a minimum of one month in advance to allow time for review by
the Recreation Committee and the Council.
Fields are available March 15 thru November 30 each year.
Requests for:
March 15 thru June 15 shall be submitted no earlier than February 1.
June 16 thru August 15 shall be submitted no earlier than May 1.
August 16 thru November 30 shall be submitted no earlier than July 1.
Submission dates may be changed subject to Borough offices being closed for
recognized Borough holidays or weekends.
Permit application content. The application for requesting use of a facility can be downloaded from
the Borough of Oceanport's website or can be obtained from the Borough Clerk during business
hours. A person seeking issuance of a facility use permit hereunder shall file an application with
the Recreation Committee consistent with the terms set forth on the facility use permit. The
application should be submitted or mailed to the Borough Clerk's Office, Attn: Field Usage
Request, PO Box 370, Oceanport, NJ 07757.
Facility use permit application standards. Standards for issuance of a facility use permit by the
Recreation Committee shall include the following findings:
That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract
from the general public enjoyment of the park or facility;
That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violence,
crime or disorderly conduct;
That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police
operation by the Borough;
That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the date and hour
requested in the application;
That the applicant has not had a previous permit revoked an/or has not been found to have
violated this article in connection with previous usage.
Insurance requirements. Proof of insurance is required with certain facility use permit applications.
Formal organizations (e.g., Boy Scouts, athletic leagues, AAU teams, travel teams,
businesses, athletic camps, etc.) that wish to use municipal facilities must maintain and
provide proof of adequate insurance. An original, executed certificate of insurance is required
at the time of application. Informal groups, however, are free to use the facilities without
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 202/392
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
insurance coverage, contingent upon the execution of an indemnification and waiver which is
more particularly described below. Insurance requirements may also be waived for
municipally sponsored or approved meetings or events. Determination as to whether a group
is formal or informal will be made by the Recreation Committee. Factors will include, but are
not limited to, incorporation status, size of membership, frequency of gatherings and existing
insurance.
Those permittees required to have insurance must present satisfactory evidence (an original,
executed certificate of insurance) of insurance protection for participants, spectators, coaches
and the public. Satisfactory evidence of insurance shall mean commercial general liability
insurance, from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, with limits of
liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000, per occurrence and aggregate. The policy
must provide coverage for the user's activity at the approved facilities, and shall state such
activities on the certificate of insurance. The certificate of insurance shall name the Borough
of Oceanport as an additional insured for the duration of the use of the facility(ies).
Indemnification and waiver.
All permittees must sign a waiver in which they agree to waive and relinquish all claims, and
causes of action, of every kind which they have or may have against the Borough of
Oceanport arising out of the use of the facility(ies) resulting in personal injury and/or property
damage. All permittees must acknowledge that they assume all risks in connection with the
use of the facility(ies).
All permittees must indemnify the Borough of Oceanport of any and all liability of loss, and
against all claims or actions based upon or arising out of damage or injury (including both) to
persons or property caused by or sustained in connection with the applicant's use of the
facility(ies), and the defense of any such claims or actions, whether the liability, loss or
damage is caused by, or arises out of negligence of the Borough of Oceanport, or any of the
agents, employees or otherwise. The user must further agree to reimburse the Borough of
Oceanport, its agents, employees or otherwise, for any and all expenses, attorney's fees or
costs incurred in the enforcement of this waiver and indemnification.
The form of waiver and indemnification can be downloaded from the Borough of Oceanport's
website or can be obtained from the Borough Clerk during regular business hours.
Returnable deposit. It shall be within the discretion of the Recreation Committee to require that a
user provide a returnable deposit of $200 (check or money order made payable to "Borough of
Oceanport"). This deposit will be used to cover any damage to Borough property or cleaning
required due to the use of the facility. Permittees will be notified, in writing, by the Recreation
Committee if any such charge will be assessed against the deposit.
Permit application procedure.
Upon receipt of application, the requested usage will be submitted to the Recreation
Coordinator and Recreation Committee for consideration.
If approved, the Recreation Coordinator will forward to the Clerk for approval by resolution at
the next available Council meeting.
The applicant will be contacted to advise if approved or not approved.
If the request is approved, the applicant will also be advised of the usage fees along with
payment instructions.
Upon receipt of payment in full, a permit will be issued to the applicant. No one will be
permitted to use any field without a permit. Usage fees are not refundable unless deemed
otherwise by the Borough.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 203/392
(6)
(7)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
L.
All applications shall be reviewed under the standards set forth under Subsection E of this
section.
The Borough Council, moreover, shall consider the application under the standards set forth
under Subsection E of this section and sustain or overrule the Recreation Committee's
decision by way of resolution. The decision of the Borough Council shall be final.
Permittee obligations and responsibilities.
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully
as though the same were inserted in such permits.
The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss, damage or
injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons
to whom such permit shall have been issued. The person or persons to whom the permit is
issued shall be responsible for:
Ensuring that all participants and spectators adhere to park rules and regulations;
Ensuring that the field, court or facility is in safe condition prior to allowing players or
participants to proceed and to report unsafe conditions to the Recreation Committee not
later than one day after its use; and
Ensuring that upon conclusion of the use, the field, court and/or facility is left in the same
condition as it was found, including removal of any equipment, and cleanup and proper
disposal of any litter.
Revocation of issued permit. The Recreation Committee and/or the Borough Council shall have
the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown. The Recreation Committee and/or the Borough Council may also revoke a permit
which has been issued upon discovery of a material misrepresentation of fact on the application.
Priorities of use. Applications for the use of facilities will be scheduled on a first-come-first-served
basis. In all instances, priority is given to Oceanport residents. When more than one application is
received for the same date(s), the following order of priority shall apply:
Meetings or events directly sponsored by the Borough Council for municipal purposes,
inclusive of the Borough's recreational sports programs via the Borough-approved
recreational sports associations.
Meetings or events directly sponsored by municipal advisory boards and committees.
Meetings or events directly sponsored by Borough departments for municipal purposes.
Meetings or events held for the discussion of municipal issues.
Resident youth recreation activities, leagues or service organizations.
Resident adult recreation activities, leagues or service organizations.
Board of Education related activities.
Nonresident youth recreation activities, leagues or service organizations.
Nonresident adult recreation activities, leagues or service organizations.
All other uses.
§ 279-7. Fee schedule.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 204/392
[1]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
B.
Other than those who qualify as exempt or partially exempt as set forth below, all groups,
organizations, teams, leagues shall be required to pay a fee to use municipal facilities as follow:
Games.
Youth fee:
Resident fee: $25 per game.
Nonresident fee: $50 per game.
Non-youth fee:
Resident fee: $35 per game.
Nonresident fee: $70 per game.
Practices.
Residents: $100 per team/one two-hour practice per week for 12 weeks.
Nonresident: $200 per team/one two-hour practice per week for 12 weeks.
For-profit camps: $500 (no more than five days).
For-profit tennis lessons: $500 for the period of May 1 to September 30 with a maximum
usage of 10 hours per week with a two-hour per one-court maximum per day.
Resident team rosters shall consist of 75% Oceanport residents.
All other teams are to be considered nonresident teams. The determination of whether a team
is a resident or nonresident team, when disputed, shall be decided by the Municipal Council
and confirmed by way of resolution.
Borough-approved recreation sports associations.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth within the ordinances of the Borough of
Oceanport, the Borough of Oceanport hereby recognizes the following entities as "Boroughapproved
recreation sports associations" and further recognizes that these entities are
charged with the responsibility of planning, promoting, organizing and operating specific
recreation sports programs on behalf of the Borough, for the benefit of the Borough, its
residents and, in certain instances, the residents of neighboring communities:
Oceanport Soccer Association.
Oceanport Basketball Association.
Oceanport Roller Hockey Association.
Oceanport Baseball Association.
Oceanport Adult Athletic Association.
Oceanport Old Timers Softball Association (teams playing in the Two Rivers Softball
League).
Shore Youth Lacrosse Association.
Shore Regional Little League Baseball and Softball.
[Added 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 1002]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 205/392
(2)
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Insofar as these entities operate the Borough of Oceanport's recreation sports programs with
the consent and under the aegis of the Borough of Oceanport, these entities and their teams
shall be exempt from all fees.
Sports camps sponsored or operated by a Borough-approved recreation sports association shall
not be required to pay a fee.
Editor's Note: For recreation program fees, see Ch. 204, Art. X.
§ 279-8. Security.
Security: All applications for permits for groups of 50 people or more shall be referred to the Chief of
Police for review. The Chief of Police shall have the discretion to impose any reasonable conditions
related to the public health, safety and welfare on the issuance of the permit, including but not limited
to the employment of police officers by the applicant/permittee during the activity for security and/or
traffic/parking control.
§ 279-9. Enforcement.
The Recreation Committee, Recreation Coordinator and/or their designees shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article.
The Recreation Committee, Recreation Coordinator and/or their designees shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person or persons acting in violation of this article.
The Recreation Committee, Recreation Coordinator and/or their designees shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park or used in violation of
this article.
This article shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough.
§ 279-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both.
§ 279-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed as to
such inconsistency.
§ 279-12. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision so adjudged
and the remainder of this article shall be deemed valid and effective.
Article II. Recreation Programs
[Adopted 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 976]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 206/392
[1]
A.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 279-13. Action Camp.
The Oceanport recreation program, Action Camp, is a playground-based program consisting of games,
crafts and sports campers attending Grades K to 7. Campers must be age five no later than October 1
of the current year, with copy of the camper's birth certificate as proof of age five by October 1 of the
current year.
Fees. The fee to be charged for program participation shall be as so promulgated in the Borough
Fee Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Fees.
Article III. Sponsorship
[Adopted 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 976]
§ 279-14. Sponsorship of Borough programs and activities.
A sponsor may offer monetary or other acceptable material support to any authorized Borough
program or related activity. This may include, but not necessarily be limited to, providing financial
support to a Borough recreation program, activity or facility improvement or modification that provides
a public benefit, subject to any applicable laws, ordinances and authorization by the governing body or
Borough Administrator. Sponsors shall be entitled to recognition or acknowledgment by way of public
address, approved signage, written announcements, correspondence or other appropriate means,
subject to the following standard terms and conditions:
All sponsorship proposals equal to or less than $5,000, including creation of sublevels, may be set
and approved by the Borough Administrator. Proposals in excess of $5,000 in material value are
required to be approved by the governing body upon the recommendation of the Borough
Administrator.
No program participant, Borough employee or official shall be required to participate in surveys or
focus groups as a condition of any such sponsorship.
Such recognition in any manner shall not constitute the Borough's endorsement of any product,
service or program provided by the sponsor.
All sponsorships shall be appropriate for audiences of all ages and shall not promote any illegal or
discriminatory activity.
The Borough reserves its right to cancel any sponsorship at its sole discretion.
Article IV. Blackberry Bay Park Launch Facilities
[Adopted 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1008]
§ 279-15. Launch fee required.
No person shall launch a watercraft from the Blackberry Bay Park boat-launching facility without paying
the launch fee established in this section. If a motor vehicle and empty trailer related to that watercraft
is parked in the parking lot related to the launching of a single boat, each vehicle shall be construed as
having launched such boat, and each such vehicle shall be subject to pay the daily launch fee or
obtain a seasonal permit. Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the governing body, fees for
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 207/392
A.
B.
C.
use of the launching facilities are contained within the Borough of Oceanport Fee Ordinance, Chapter
204.
§ 279-16. Display of permit.
Each holder of a daily or seasonal launching pass shall display the pass in a visible location on the
dashboard of the motor vehicle used to launch the watercraft. Application for a daily or seasonal permit
shall be made on a form provided by the Borough Clerk's office. Every person that launches on a
single day shall utilize the permit issued by the Borough Clerk and shall post it in a visible location on
the dashboard of the motor vehicle used to launch the boat. The parking of a motor vehicle with an
empty trailer in the parking lot of Blackberry Bay Park without a visible seasonal permit or valid oneday
permit on the motor vehicle's dashboard will be conclusive evidence of a failure to comply with
§ 279-15.
§ 279-17. Commercial use.
Commercial use of the Blackberry Bay Park launch facilities is prohibited.
§ 279-18. Fee exemption.
Application for use of the launch facilities by outside governmental agencies shall be exempt from the
fee at the discretion of the Borough Clerk.
§ 279-19. Citation enforcement.
The Borough of Oceanport hereby adopts and authorizes the use of a citation to be issued for
violations of this article, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists. Citations
authorized under this article may be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, Police Department
and/or by any other officer of the Borough. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the Borough
from enforcing this article by any other lawful means.
Chapter 281. Parking Spaces, Reserved
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 804.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 64.
§ 281-1. Enumeration of reserved spaces.
One standard parking space in the front of the Municipal Building shall be specifically designated
for and reserved for the Mayor of the Borough of Oceanport.
One standard parking space in the front of the Municipal Building shall be specifically designated
for and reserved for the Borough Clerk.
Eight parking spaces located in the rear of the Municipal Complex shall be specifically designated
for and reserved for police vehicles or other authorized vehicles only.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 208/392
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Ten parking spaces at the Port-Au-Peck Chemical Hose Firehouse shall be specifically designated
for and reserved for Fire Department vehicles or other authorized vehicles only.
§ 281-2. Display of signs.
The appropriate signs shall be displayed to advise the public of the specific parking
designations/restrictions.
§ 281-3. Violations and penalties.
A violation of the within chapter shall result in a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General
penalty (per each offense).
Chapter 284. Peace and Good Order
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 115.
Animals — See Ch. 127.
Curfew — See Ch. 183.
Firearms — See Ch. 210.
Games of chance — See Ch. 236.
Littering — See Ch. 261.
Noise — See Ch. 267.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 279, Art. I.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 325, Art. I.
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 331, Art. I.
Article I. Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 6-5-1947 by Ord. No. 129 (Ch. 45 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 284-1. Enumeration of prohibited acts.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Oceanport:
Appear on any street, road, avenue, park or public place, or bathe, swim or be found in any
river, pond, lake or stream, or in plain view of such place, in a state of nudity or in indecent or
lewd dress or indecent exposure of the person, or commit any lewd or indecent act or offer to
sell or exhibit any lewd or indecent book, picture or article.
Disrobe in any automobile, truck or vehicle while the same is parked upon any parking place,
street, road, avenue, park or other public place.
Keep or maintain a disorderly house or house of ill fame, or allow or permit any house or
other building or structure owned or occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house
or house of ill fame.
Permit any house or other building or structure to be used by noisy, riotous or disorderly
persons or by prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 209/392
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Set up or keep or maintain, or permit to be set up, kept or maintained, in any building,
premises, parking lot or other public place, any faro table, faro bank, roulette wheel or other
device or game of chance for the purpose of gaming, or any boxing ring, cockpit or other
place for men or animals to fight, nor shall any persons hold or permit to be held in any such
place any dogfight, cockfight, prizefight or any sparring contest for a purse or money prize,
nor shall any person aid or abet in the foregoing.
Loiter on any street, road, avenue or other public place or in or about any public building, or
utter any loud, profane, offensive or indecent language in any of the foregoing places, or
molest or interfere with any person lawfully being in or upon any of the aforesaid places.
Make or cause to be made or continued any unnecessary noise, or operate or use any radio
receiving set, phonograph, horn or other sound-producing apparatus in such a manner as to
annoy or disturb the comfort, rest or repose of any person or persons being in his or her or
their place or places of abode.
Discard, deposit, throw or leave any wastepaper, tin cans, bottles, garbage, waste or refuse of
any kind whatsoever upon any parking place, street, road, avenue, park or other public place
or upon any lot or other premises, except in receptacles or containers provided for such
purpose.
Individuals or groups who wish to solicit within the Borough of Oceanport must first obtain a
written permit from the Chief of Police. Said permit shall be in the amount of $10. The Chief of
Police shall have the discretion of reviewing the application and may either issue or withhold
the permit. The permit can only be withheld if in the opinion of the Chief it is in the best
interest of the welfare and the public interest of the residents of the Borough to do so. Any
denial by the Chief of Police to issue a permit may be appealed to the governing body to be
considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If the governing body affirms the Chief of
Police, a resolution shall be prepared accordingly. If the governing body reverses the decision
of the Chief of Police then the resolution opposing same must set forth specific reasons for
the reversal.
[Amended 2-21-1952 by Ord. No. 162; 12-4-2013 by Ord. No. 925]
Ring any bell or blow any horn or make any public outcry at or for any public sale, auction or
vendue or to advertise any goods, wares or merchandise for sale or to gain passengers for
any cab, taxicab, hack or omnibus.
Give or cause to be given in any manner whatsoever any false alarm of fire.
Hinder or obstruct any fireman, police officer or other Borough officer in the performance of
his duties, or willfully refuse or neglect to assist the same when lawfully called upon by him so
to do in the execution of any process or in the suppression of any breach of the peace or
disorderly conduct or in case of escape or when such officer is resisted in the discharge of his
duty.
Maliciously destroy, tamper with, damage or injure any property, public or private.
Leave or abandon, or threaten to leave or abandon, any member of his or her family or any
other person for whose support he or she may be chargeable, so that they or any of them
shall or might be or become a public charge.
Have concealed upon his or her person or in any portable vehicle, carriage, motorcycle or
other vehicle any offensive or dangerous weapon without lawful authority.
Have upon his or her person or in his or her possession any picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or
other implement with an intent to break and enter into any building.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 210/392
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
Disturb or annoy any school or church classes, exercises, devotions, ceremonies or any
public meetings, or any persons participating or engaged therein, on or about any school,
church or other public or quasi-public building, structure or place.
Be disorderly in any public omnibus, street, highway, thoroughfare or on any sidewalk or in
any private house, boardinghouse, store, restaurant or other quasi-public or public place, to
the annoyance of any person.
[Amended 3-19-2009 by Ord. No. 859]
Use, operate, or cause to be used or operated, a loudspeaker, sound wagon, public address
system or other sound-producing device or apparatus in, on, about or near any public street,
highway or place or other public place, without first making written application to and
obtaining the permission of the Borough Clerk.
Unnecessarily obstruct any street, alley or public place with any kind of vehicle, box, lumber,
wood or any other thing.
Distribute, deliver or hand out any bills, circulars, cards, pamphlets or other advertising matter
without having first obtained a written permit from the Chief of Police and compliance with
§ 284-1A(9).
[Amended 12-4-2013 by Ord. No. 925]
Participate or engage, attempt or offer to engage or aid or abet in any disturbance or
disorderly assemblage, or in any way commit any breach or disturbance of the peace.
[Amended 12-1-2010 by Ord. No. 889]
Fire or discharge any pistol, revolver, rifle, gun, air gun or fowling piece, or any kind of firearm
or cannon, except when expressly permitted by law.
Paste, write, clamp, paint, nail, clip or otherwise fasten, inscribe or affix any notice, placard or
advertisement against or upon any public or private property.
Dump on or tow to open fields or other private property, without first having obtained the
permission of the owners of such property, any abandoned automobile, part thereof, or other
junk, refuse or waste matter.
Engage in, commit or be guilty of any other riotous or indecent conduct, breach of the peace,
vagrancy or prostitution not hereinbefore mentioned.
Force or induce any child under the age of 16 years to do or submit to the doing of any act
which tends to debauch such child or which tends to impair the morals of such child.
Give any person information or a tip on a horse or horses in any race for an expected
compensation or in the hope of sharing in any winnings.
Between the opening of the pari-mutuel windows for the first race and until after the last race
has been finished on any race day, give, send, transmit or communicate, by telephone,
telegraph or any other means whatsoever, any notice of, advertisement, result, change of
odds or any information pertaining to any horse race or races to any person or persons
outside the limits of the Borough of Oceanport, unless expressly permitted so to do by law.
Be permitted to enter, occupy or otherwise utilize the parks and playgrounds of the Borough
of Oceanport from the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. during the months of April through
September, and from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. during the months of October
through March, daily, unless that person is participating in, attending or observing a function
or activity sponsored or under the auspices of the Borough of Oceanport's Recreation
Committee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person or persons shall be permitted to utilize
any tennis court facility maintained by the Borough of Oceanport, illuminated for night play,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 211/392
A.
B.
C.
until 10:00 p.m. daily. No person shall be cited for violation of this subsection unless he has
first received a warning from a law enforcement officer.
[Added 10-5-1972 by Ord. No. 323; amended 10-18-1973 by Ord. No. 339; 10-16-1976 by
Ord. No. 389]
§ 284-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON
Wherever appropriate in connection with the context, includes corporation, partnership,
association and individual, and shall include the plural. The masculine pronoun shall include the
feminine.
§ 284-3. Disposition of fines collected.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the
Borough.
§ 284-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article or who shall commit or do any
act or thing in this article prohibited shall, upon conviction thereof before the Judge authorized to hear
and determine the matter, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article II. Civil Disturbances
[Adopted 10-7-1971 by Ord. No. 304 (Ch. 35, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 284-5. Proclamation of emergency; powers.
Whenever, in his judgment, the Mayor of the Borough of Oceanport or, in his absence or in the event of
his inability to act, the President of the Borough Council or the Chairman of the Police Committee
determines that an emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience causing
danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, he shall have power to impose by proclamation
any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the Borough:
To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the Borough thereby requiring all persons in such
designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or
other public areas; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators
performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and
Borough-authorized or -requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from
such curfew.
To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the Borough for the period of
the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors,
cereal malt beverages, gasoline or firearms.
To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicles and
pedestrian traffic.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 212/392
D. To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without
the Borough to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the Borough.
§ 284-6. Procedure for proclamation to become effective.
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective upon the same being filed with
the Borough Clerk and posted in at least 10 public places in the Borough.
§ 284-7. Termination of emergency.
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall terminate upon the
issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists.
§ 284-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly authorized law
enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of
emergency authorized herein shall be deemed guilty of violating the provisions of this article and, upon
conviction therefor, shall be punished by a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 286. Peddlers and Solicitation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Door-to-Door Commercial Solicitation
§ 286-1. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to protect the safety of the residents of the Borough of Oceanport, to
prevent fraud from being perpetrated upon them and to protect their privacy, while balancing such
interests against the opportunity for commercial, political, religious, charitable, and nonprofit
organizations to exercise their rights of free speech.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable
application.
APPLICANT
A person or entity seeking to obtain a permit for solicitation from the Borough of Oceanport.
BOROUGH
Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
CANVASSER
Any person who travels, either by foot or automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place
to place, from house to house or from street to street to seek or develop support for, to conduct
market research about, to determine feelings or opinions about, to conduct a survey about, or
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 213/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
explain a position about and on behalf of any commercial product, commercial cause or
commercial organization.
EMPLOYER
Any individual or entity providing compensation, in any form whatsoever, to an individual engaged
in solicitation within the Borough of Oceanport.
PERMIT
A permit for solicitation issued by the Borough of Oceanport pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
SOLICITATION
To go in or upon private property in the Borough of Oceanport without having been invited to do so
by the owner or occupant, for the purpose of advertising, promoting, or selling any product, goods,
or service; or conducting market research or a market or opinion survey regarding commercial
products or services. By way of illustration and not of limitation, solicitors shall include canvassers,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of goods or services. Solicitation
shall also include the placement upon private property of handbills or other written material
advertising goods or services for sale. Solicitation shall also include the sale of goods or services
which the solicitor promises to donate or deliver to a charitable or other nonprofit institution on
behalf of the purchaser. Solicitation shall not include the entry upon private property without prior
invitation of the owner or occupant by any person representing an entity which:
Qualifies for tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code;
Qualifies for exemption from property tax under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6;
Qualifies for exemption from sales tax under N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9; or
Was created under or is otherwise subject to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey
Statutes.
§ 286-3. Permit required.
No person or entity shall engage in solicitation within the Borough without first having obtained a permit
pursuant to the provisions of this article. Failure to obtain a permit prior to solicitation shall constitute a
violation of this article. Each day of solicitation without a valid permit shall constitute a separate
violation of this article.
§ 286-4. Exemptions.
Door-to-door canvassing, solicitation, campaigning, advocacy, education, proselytizing, handbill
distribution, or other entry upon private property by individuals representing any entity which 1)
qualifies for tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code; 2) qualified for exemption from
property tax under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6; 3) qualifies for exemption from sales tax under N.J.S.A. 54:32B-
9; or 4) was created under or is otherwise subject to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey
Statutes shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. Solicitation of donations by any such
organizations shall not constitute solicitation as defined in this article. Individuals representing such
organizations may request a copy of the Borough's do-not-solicit list for their information, but no
penalties shall be imposed if they enter in or upon a property identified on the do-not-solicit list.
§ 286-5. Application and fee for permit.
Any person seeking to engage in solicitation within the Borough shall apply to the Police
Department for a solicitation permit.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 214/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
A.
B.
An applicant for a solicitation permit shall be required to provide the following information in
writing:
The name of each individual who will engage in solicitation within the Borough;
The present address of each individual who will engage in solicitation within the Borough;
As to each such individual, whether the individual has ever been convicted of a crime, and if
so, the nature of the conviction, where convicted, the date of conviction, and the penalty
imposed;
The employer or organization for which solicitation will be made;
The address of the employer or organization;
The telephone number of the employer or organization;
The name of the contact person at the offices of the employer or organization;
The type of goods or services to be sold or the type of survey or research to be conducted;
As to any vehicle to be used by the applicant, the make, model, year, color and license plate
information of the vehicle; and
The expected dates of solicitation within the Borough.
An applicant for a solicitation permit shall also be required to produce photo identification, which
the Police Department will photocopy and attach to the application form.
The application form shall be signed by the applicant, under penalty of perjury.
Application forms, including photographic identification, shall be retained by the Police
Department.
Fees for permits shall be set in accordance with the Fee Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport.
[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Fees.
Misrepresentation, false statements, or failure to disclose information on the solicitation permit
application form shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 286-6. Issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in charge of the Police Department shall issue a
permit and identification badge upon completion of the solicitation permit application form. The
permit and badge shall be issued to any and all applicants who complete the application form and
provide photo identification. A separate permit and badge shall be issued to each individual who
engages in solicitation within the Borough. The permit shall be signed by the Chief of Police or, in
his absence, the officer in charge of the Police Department. The permit shall state the name of the
individual, the business or organization for which solicitation is made, and the date the permit was
issued.
Noncommercial solicitors do not require the approval of the Chief of Police or the requirement or
granting of a permit, with the sole exception that any noncommercial solicitors or canvassers must
register with the Police Department to have knowledge of their presence within the Borough of
Oceanport.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 215/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 286-7. Carrying and displaying of permit and badge.
Each individual engaging in solicitation within the Borough shall carry the permit issued to him upon his
person and display his badge at all times while soliciting within the Borough, and shall produce the
permit and badge if requested to do so by the police or any resident. Failure to carry the permit and/or
display the badge during solicitation shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 286-8. Time limits on solicitation.
A solicitation permit shall be effective for three months after the date it is issued. Solicitation
without a valid permit in effect shall constitute a violation of this article. This permit shall be subject
to renewal for an additional three-month period.
Commercial solicitation shall take place within the Borough only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
Noncommercial solicitation or canvassing may take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on each and every day of the year.
All solicitors or canvassers are encouraged to wear reflective clothing and/or to carry flashlights if
soliciting after dark.
§ 286-9. Do-not-solicit list.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this article, any person or entity owning
property within the Borough may register such property on a do-not-solicit list.
The office of the Borough Clerk shall maintain a list of addresses of those premises where the
owner and/or occupant has notified the Borough Clerk that soliciting and canvassing are not
permitted on his or her premises. Notification shall be by completion of a form available at the
Borough Clerk's office during normal business hours, Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., except weekends and legal holidays.
The Borough Clerk shall submit the do-not-solicit list to the Chief of Police on a quarterly basis,
which do-not-solicit list shall be distributed to applicants seeking authorization to solicit or canvass
pursuant to this article. The persons seeking to solicit or canvass shall not solicit or canvass at any
address listed on the do-not-solicit list.
On or about January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, the Borough Clerk's office shall
update the list. The updated list shall then be forwarded to the Chief of Police for distribution to
solicitors and/or canvassers.
The Tax Assessor shall, upon being advised of a transfer of ownership of a residential premises,
notify the Borough Clerk, not less than semiannually, of said conveyances, whereupon the
Borough Clerk shall remove the address of the premises from the do-not-solicit list.
§ 286-10. Violations and penalties.
For a violation of any provision of this article, the maximum penalty, upon conviction thereof, shall be
as provided in § 1-15, General penalty. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this
article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 216/392
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
Chapter 295. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Schedule A - Fees
Article I. Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 10-3-2013 by Ord. No. 920[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 295, Property Maintenance, adopted 10-18-
2007 by Ord. No. 831, as amended.
§ 295-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
[Amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 996]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk of Oceanport,
being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition," or
hereinafter published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Oceanport, in the State of New Jersey, for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of Oceanport Borough are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 295-2 of this article.
§ 295-2. Revisions.
[Amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 996]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: Borough of Oceanport.
Section 103.5. Insert: Schedule A: Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Section 111, Means of Appeal, is hereby deleted.
Section 112.4. Insert: $100, $1,000.
Section 113, Certificate of Occupancy, is hereby added as a new section to read as follows:
[Amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
113.1. Certificate of occupancy required for rental/resale and transfer of title; forms; fees;
conditional approval: No owner, owner of rental properties, agent of owner, real estate agent or
broker, firm, company, partnership, corporation or person or persons shall sell, rent, transfer,
grant, lease, let or mortgage with right of occupancy or otherwise dispose of the ownership or
occupancy thereof, whether or not for a consideration and whether such disposal of ownership or
occupancy be temporary or permanent, any dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming unit,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 217/392
F.
boardinghouse or premises on which a building is located and is used for human occupancy
unless a certificate of occupancy certifying that the building and premises are in compliance with
all other ordinances of the Borough of Oceanport. Such certificate of occupancy shall be granted
or denied within 21 days from the date of the application for same. All applications are subject to
review for open permits or outstanding violations, which shall be satisfactorily addressed prior to
any inspection by the Housing Inspector being scheduled.
1. The Housing Inspector shall cause to be prepared appropriate application forms, including a
copy of the lease between owner and tenant, for such certificate of occupancy, which forms shall
be available in the Building Department. The Housing Inspector shall also cause to be prepared
appropriate forms of such certificate of occupancy.
2. A charge of $65 for rentals and transfers of ownership, to cover the cost of inspection in
connection with such applications, shall be paid to the Building Department at the time the
application is filed and shall not be refundable. A charge of $50 for each reinspection related to
temporary certificate or nonoccupancy certificate shall be paid to the Building Department prior to
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. A charge of $125 will apply to any request for
applications eligible for an expedited certificate.
3. Whenever the Housing Inspector shall have made an inspection of any property as herein
provided in connection with a proposed sale of such property and upon determining that one or
more violations of this code exist, the Housing Inspector shall, upon request of the owner of such
property, distinguish between those violations that may endanger the public health or safety and
those which do not. All public health and safety violations shall be corrected immediately. Upon
receipt of a letter signed by any prospective purchaser of such property acknowledging the
existence of those violations which do not endanger the public health or safety and accepting
responsibility for the corrections of such violations, the Housing Inspector may issue a
conditional certificate of occupancy enumerating the violations remaining to be corrected and
specifying the time within which such violations should be corrected, which time shall be
commensurate with the nature of the violations to be corrected.
113.2. Short-term rental property prohibited uses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the Borough Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sublessor, any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with possessory or use rights in a dwelling unit, their principals, partners
or shareholders, or their agents, employees, representatives and other person(s) or entity(ies),
acting in concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or anticipated consideration
for soliciting, or advertising, offering, and/or permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use
or occupancy of any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 90 days or less. Nothing in
this section will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental
period of more than 90 days.
113.3. Sublease of any rental property. Any conditions pertaining to subleasing of rental property
will require a new certificate of occupancy and full disclosure from the property owner.
113.4. Violations and penalties. Any person or organization that shall violate any provision of this
article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth below:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any person, firm or
corporation in violation of this section may be subject to a penalty of $500.
A second offense of this section may be subject to a fine of $1,000.
A third offense of this section may be subject to a fine of $2,000.
Chapter 2, Definitions.
[Amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 996]
Section 202 General Definitions
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion and communication for
marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade or manipulate viewers, readers or listeners into
contracting for goods and/or services in violation of this ordinance, as same may be viewed
through various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers, handbills,
pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, internet websites, or text or other electronic
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 218/392
messages for the purpose of establishing occupancies or uses of rental property, for
consideration, which are prohibited by this ordinance.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this
code, or any duly authorized representative. The duly authorized representative for certificates of
occupancy for rentals and transfers of title shall be known as the "Housing Inspector."
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or accepting any legally
recognized form of consideration, including a promise or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other
form of payment or thing of value.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is
occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied, for sleeping,
dwelling, cooking, gathering and/or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more
persons. This definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative, converted
space or portions thereof, that is offered to use, made available for use, or is used for
accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping, gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or
guests, for consideration for a period of 90 days or less.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
GROUNDWATER — Water that is found underground in the cracks and spaces in soil, sand and
rock.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation involving one or more persons
living together that exhibit the kind of stability, permanency and functional lifestyles equivalent to
that of a traditional family unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering, entertaining, being entertained
as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, or having other permission or
possessor rights within a dwelling unit.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited-liability company, corporation or
partnership or any combination who legally uses, possesses, owns, leases, subleases or
licenses (including an operator, principal, shareholder, director, agent or employee, individual or
collectively) that has charge, care, or control of or participates in the expenses and/or profit of a
dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten agreement, rental, lease, license, use, or
occupancy agreement or any other agreement.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, limited liability company,
association, entity and any person(s) and/or entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination
therewith.
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
[Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1010]
SEEPAGE PIT — A chamber or tank constructed below grade for the purpose of recharging
water into the ground. The chamber may be preformed of composite materials or built to suit.
The chamber shall hold at least 50 gallons and shall have perforated bottom and sides.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the
surface of the land, is transmitted to the subsurface, and is captured by storm sewers or other
drainage facilities.
SUMP PIT — A space into which a sump pump is installed, designed to provide sufficient depth
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 219/392
G.
H.
(1)
I.
J.
K.
and volume for proper performance of the pump.
SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE — The end of the pipe from the sump pump where water becomes
unconfined and reverts to gravity flow.
SUMP PUMP — A pump, with related valves, pipe and fittings, installed for the purpose of
evacuating water, usually from a basement area.
Section 302.4. Insert: 12 inches.
Section 304.14. Insert: May 1 to October 1.
Chapter 5, Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements.
[Added 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 996]
Section 508, Sump Pumps, is hereby added as a new section, to read as follows:
Section 508 Sump Pumps
508.1 Installation. All residential and commercial structures having a storage or habitable
area below grade may install there a sump pit and a sump pump upon approval by the
Borough plumbing subcode official. All sump pumps shall be installed and inspected in
compliance with the plumbing and building codes of the Borough and the requirements of
this article. All necessary permits must be obtained and fees paid before installation
commences.
508.2 Location. A sump pump must discharge through permanent, rigid piping. The sump
pump discharge shall be located no less than 10 feet from the building unless the Borough
Engineer determines in advance in a particular case that compliance with this requirement is
not practicable and for this reason approves, in writing, an alternative location.
508.3 Discharges. A sump pump shall not discharge water, either directly or indirectly: [i]
into the sanitary sewer system; [ii] onto any public right-of-way (sidewalk or roads), unless
approved in advance and in writing by the Borough Engineer; or [iii] into the municipal
separate stormwater sewer system, unless also approved in advance and in writing by the
Borough Engineer. In connection with any such advance approvals, the Borough Engineer
may require that water be routed to a seepage pit with only the overflow discharging to the
public right-of-way or municipal separate stormwater sewer system.
508.4 Approval by Engineer. In connection with required approvals by the Borough
Engineer, the person requesting the approval shall make the request through submission of
a street right-of-way opening application. All recommendations for approval by the Borough
Engineer shall be forwarded to the Borough Clerk for issuance of a street right-of-way
opening permit.
508.5 Inspections. The Borough reserves the right to use whatever tests are available to
determine the existence of illicit connections. It also reserves the right to inspect properties
in order to enforce these prohibitions. If a test is used which might cause some discomfort if
an illicit connection exists, it shall be recognized that any discomfort, or other effect of the
test, is of less value and importance than the effects of such illicit connection on the health,
comfort and welfare of the residents of the Borough, and, consequently, there shall be no
cause for action against the Borough in law or in equity.
508.6 Violations. Any owner or occupant of a property found to have caused or permitted a
discharge or to have constructed, installed or permitted the construction or installation of a
sump pump in violation of this article shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per day for
each day a violation continues, beginning on the 14th day from service of notice of the
violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 to May 1.
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 to May 1.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 220/392
Article II. Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 921]
§ 295-3. Removal required; time limit.
The owner, tenant or occupant of any building or lands abutting upon any street within the Borough of
Oceanport shall cause the sidewalk in front of the property to be cleared of snow or ice to a width of at
least two feet within 48 hours after the cessation of the snowfall or formation of ice. In case of ice on
the sidewalk, should it be impracticable to remove same, then the sidewalk shall be covered with sand
or some other suitable substance so as to cause the sidewalk to be made safe for persons traveling
thereon.
§ 295-4. Deposit of snow or ice on plowed streets prohibited.
No person shall sweep, throw or deposit any snow or ice in that part of the street which has been or is
being plowed, swept, cleaned or cleared by the municipality for the passage of traffic.
§ 295-5. Extension of removal time limit.
In the event of snow in excess of 18 inches in a twenty-four-hour period, the Borough Administrator,
based on a report of conditions from the Public Works Department and/or the Emergency Management
Director may extend the forty-eight hour requirement for an additional 48 hours. Such extension would
be posted on the Borough website, www.oceanportboro.com.
Article III. Invasive Plants
[Adopted 2-19-2015 by Ord. No. 943]
§ 295-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public health through the control of the growth
of invasive plants, including but not limited to bamboo.
§ 295-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICER
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee.
INVASIVE PLANTS
All native and nonnative vines and vegetation that grow out of place and are competitive,
persistent, and pernicious. These plants may damage trees, vegetation, or structures. Examples
include but are not limited to bamboo (spreading or running type), ragweed, multiflora rose and
kudzu vine.
§ 295-8. Control of growth.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 221/392
All persons must control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control the spread of such vegetation
beyond the border of a resident's property is a violation of this chapter.
§ 295-9. Inspections.
All places and premises in the Borough of Oceanport shall be subject to inspection by the enforcing
officer. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency duly authorized and
appointed by the Borough of Oceanport. Such inspection shall be made if that official has reason to
believe that any section of this article is being violated.
§ 295-10. Violations; cost of abatement.
Whenever an invasive plant as defined by this chapter is found on any plot of land, lot or any other
premises or place, and is found to lack appropriate physical barriers to prevent the spread or growth of
the species, or is found to have spread beyond the boundaries of a property, a violation shall be given
to the owner of the property from which the invasive species has spread, in writing, to remove or abate
the same within 30 days. In the event more time is needed for treatment and/or removal, approval by
the enforcing officer, or his/her designee, is required. The cost of abatement shall be borne by the
property owner.
Article IV. Hazardous Substances
[Adopted 3-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1021]
§ 295-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPENSATION
A calculation of reimbursement costs for items, plus any and all wages paid, plus an hourly rate for
use of any and all equipment, plus any and all administrative costs.
EMISSION
Spilling, leaking, flowing or running of substances into the environment, without regard to cause,
and shall include causes that are man-made, natural, accidental, unavoidable or from any cause
whatsoever.
ENVIRONMENT
The air, ground and waters in, and adjoining, the Borough of Oceanport.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS
Any items used to stop or contain any discharge involving any hazardous materials that cannot be
used again or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular incident. These expendable
items include, but are not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent
and nonabsorbent materials, brooms, pads, pillows, rope, sand, recovery drums and any
protective equipment and clothing, including but not restricted to chemical protective suits,
chemical protective gloves, goggles and any other item owned or controlled by the Borough of
Oceanport, its employees, agents, officers and/or officials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as such under the National Fire Protection Association
Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous
substances adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to Section
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 222/392
A.
B.
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, as amended by the Clean
Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and the list of toxic pollutants designated by the
Congress of the EPA, pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and any
hospital or medical waste, including but not limited to syringes, bandages and discarded
pharmaceutical products or any substance on the New Jersey Hazardous Substance List.
§ 295-12. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or be responsible for the emission of any substance
into the environment of the Borough of Oceanport.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay compensation to the Borough of Oceanport within
30 days following his receipt of a bill for compensation pursuant to this article.
§ 295-13. Compensation.
Whenever the Borough of Oceanport, through the offices of the Health Officer, Police Chief, Fire
Chief(s), Fire Prevention Bureau, Office of Emergency Management, Mayor and/or Administrator,
identifies an emission into the environment of the Borough of Oceanport of any substance in such a
manner so that, in the professional opinion of the above, immediate cleanup and/or mitigation is
required, the above shall order, which order may be verbal, the responsible person to take immediate
action to abate the emission. Should the responsible person not be available, or for whatever reason
not take action as in the professional opinion of the above agents of the Borough of Oceanport, then
the agent of the Borough of Oceanport may, at his discretion, engage Borough of Oceanport personnel
and/or supplies and/or equipment and/or expendable items and/or contract in the name of the Borough
of Oceanport qualified private entities to take action to immediately abate and/or clean up and/or
mitigate the emission. The responsible person should then be billed by the Borough of Oceanport for
all costs incurred in this action in response to the emission.
§ 295-14. Compliance.
From and after the effective date of this article, any person, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity shall be required to reimburse the Borough of Oceanport for any violation of the sections of this
article.
§ 295-15. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any hazardous spill that is the result of any traffic accident arising in the
Borough of Oceanport or any hazardous spill arising from the discharge of hazardous materials from
any automobile or equipment on the streets of the Borough of Oceanport or any public property or the
air or waters contiguous to the Borough of Oceanport from any source.
§ 295-16. Investigation.
In the event that the Oceanport Police Department or Fire Department or any health officer or
emergency management or Construction Code Official of the Borough of Oceanport is called out to
abate a spill or shall be asked to investigate any traffic accident or is called upon to investigate any
condition on the city streets or sees any of the conditions set forth in this article, the appropriate officer
shall make an investigation of the scene to determine whether hazardous materials have been spilled
onto the roadways of the Borough of Oceanport or other public or private property or water in the city
or the air or waters contiguous to the Borough of Oceanport.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 223/392
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
§ 295-17. Violations and penalties.
After an investigation, the appropriate officer as set forth in the preceding section shall be
authorized to issue a summons to the owner and/or operator of any such vehicle or agent or
responsible person of any instrumentality which discharges hazardous substances onto the
streets or other public or private property or air or water in the Borough of Oceanport. Said
summons will be returnable in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Oceanport and, upon
conviction of any offense, the offender, owner and/or driver of said vehicle or agent or responsible
person of the instrumentality of such discharge shall be subject to the following penalties.
For a conviction under this article, penalties shall be as follows:
The Municipal Court shall impose a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,200.
The defendant shall be required, as an additional penalty of the Municipal Court, to repay to
the Borough of Oceanport the cost of cleanup of the hazardous spill, which shall include the
cost of the product necessary to be used on the roadway and/or streets of the Borough of
Oceanport and for any cost of manpower and equipment used by the Public Works
Department or Fire Department of the Borough of Oceanport or any agents, representatives,
contractors or otherwise hired by the Borough of Oceanport to clean up said hazardous spill.
The Borough of Oceanport is further authorized to apply to any appropriate judicial body,
including the Superior Court of New Jersey, for reimbursement for the full cost of cleanup of
the hazardous spill that is incurred by the Borough of Oceanport. Such funds shall be
returned to the line item used to purchase the materials used.
It shall be the responsibility of the Borough of Oceanport to present to the presiding Judge of the
Municipal Court a list of the expenses incurred, limited to the cost of the product necessitated for
the cleanup, any overtime as paid to any Borough employee and the cost of any equipment used
by the Borough of Oceanport necessitated in said cleanup. The Borough of Oceanport is further
authorized to present to the appropriate judicial body, including the Superior Court of New Jersey,
whether by complaint or other application, a list of the expenses incurred, and take whatever steps
necessary for application for reimbursement.
Chapter 297. Public Buildings
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 204.
Article I. Rental Regulations
[Adopted 12-3-2014 by Ord. No. 939]
§ 297-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Oceanport recognizes the need to review requests and establish formal scheduling
procedures for the use of its public buildings (hereinafter referred to as "buildings") by the public.
Buildings owned by the Borough of Oceanport will be available for use by the public, groups or
individuals. All parties utilizing the buildings must adhere to all Borough rules and regulations as
adopted by resolution of the governing body. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be given to each
applicant upon application.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 224/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
§ 297-2. Building availability and use.
A limited number of established buildings are available for use in the Borough of Oceanport.
These include the Blackberry Bay Pavilion, the Old Wharf House and the Port Au Peck Firehouse.
The Borough of Oceanport reserves all rights to schedule, reschedule, restrict or limit date
availability for any reason. The Borough of Oceanport specifically reserves the right to cancel any
building use at any time for any reason.
No alterations to existing buildings shall be allowed without prior approval from the Borough of
Oceanport Municipal Council by way of resolution.
Parties reserving buildings will be held responsible for the behavior and actions of all parties
present at the event. Parties reserving the buildings shall be responsible for any and all damage
resulting from the misuse of any Borough of Oceanport buildings or property. All parties must
inspect the building and adjacent area for trash, recyclables and other litter at the conclusion of
their use and dispose of it properly in the receptacles provided. The Borough of Oceanport
reserves the right to bill the group that utilized the building for clean-up of the building and
adjacent property if the Borough deems that there was excessive litter left at the athletic facility or
adjacent property after use.
Any violation of the Borough of Oceanport rules may result in the individual or group being unable
to utilize an Oceanport building for the period of six months from the date of violation.
A second violation shall result in a suspension of reservation privileges for one year from the date
of the violation.
The time and materials expended by the Borough of Oceanport in repairing damage or conditions
caused by the parties or guests of the parties due to their actions or misuse will be withdrawn from
the required security deposit and any excess billed to the party at the Borough of Oceanport
Municipal Council's discretion.
§ 297-3. Fees and charges.
Permit fees are based upon a per-event, per-facility fee. Fees for building use are contained within the
Borough of Oceanport Fee Ordinance, Chapter 204.
§ 297-4. Scheduling procedures.
Rental of the Old Wharf House shall be subject to vacation of the building by the Borough offices,
with priority given for the use of the building to the Oceanport Senior Citizens Club.
Rental of the Port-Au-Peck Firehouse shall be subject to the availability as determined by the Port-
Au-Peck Chemical Hose Co.
The date of receipt of a building use request shall be the date that the request is deemed made.
All building use requests shall be made to the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 297-5. Insurance coverage.
Prior to facility use, individuals and groups requesting use of buildings must provide to the
Borough Clerk a current certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance from an insurer
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 225/392
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, with limits not less than $1,000,000 bodily
injury/property damage combined single limit. The certificate of insurance must specifically name
the Borough of Oceanport as an additional insured. Failure to provide a valid and acceptable
certificate of insurance will void facility use. Users should check with their homeowner's insurance,
which may cover this requirement.
As an alternative, the Borough has made available to users the ability to purchase a "tenant users
liability insurance policy" (TULIP), which can be purchased for the specific date of use. The User
is directly responsible for application and payment to the agency administering the TULIP
program. Additional information on how to apply is available in the Borough Clerk's office.
Chapter 301. Sales and Auctions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 11-1-1973 by Ord. No. 341
(Ch. 48 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 301-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings and definitions
indicated:
PRIVATE AUCTION
The sale, barter, exchange or display or any new or used furniture, sporting goods, fixtures, tools,
equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber, synthetics, household goods or rummage
conducted upon private premises and conducted by a person employed for said purpose whether
compensated or not.
PRIVATE PREMISES
Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, garage, steps or vestibule
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house or other structure.
PRIVATE SALES
The sale, barter, exchange or display of any new or used furniture, sporting goods, fixtures, tools,
equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber, synthetics, household goods or rummage
conducted upon private premises.
§ 301-2. General regulations.
No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of Oceanport except in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of Oceanport unless a
permit shall have first been issued by the Borough Clerk permitting same.
No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of Oceanport except
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset on the day for which a permit is issued. No permit shall
be issued for more than two consecutive days.
No refrigerator or icebox having a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more, with an attached lid or door
which may be opened and fastened shut by means of an attached latch, lock or other similar
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 226/392
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
device, shall be displayed, offered for sale or sold at a private sale or private auction unless the
attached lit or door shall first be removed and detached therefrom.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to a sale held under a judicial order, judgment or decree or a
writ issuing out of any court or sale to enforce any lawful lien or power of sale.
§ 301-3. Licensing.
Upon filing written application with the Borough Clerk stating the date and place where the private
sale or private auction is to be conducted, the type of merchandise to be sold and the date upon
which the last permit, if any, was issued, either to the applicant or for the same premises covered
by the current application, together with the filing fee, the Borough Clerk shall issue a permit
authorizing same.
There shall be a fee of $5 for the issuance of said permit.
[Amended 10-3-1991 by Ord. No. 617]
No person, firm or corporation shall be issued more than two permits within a twelve-month period
for any one location.
[Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No. 688]
§ 301-4. Advertising.
In connection with the conduct of any private sale or private auction as may be permitted by the
terms of this chapter, not more than two signs advertising such private sale or auction shall be
permitted.
[Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No. 688]
The size of any sign permitted by the terms of this chapter shall not exceed two feet by three feet.
No sign advertising any private sale or private auction governed by the provisions of this chapter
shall be erected prior to the commencement of such sale or auction and any such sign shall be
removed immediately upon the expiration of the permit authorized under § 301-3 of this chapter.
§ 301-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 306. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 229.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 328.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
Article I. Sewer Connections
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 227/392
[1]
[Adopted 7-3-1968 by Ord. No. 268 (Ch. 49, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 306-1. Definitions.
As used in this article and unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
words shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY
The Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority.[1]
BOROUGH
The Borough of Oceanport.
BUILDING
Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed and designed or used for dwelling or
other use or occupancy by persons, either temporary or permanent.
CONNECTION DATE
The 90th day following the service of a notice from the Borough that a sewer is available to serve
a building; except that, in the case of a building completed subsequent to the availability of a
sewer to the premises on which a building is located, "connection date" shall mean the date of the
initial occupancy of said building or the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy therefor,
whichever of said dates shall be the earlier.
PROPERTY
Shall be deemed to front on the system if any of its boundaries abut a street or easement at a
point opposite a sewer in such street or easement which is part of a sewer of the Authority or
where a building is located upon a street or easement in which a sewer is now or hereafter
constructed.
SEWER
Any sewer or main designed or used for collection or disposal of sanitary sewage within the
Borough.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Sewerage Authority, Regional.
§ 306-2. Discharges to sewers; prompt payment of charges and
fees.
Every connection required by this article shall be made in a manner to discharge into said sewer all
waste and sanitary sewage originating in the building in accordance with and subject to the rules and
regulations as well as sewer system standards heretofore or hereafter adopted by the Authority, which
connection shall be subject to the right of inspection and approval by the Authority. All connection
charges, service charges and inspection fees imposed by the Authority under its rules and regulations
or rate schedules now or hereafter adopted by the Authority shall be paid promptly when due.
§ 306-3. Connections.
The owner of each building located on property which now or hereafter fronts upon a sewer or is
located upon any street in the Borough in which a sewer is now or hereafter constructed shall connect
such building and property with said sewer prior to the connection date for the purpose of delivering
sewage from each building into the sewer. Said connection shall be subject to and in conformity with
the rules and regulations and sewer system standards heretofore or hereafter adopted by the Authority
regulating and providing for the construction of such connections and providing for the improvement,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 228/392
[1]
[2]
maintenance and repair of such connections and prescribing the kind of materials to be used in the
original connection and in improving and repairing the same and the method of doing the same. Unless
a toilet is already installed therein, every owner of such building shall install at least one toilet therein
and connect such building and every toilet therein with said sewer.
§ 306-4. Notice to connect.
The Borough Clerk shall mail a notice to connect on a form furnished by the Authority to every owner
of a building and property located within the area in the Borough in which a sewer shall have been
installed and is ready to receive sewage. The Borough Clerk shall mail such notice to connect as soon
as possible following receipt of written notification from the Authority describing the area or areas
within which such sewer is available to receive sewage. The Borough Clerk shall forward a list of the
names and addresses of the owners upon whom the notice to connect has been served to the
Authority.
§ 306-5. Failure to connect.
If the owner of any property affected by this article shall neglect, after notice given as provided in the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey 40:63-52 to 40:63-64, inclusive,[1] to make any such sewer connection
or installation of toilet, the Borough may cause such connection or installation to be made under its
direction and supervision or award one or more contracts for the making of such improvement, and
such sewer connection or installation charge shall bear interest and be a first and paramount lien
against the respective property or properties so connected with the sewer to the same extent as
assessments for local improvements, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner, all as
provided in the Revised Statutes of New Jersey 40:63-54.[2]
Editor's Note: The Revised Statutes of New Jersey 40:63-52 to 40:63-64 were repealed by P.L. 1991, c.
53. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.
Editor's Note: The Revised Statutes of New Jersey 40:63-52 to 40:63-64 were repealed by P.L. 1991, c.
53. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.
§ 306-6. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15,
General penalty.
Article II. Disconnection of Auxiliary Systems
[Adopted 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 708 (Ch. 49, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 306-7. Connections.
No owner, occupant or tenant of residential, educational, religious, commercial or industrial properties
situated in the Borough of Oceanport shall connect or maintain the connection or permit to be
connected or permit the maintenance of the connection of any sump pumps, roof leaders, roof drains,
swimming pools, ornamental ponds, water-cooled refrigeration, air-conditioning units, fire sprinkler
systems and any other similar devices with the Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewer
Authority's sanitary sewer system.
§ 306-8. Disconnection.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 229/392
A.
B.
All existing connections, direct or indirect, to the sanitary sewer system as stated in § 306-7 shall be
disconnected and physically cut off no later than 120 days from the adoption of this article.
§ 306-9. Inspection.
Existing units. All existing units will be inspected by the Housing Inspector or his authorized
designee in order to ensure compliance with this article. In the event of a sale or rental of any
existing unit, no certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued until the Housing Inspector is
satisfied that the property is in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
New units. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued for new units until the Plumbing Inspector
has completed his inspection pursuant to this article.
§ 306-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Article III. Illicit Connections
[Adopted 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 798]
§ 306-11. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated
by the Borough of Oceanport, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 306-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE
Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION
Any physical or nonphysical connection that discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Oceanport, unless that discharge is
authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit No. NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 230/392
Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a),
(b), or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) that is owned
or operated by the Borough of Oceanport or other public body and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT
A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER
Water used to reduce temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of
equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER
Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water
other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER
Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 306-13. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Oceanport any domestic sewage,
noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 306-14. Enforcement.
The primary parties responsible for the enforcement of the within Ordinance and the issuance of a
Complaint for any violation thereof, shall be the Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 306-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article IV. Improper Waste Disposal
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 231/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[Adopted 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 799]
§ 306-16. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Oceanport, so as to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 306-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein, unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned
or operated by the Borough of Oceanport or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER
Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 306-18. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate storm
sewer system operated by the Borough of Oceanport is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of
materials (other than stormwater) in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 306-19. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to the provisions of this article shall be as follows:
Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or basement sump pumps, foundation
or footing drains, rising groundwaters).
Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling water).
Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges and diverted
stream flows.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 232/392
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
[1]
A.
Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool discharges.
Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
Flows from fire-fighting activities.
Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their intended purposes;
and
Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials immediately following salt and
deicing material applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing
materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent practicable,
using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be
returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage and
exposed parts, and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 306-20. Enforcement.
The primary parties responsible for the enforcement of this article and the issuance of a complaint for
any violation thereof shall be the Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 306-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this article, after being duly notified,
shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article V. Retrofitting of Storm Drain Inlets
[Adopted 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 306-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct
contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers
and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Oceanport so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 306-23. Word usage; definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 233/392
B.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is
owned or operated by the Borough of Oceanport or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of
this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET
An opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited
to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE
The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 306-24. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one single-family house) shall
authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering
any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable materials; or
Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 306-25 below prior to the completion of the
project.
§ 306-25. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 306-23 above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid
and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable
solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 306-25C below.
Grates.
Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate in
pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain
or surface water body under that grate:
The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is
described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no more than
7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 234/392
(2)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion
(non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or
each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area
of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
This standard does not apply:
Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain
inlets that meet these standards;
Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of
all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following:
A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (This option does not apply
for outfall netting facilities.); or
A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing
between the bars; or
Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines, pursuant to the
New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this
standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 306-26. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of Borough of Oceanport.
§ 306-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, for each storm drain inlet that is not
retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 308. Sex Offender Residency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 6-15-2006 by Ord. No.
812. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 308-1. Sex offender residency prohibition.
No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of any crime against a minor as
identified in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of said conviction is required to register with the
proper authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 235/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Certain Offenders, commonly identified as "Megan's Law," shall be permitted to reside or live within
2,500 feet of:
Any public or private school where the dominant school population is 18 years of age or younger;
Any day-care center;
Any day camp;
Any Borough, county or state park, including the so-called "pocket parks" within individual
neighborhoods;
Any public or commercial recreation facility clearly designed to attract children as a "playground;"
Any commercial recreation facilities frequented by young people, including theaters, bowling
alleys, sports fields, exercise or sporting facilities;
Any convenience store; or
Any public library.
§ 308-2. Relocation requirement.
Any person meeting the definition set forth hereinabove who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any of
the facilities listed within the Borough shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice of the prohibition
set forth in § 308-1 of this chapter to move to a location that is not within 2,500 feet of one of those
facilities within the Borough. Failure to so relocate as stated herein shall constitute a violation of this
section.
§ 308-3. Prior residency established.
This prohibition shall not be deemed applicable to a person who had established a residence prior to
the effective date of this statute throughout the period of time the person remains a resident at that
precise location.
§ 308-4. Brown Zones.
In addition to the foregoing, an area encompassing 150 feet in all directions from any facilities
identified in § 308-1A through H of this chapter shall be established and defined as a "Brown Zone."
No person identified in § 308-1 of this chapter shall be permitted to stop, sit, stand or loiter within a
Brown Zone for any period of time exceeding the amount of time reasonably necessary to engage in a
legitimate activity within the Brown Zone, and only for the period of time actually engaging in that
legitimate activity.
§ 308-5. Violations and penalties.
Each and every individual in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000,
which fine shall be at least $500, or shall be required to perform community service not to exceed 90
days for each offense, or shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. In the event of a
second offense, even concurrent, occurring within one year of the prior offense, for which the individual
was sentenced to pay a fine, the court shall sentence the individual to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a repeat offender shall not be less than $500
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 236/392
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
nor more than $2,000, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this
chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 311. Signs
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs for sales and auctions — See Ch. 301.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
Article I. Political Signs
[Adopted 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 637 (Ch. 49A, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 311-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
POLITICAL SIGN
A sign which directs attention to an issue, issues, candidate or candidates for public consideration
in an election, including the name of a political party.
§ 311-2. Posting on public property and utility structures
prohibited.
No political sign shall be erected, posted, placed on or attached to any public property, utility pole,
traffic sign, street sign, fire hydrant, public telephone booth or similar public fixture.
§ 311-3. Posting on private property restricted.
No political sign shall be erected, posted or placed on private property without the express
consent of the owner, who shall then be responsible for compliance with this article.
No sign in excess of eight square feet shall be permitted to be placed on grounds or yards, front,
rear or side, facing any public street. All such signs must be at least six feet from the curbline or, if
there is no curb, six feet from the edge of the paved street.
[Amended 12-21-1995 by Ord. No. 670]
Only one nonilluminated political sign may be erected or placed on any building lot or parcel at any
time.
Any political sign erected or placed pursuant to this article shall be constructed of such material
that it will not readily tear, and it shall be affixed so that it will not readily become detached.
§ 311-4. Time of posting; removal.
No political signs shall be displayed sooner than 45 days prior to the date of the election or the
decision of the issue is scheduled, and all such signs shall be removed within five days following said
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 237/392
election or date of decision.
§ 311-5. Removal by municipal official.
Any sign which does not comply with this article shall be removed forthwith by any official of the
Borough of Oceanport.
§ 311-6. Each sign to be separate offense.
The erection, posting and placing of each individual sign shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 311-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article by permitting signs on his or her property
contrary to the above provisions shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General
penalty.
Chapter 313. Single-Use Plastics, Regulation of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 4-23-2020 by Ord. No.
1022. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 313-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to adopt regulations relating to and limiting the use of single-use
nonbiodegradable plastic bags, plastic utensils, polystyrene foam containers, and plastic straws by
businesses in the Borough of Oceanport. The regulations are intended as necessary and proper steps
by the Borough to address a significant global problem relating to the sale and use of single-use plastic
bags, plastic utensils, polystyrene foam containers, and plastic straws; to further incentivize the use of
reusable bags and compostable utensils and containers at businesses and, ultimately, to protect the
environment, waterways, and wildlife, and to preserve the public health, welfare, and safety.
§ 313-2. Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this chapter, are hereby defined for the purpose
thereof as follows.
BUSINESS or STORE
Any retail establishment that engages in the retail sale of goods and products. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, pharmacies, supermarkets, grocery stores, convenience stores,
clothing stores, surf shops, dry cleaners, food marts, and food service establishments.
EFFECTIVE DATE
Shall be defined as the date on which final adoption and publication in accordance with the law
are complete.
ENFORCEMENT DATE
Shall be the later of 180 days from the effective date or October 20, 2020.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment which serves made-to-order food or beverages for dine-in, takeout, or delivery.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 238/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
GARMENT BAG
A larger laundry or dry-cleaning bag incorporating a hanger on which garments may be hung to
prevent wrinkling during travel or storage and used to protect and transport clothing or other
textiles.
GOODS AND PRODUCTS
Things and items that are prepared and made to be sold, including, but not limited to, clothing,
groceries, prepared food, foodstuffs, meat, dairy, beverages, merchandise, books, jewelry, alcohol,
tobacco products, toys and any and all other things and items sold at retail by businesses and
stores.
PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG
Any bag without handles that is used exclusively to segregate produce, meats, other food items
and merchandise to the point of sale inside a store to prevent such items from coming into direct
contact with other purchased items, where such contact could damage or contaminate other food
or merchandise when placed together in a reusable or recycled bag.
RETAIL
The sale of goods and products for use and/or consumption.
REUSABLE BAG
A bag that is designed and manufactured to withstand repeated uses over a period of time, is
machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned and disinfected regularly, has a
minimum lifetime of 75 uses, and is capable of carrying a minimum of 18 pounds.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG
A bag, sheet, or receptacle produced or manufactured from material commonly known as "plastic"
or "polyethylene" which does not decompose within 12 months and is provided at the check-out
stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting goods
or products out of the establishment. The term "single-use plastic carryout bag" does not include
reusable bags, produce or product bags, or garment bags.
§ 313-3. Regulation of single-use plastic carryout bags, plastic
utensils, plastic straws, and polystyrene foam containers.
No business or store shall provide any single-use plastic carryout bags, plastic utensils, polystyrene
foam containers, and/or plastic straws to a customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or
other point of departure for the purpose of transporting or consuming products or goods outside of the
business or store, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 313-4. Exceptions.
Upon the specific request of any customer, a business or store may provide said customer with
plastic utensils and/or plastic straws. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any business or store
to offer plastic utensils and/or straws unless specifically requested by the customer. Additionally,
this chapter should not be read as prohibiting cups, containers, or utensils which may be utilized
for more than a single serving.
Exempt bags include:
Produce bags or product bags used as defined above to prevent cross-contamination;
Garment, laundry, or dry-cleaning bags;
Paid subscription newspaper bags; and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 239/392
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Bait bags.
§ 313-5. Carryout bag fee.
A store may provide a customer with a single-use paper carryout bag or reusable carryout bag,
provided that the store shall impose and collect a minimum fee of $0.10 for each such bag
provided to the customer. No store shall be required to charge such fee for an exempt bag. All
monies collected under this provision shall be retained by the store.
All paper carryout bags must be 100% recyclable and include a minimum of 40% post-consumer
recycled content.
The store shall indicate on the sales or other receipt given to the customer the total number of
single-use paper carryout bags provided to the customer, and the total fee charged to the
customer.
No store shall charge a carryout bag fee for bags of any kind provided by the customer in lieu of a
carryout bag furnished by the store.
No store shall prevent a person from using a bag of any kind that they have brought to the store
for the purpose of carrying items obtained from the store.
The fee on paper bags will not apply to customers purchasing groceries with government
assistance such as the New Jersey State Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program, the EBT
program, or the New Jersey State Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for women, infants,
and children.
§ 313-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall take effect on the effective date, and all businesses and stores must be in
compliance with same by the enforcement date.
Any business or store found not to be in compliance with this chapter on the enforcement date,
and which has not made application to the Borough Council for an extension as provided in this
section, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the violations and penalties prescribed
herein.
The Borough Council may, in the Borough's sole discretion, grant an extension of time for
compliance with this chapter when a business or store makes application for an extension prior to
the enforcement date. Upon such application, the Borough shall consider whether the business or
store has made adequate good-faith efforts to comply with this chapter by the enforcement date,
and has been unable to do so for compelling reasons. The Borough may, in its sole discretion,
grant an extension for not longer than 180 additional days from the enforcement date.
§ 313-7. Violations and penalties.
Each business or store violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in
municipal court, be subject to a penalty of up to $500 for a first offense, up to $1,000 for a second
offense, and up to $2,500 for a third offense. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during
which it continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
§ 313-8. Severability.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 240/392
In the event that any clause, section, provision, paragraph, or sentence of this chapter is deemed to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the remaining provisions of this chapter not affected by said
invalidity shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 315. Smoking and Tobacco Products
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 2-15-1996 by Ord. No.
673 (Ch. 56A of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 61.
§ 315-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH OFFICER
The Administrative Officer and the Oceanport Board of Health and/or his or her authorized
representatives.
LICENSED PREMISES
Any place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily sell at retail beer, wine and mixed
spirits for consumption on the premises.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, cooperative, association, corporation, personal representative, receiver,
trustee, assignee or any other legal entity.
TOBACCO
Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other
personal use, including cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER
Any person or entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession or place at which sales of
tobacco are made to purchasers for consumption or use, and shall mean a person or entity that
owns or operates a vending machine and/or a vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE
Any automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payments, dispenses cigarettes or other tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION
The room, enclosure, space or area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
§ 315-2. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors.
It shall be unlawful for anyone, including a tobacco retailer, to sell, give or permit to be sold or given to
a person under 18 years of age, tobacco in any form.
§ 315-3. Identification required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit tobacco products to be sold to any individual
under the age of 18 years unless the seller has a reasonable basis for determining that the buyer is of
legal age (18 or over).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 241/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
§ 315-4. Prohibition of sales of tobacco products by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer to allow, suffer or permit the sale of tobacco products on his
or her premises by any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 315-5. Restriction of tobacco vending machines and sales.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to offer for sale or to sell any tobacco products through a
vending machine in this municipality, except in the following instances:
In any premises or portion thereof to which access by minors is expressly prohibited by law or by
the expressed policy of the owner of the premises; provided, however, that the tobacco vending
machine is:
Located fully within such premises or section of premises, from which minors are prohibited.
Under the visual supervision of the tobacco retailer or his or her adult employee so that all
purchases from the machine are readily observable.
Inaccessible to the public eye when the businesses are closed.
In any premises such as a factory, business, office, industrial plant or other place where the public
is generally not given access and where such machines are intended for the use of employees 18
years of age or older or other adults and the tobacco vending machines in each premises is:
Located within the immediate vicinity of, or in plain view of and under the control of, a
responsible employee 18 years of age or older.
Not located in a coat room, rest room waiting area or similar unmonitored area and is
inaccessible to the public when the establishment is closed.
In any premises or portion thereof where the principal use is for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages pursuant to the "New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," N.J.S.A. 33:1.1 et seq.,
where access by persons under 18 years of age is prohibited by law, provided that the tobacco
vending machine is:
Located fully within such premises or section of premises from which minors are prohibited.
Inaccessible to the public when the premises are closed.
In all other instances, locations and places, a tobacco vending machine shall be permitted to
operate if the operation of the machine to vend tobacco products is possible only by the activation
of an electronic switch or other device which is controlled by the proprietor or employee at or over
the age of 18 and only after the proprietor or employee has made the reasonable determination
that the person wishing to use the tobacco vending machine is 18 years of age or older.
§ 315-6. Prohibition within certain distance from school property.
Except on premises as described in § 315-5B of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer
to operate a tobacco vending machine in any premises or portion thereof located within 200 feet of any
public or private school or other property used primarily for school activities.
§ 315-7. Tampering with machines or devices prohibited.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 242/392
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer responsible for the operation of a tobacco vending machine
to remove, disconnect or otherwise disable the remotely activated electronic switch or device on a
tobacco vending machine in a location where § 315-5 of this chapter provides for a vending machine to
be so equipped.
§ 315-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person either acting directly or indirectly through an agent who sells or offers for sale, gives
away, delivers or otherwise furnishes to a person under the age of 18 years any tobacco or
tobacco product in any form, including smokeless tobacco or any other matter or substance which
can be smoked, either from a vending machine or by retail counter sales, shall be given a warning
pursuant to Subsection B of this section for a first offense and be subject to the penalty set forth in
§ 315-10 for a second or subsequent offense.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The local Board of Health, or the Board, body or officers exercising the function of a local Board of
Health, having determined that a licensee or other person is in violation of this section shall, by
written notification not later than 60 days after discovery of an alleged violation, advise the person
of the violation and that any subsequent failure or refusal to comply with this chapter is subject to
the fine prescribed in this section.
Any penalty recovered under the provisions of this chapter shall be recovered by and in the name
of the local Board of Health. The penalty recovered shall be paid by the local Board into the
treasury of the Borough.
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce and collect any penalty
imposed because of the violation of any provision of this chapter if the violation has occurred
within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court. The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance
with the "Penalty Enforcement Law" (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1, et seq.). Process shall be in the nature of a
summons or warrant and shall be issued by the local Board of Health or the Chief of Police.
The Health Officer or his designee, or any other person charged with enforcement of this chapter,
after giving proper identification, may inspect any matter, thing, premises or place as may be
necessary for the proper enforcement hereof.
It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose or otherwise obstruct a Health Officer or his designee
in the performance of duties hereunder, and they may request the assistance of a law
enforcement agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a
manner prescribed by law.
§ 315-9. Seizure of unauthorized tobacco vending machines.
A tobacco vending machine which is not permitted under this chapter may be taken into custody by
municipal authorities. Any machine so taken shall be returned to its owner upon payment of the
reasonable costs incurred in connection with the taking. As an alternative or in addition to the
provisions of this section, any person licensed as a retail dealer under the "Cigarette Tax Act" (N.J.S.A.
54:40A-1 et seq.), for each unauthorized tobacco vending machine remaining at any prescribed
location after the effective date of this chapter may be subject to § 315-10 for each day placement of
the vending machine is in violation of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 315-10. Violations and penalties.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 243/392
A.
B.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15,
General penalty.
§ 315-11. Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
people of this municipality.
Chapter 320. Soil Removal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 4-15-1982 by Ord. No.
460 (Ch. 50 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 29, Art. II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 229.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 328.
Street excavations — See Ch. 331, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 320-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON
Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms, partnerships and joint-stock
companies, as well as individuals.
SOIL
Any earth, topsoil, clay, loam, gravel, brick, concrete, masonry materials, stone, sand, dirt or rock,
without regard to the presence or absence of organic matter.
SOIL MOVING
Any removal of soil from or depositing of soil on any premises except as otherwise exempted by
this chapter.
TOPSOIL
Upper layer of soil which contains humus and bacteria necessary to plant growth.
§ 320-2. Permit required; exceptions.
[Amended 6-2-1988 by Ord. No. 570]
No person shall remove or deposit soil on any premises in the Borough of Oceanport unless a permit
therefor is first secured from the Construction Official as hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that
no permit shall be required for the following:
The moving of excess soil resulting from foundation or cellar excavations or grading incidental
thereto.
The moving of less than 100 cubic yards of soil upon any lot on which there is an existing or
proposed one- or two-family dwelling.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 244/392
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
[Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 635]
The moving of soil for gardening primarily for home consumption or landscaping for aesthetic
purposes.
The moving of soil for the agricultural use of lands.
The moving of soil which does not result in either substantial changes in grade and/or elevation or
does not significantly alter drainage runoff patterns from said lot.
§ 320-3. Permit application; topographical map.
Application for a soil-moving permit shall be filed with the Construction Official, in triplicate,
accompanied by the fee set forth in § 320-4 hereof, setting forth the following:
The name and address of the applicant.
The name and address of the owner if other than the applicant.
The description and location of the land in question, including the Tax Map lot and block
numbers.
The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
The kind and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be moved.
The destination of soil to be moved.
The proposed date of commencement and completion of the soil moving.
The name, address and telephone number of the person having direct charge over the soilmoving
operation.
The Construction Official shall refer the application(s) to the Borough Engineer if 100 cubic yards
of soil or more are to be moved and may also refer application(s) for movement of lesser
quantities of soil if he deems it necessary.
[Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 635]
If required by the Borough Engineer, and in all cases where more than 100 cubic yards of soil are
to be moved, the application shall be accompanied by a topographical map, in triplicate, of the
lands in question. Said map shall be prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer or
a licensed land surveyor, on a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch, showing the following:
[Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 635]
The present grades on a fifty-foot grid layout.
The proposed finished grades.
The quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be moved.
The grades of all streets and lots within 100 feet of the property in question.
Proposed slopes and lateral supports.
Present and proposed surface water drainage.
§ 320-4. Fees.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 245/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Along with the application, there shall be deposited with the Borough Clerk a permit fee calculated
in accordance with the following schedule:
[Amended 5-16-1985 by Ord. No. 506; 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 635]
Cubic Yards of Soil To Be
Moved Permit Fee
Up to 100 $50
Above 100 $100, plus a sum computed at $0.10 per cubic yard multiplied by
the number of yards in excess of 500
The charge in accordance with the schedule hereinbefore set forth shall include all engineering
and other services the Borough may deem desirable or necessary to assure an orderly soil
operation in full compliance with provisions of this chapter.
§ 320-5. Considerations governing grant of permit.
In acting upon applications for soil-moving permits, the Construction Official shall take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, with emphasis given to the following
factors:
Soil erosion by water and wind.
Drainage.
Soil fertility.
Lateral support, slope and grades of abutting streets and lands.
Environmental impact.
Coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
§ 320-6. Appeal to Borough Council; notice to neighboring
property owners.
The applicant may appeal in writing to the Borough Council at a meeting to be held not less than
30 nor more than 60 days thereafter. Upon being advised by the Borough Clerk, the applicant shall
serve written notice, either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon
all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property as their names appear on
the Borough tax records. Said notice shall be served as aforesaid not later than seven days prior
to the date of the meeting scheduled for consideration of the application. The applicant shall
deliver an affidavit of service to the Borough Clerk at least two days prior to the date of said
meeting.
If, following the hearing during which all persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, the
Borough Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed soil-moving will conform to the
considerations set forth in § 320-5 above, permission to move soil shall be granted.
§ 320-7. Regulation of soil-moving operations.
If a permit to move soil is issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the operation
conducted thereunder shall be subject to the following conditions:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 246/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
The person or persons receiving the permit shall properly level off, remove debris and grade the
premises to conform to the contour lines established and approved within the time periods
established by the Construction Official. Said time periods shall in no event extend 30 days
beyond each soil moving.
Operations shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
Soil-moving operations shall be restricted to street routes established by the Construction Official.
All reasonable means shall be employed by the person or persons conducting a soil-moving or
grading or excavating operation to prevent air pollution by large quantities of dust and dirt. Such
means may include spraying water or nonpolluting dampening agents on the surface of the
ground.
Unless authorized by the Borough Council, the person or persons receiving the permit shall not
remove from the premises any topsoil. The topsoil shall be set aside and shall be respread over
the premises, in conformity with the contour lines approved by the Construction Official.
Unless authorized by the Borough Council, the person or persons receiving the permit shall not
remove any soil to a destination outside of the Borough of Oceanport.
Where applicable, all soil moving shall be done in compliance with the requirements of the
Monmouth County Soil Conservation District in effect at the time the soil is to be moved.
§ 320-8. Deposit of removed soil; depth of excavations.
Where soil moving is permitted, no person, owner, developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon,
fill in or raise the grade of any lot without first making provisions for:
The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in deviation from the
proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by reasons of shrinkage or settlement.
The collection and storage upon the lot of original topsoil so that it is not buried beneath soil
or other material of inferior quality. Said topsoil shall be respread uniformly over the entire
area or surface of the fill soil or other material. In the event that it is not practicable to use the
original topsoil, topsoil not inferior in quality to that of the original topsoil shall be used to a
depth of not less than six inches.
The preservation of existing watercourses, in accordance with the plans on file.
The planting of shrubbery and trees as may be directed by the Shade Tree Committee.
The seeding of the entire area upon completion of the restoration of the topsoil with seed
which will germinate so as to minimize soil erosion by wind and water.
At no time will excavations be permitted to go below the final grade as established by the
approved plans.
§ 320-9. Performance bond.
The Construction Official may require the applicant to post with the Borough a performance guaranty
conditioned upon full compliance with all the terms and conditions of approval. The amount of the bond
shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the Borough Engineer, which amount shall be
sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken as approved. The form of the
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 247/392
A.
B.
[1]
bond shall be approved by the Borough Attorney. If a bond is not obtainable, the Borough Council may
waive the bonding requirement and establish other requirements to secure compliance with the permit.
§ 320-10. Enforcement officer; inspections.
The Construction Official is hereby designated as the officer whose duty it shall be to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. He shall, from time to time, upon his initiative, and whenever directed by the
Borough Council, inspect the premises for which permits have been granted to ensure compliance with
the terms of the permit and of this chapter.
§ 320-11. Abandonment or delay of project; extension of permit.
In the event that, in the opinion of the Construction Official, the soil-moving project has been
abandoned or cannot be completed within the time set forth in the soil-moving permit, the
Construction Official may so certify to the Borough Council in writing. The Borough Council may
then revoke the permit or call upon any surety or the performance guaranty to complete the
project after hearing on seven days' written notice to the permittee by certified mail at the address
on the permit application. In the event that a cash deposit guaranty is posted, the Borough may
complete the project and deduct the cost thereof from the deposit.
A permit hereunder shall be in force for one year. Applications for the extension of the permit shall
be made upon the submission of the data required in § 320-3 hereof. As of the date of the
application for renewal, a renewal permit may be issued by the Construction Official once but for a
period of no longer than one year.
§ 320-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction may be
had. Each and every violation of this chapter, or each day that any provision of this chapter shall have
been violated, shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 50-13, Effect on other provisions; inconsistencies, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 325. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 261.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 295.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
Article I. Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 384 (Ch. 38 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 325-1. Definitions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 248/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms or words used herein are defined as follows:
ASHES
The solid matter remaining after the combustion of wood, coal, coke and any and all other
combustible materials used for heating purposes.
GARBAGE
All waste matter pertaining to the handling, storing, preparation and disposal of meat, fish, fowl,
birds, offal and vegetable matter in any and all forms.
TRASH and RUBBISH
Consists of old furniture, appliances, rubber tires, junk, cartons, household articles of an unwieldly
nature, containers and other miscellaneous household items, except building materials.
TRIMMINGS and CLIPPINGS
Collections of leaves, grass, rakings of lawns and yards, tree limbs and branches.
WASTE and REFUSE
All waste material accumulations from private homes and premises, stores, apartment houses,
boardinghouses and rooming houses, restaurants, schools and public places, and includes such
articles as paper, tin cans, rags, broken bottles, broken glass and such other articles or matter not
heretofore or hereafter described as are usually thrown in wastebaskets and rubbish receptacles.
§ 325-2. Preparation and handling.
Garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids and placed in a receptacle as
hereafter set forth.
Cardboard boxes and cartons shall be flattened, and such boxes and cartons and all paper shall
be secured and properly tied in bundles or other packages in a manner to prevent any scattering.
The bundles or packages shall be of a size and weight to permit ease of handling by one man and
shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight.
Garbage and waste material shall be stored and held in watertight metal or plastic receptacles,
cans or barrels having a capacity of not more than 30 gallons. Such containers shall also have
handles and tight-fitting covers and be so constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of contents.
Any matter that cannot be deposited in a receptacle shall be securely packaged and tied to
prevent spilling and scattering during handling and collection. All receptacles, cans, barrels,
bundles and packages shall be of a size to permit handling by one man and shall not exceed 75
pounds in weight when filled.
Ashes shall be held and stored in metal containers with handles and of a size and weight to permit
handling by one man and shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight when filled.
All receptacles, containers, cans and barrels used shall at no time be filled any higher than three
inches below the top, shall be kept covered and in an upright position and shall be regularly
disinfected.
Trimmings and clippings, including leaves, except as provided for in Subsection G of this section,
shall be placed in barrels, receptacles or cans, and tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar
material shall be cut to a length not to exceed six feet and securely tied in bundles not more than
two feet thick.
During the months of October, November and December, when the volume of leaves makes it
impractical to place them in containers, leaves shall be placed in piles at the edge of the street.
Said piles shall not extend further than four feet into the traveled thoroughfare.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 249/392
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
This article shall not apply to any collection of earth, stone, plaster, wood or other materials from
the excavation for or the construction, alteration or repair of any dwelling or premises.
No person shall throw, lay, deposit or leave or cause to be thrown, laid, deposited or left in or upon
any vacant lot or open space, street, avenue, alley, highway, sidewalk or parking space or lot or
into any waterway flowing within, through or adjacent to the Borough garbage, ashes, rubbish,
waste, refuse, trimmings and clippings or substances of a like nature in any manner contrary to
the provisions of this article.
[Amended 7-16-1992 by Ord. No. 623]
No person, firm or corporation shall burn any garbage, refuse or dead matter.
No grass, leaves, brush, branches or yard rakings shall be placed loose or in piles in sidewalks,
gutters or streets where the same may be dispersed by wind, forces of nature, passersby or traffic,
except as set forth in Subsections F and G above. It shall be unlawful for any grass clippings or
trimmings to be dispersed at any time into any public street, highway, thoroughfare or other rightof-
way.
[Amended 7-16-1992 by Ord. No. 623]
Nothing of a highly volatile or explosive matter, whether in liquid, gaseous or solid form, shall be
placed or set out for collection either by itself or in connection with garbage, waste and refuse,
ashes, trimmings and clippings, trash and rubbish.
§ 325-3. Placement and removal.
The owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant of every private home or premises, store, apartment
house, rooming house and boardinghouse, restaurant or business building of any kind shall, prior
to the placement for collection of garbage, waste and refuse, ashes, trimmings, clippings and
trash, store the same in such a manner as not to become a nuisance to the occupants of any
adjacent building.
All garbage, waste and refuse, ashes, trimmings, clippings and trash shall be placed at the
nearest curb in front of the building to be serviced, provided that none of the above items shall be
placed at the curb earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of collection. No person, firm
or corporation shall allow or permit any empty receptacles, cans or barrels to remain on the curb
or any part of the street or sidewalk more than 12 hours after the contents thereof have been
collected.
The schedule of collections heretofore established is continued, and any changes or deviations
therefrom will be announced and made public by the Borough Administrator, including a public
advertisement thereof in a newspaper circulating within the Borough.
§ 325-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, for each and every violation, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-
15, General penalty, at the discretion of the court in which such person is convicted. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Article II. Recycling
[Adopted 6-18-1987 by Ord. No. 549 (Ch. 43A, Art. I, of the 1970 Code)]
§ 325-5. Items to be recycled.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 250/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
[Amended 3-3-1988 by Ord. No. 565; 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 638; 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
It shall be mandatory for all person who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property,
of business and industrial properties, and of private or public and government institutions and
buildings, to separate newspaper, corrugated cardboard, clean mixed paper, aluminum cans, tin
and bimetal cans, glass bottles and jars, and pourable plastic bottles ("designated recyclable”)
from all other solid waste produced by such residences and establishments, for the separate
collections and ultimate recycling of such materials.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
Residences, businesses and institutions provided with recyclables collection by the Borough shall
place all designated recyclables curbside in a manner and schedule as regularly published and
distributed by the Borough. Any business or institution not provided collection by the Borough shall
be responsible for arranging the appropriate separation, storage, collections and ultimate recycling
of all designated recyclables.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
In accordance with existing state regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil retailers
and motor vehicle reinspection stations with used-oil holding tanks shall accept up to five gallons
at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles
and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a used-oil collection site.
Leaves shall be kept separate from other vegetative waste and shall only be placed for collection
in the manner and schedule as shall be published by the Borough of Oceanport.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
It shall be mandatory to include demolition materials in the list of recycling materials for all
residential and nonresidential recycling programs.
It shall be mandatory for all nonresidential establishments not served by the municipal recycling
program to provide a record to the municipality of the types and quantities of materials recycled.
The report shall be prepared upon such forms as shall be promulgated by the Recycling
Coordinator and shall be filed with the Recycling Coordinator for each calendar quarter not later
than 15 days following the expiration of each such calendar quarter. Weights receipts and/or
letters on official company stationery shall clearly describe the quantity and disposition of each
material included in the quarterly report.
It shall be mandatory to separate grass clippings from household waste and shall be managed by
grasscycling, home composting or delivery to an authorized compost site.
Automotive and other vehicle or wet-cell batteries, motor oil and antifreeze shall not be disposed
as solid waste. Such items are to be kept separate from other waste material and recyclables, and
brought to local service stations, scrap yards or publicly operated facilities permitted to handle
such products.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
The following bulky recyclables shall not be placed with solid waste at the curbside for pickup:
concrete, asphalt, brick, block, tree stumps, tree limbs over three inches in diameter, tires, metal
appliances or bulk metal items larger than one cubic foot and/or heavier than five pounds.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
It shall be mandatory for all commercial and residential construction to separate all demolition
materials for recycling.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
Common, non-rechargeable dry-cell batteries, commonly labeled "A," "AA," "AAA," "C," "D" and "9
Volt," may be disposed with the regular municipal solid waste; however, rechargeable dry-cell and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 251/392
L.
button batteries shall be separated and brought to publically operated facilities or retail outlets
permitted to handle such products.
[Added 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
Effective January 2, 2011, computers, computer monitors and other related electronic hardware,
as well as analog and digital television must be separated and brought to publically operated
facilities or retail outlets permitted to handle such products.
[Added 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 325-6. Definitions.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS
All disposable cans made of aluminum used for food or beverages. Specifically excluded are
aluminum foils, pie tins, trays, cookware and other aluminum products.
CLEAN MIXED PAPER
High-grade bond paper, mixed office and school papers, such as stationery, construction paper
and writing tablets, including computer printouts, magazines, gift-wrapping paper, hard- and softcover
books, junk mail and single-layer cardboard (chipboard). Specifically excluded are carbon
papers, paper cups and plates, food wrappers or any other paper contaminated by direct contact
with food products and paper products used for personal hygiene, such as tissues.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD
Layered cardboard including a waffled section between the layers, of the type commonly used to
make boxes and cartons. Specifically excluded are waxed cardboard and any cardboard
contaminated by direct contact with food, such as pizza boxes.
DEMOLITION MATERIALS
Includes asphalt, concrete and wood wastes.
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS
Transparent or translucent containers made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, used for
the packaging or bottling of various products. Specifically excluded are dishware, light bulbs,
window glass, ceramics and other glass products.
NEWSPAPERS
Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprints; includes any inserts which are normally
included in the newspaper. Specifically excluded are any pages of newspaper used for household
projects and crafts, such as painting or papier-mache projects or used for cleanup of pet waste.
POURABLE PLASTIC CONTAINERS
Plastic bottles where the neck is smaller then the body of the container, and is limited to plastic
resin type No. 1 PET and plastic resin type No. 2 HDPE. Specifically excluded are other resin
types (Nos. 2 through 7) and non-bottle plastic containers, such as margarine tubes and other
consumer items and packages, such as film plastics, blister packaging, boxes, baskets, toys and
other products.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS
Disposable cans made of tin, steel or a combination of metals, including but not limited to
containers commonly used for food products. Specifically excluded are cans which contain toxic
products such as paints or oils.
§ 325-7. Recycling Coordinator.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 252/392
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
The position of Recycling Coordinator is herby created and established within the Borough of
Oceanport and shall be appointed by the Borough Council for a term of one year expiring
December 31 of each year. The term of the person first appointed as Recycling Coordinator or any
appointment due to a vacancy shall expire December 31 of the year of that person's appointment.
The duties of the Recycling Coordinator shall include, but are not limited to, the preparation of the
annual or other reports required by state and county agencies regarding the local solid waste and
recycling programs, reviewing the performance of local schools and municipal agencies in
conducting recycling activities, periodic review of local residential and business recycling practices
and compliances, reports to the governing body on the implementation and enforcement of the
provisions of this article and such other reports and activities as may be requested by the
governing body.
The Recycling Coordinator shall be required to comply with the certification requirements for
Municipal Recycling Coordinators, as established by the State of New Jersey. The Recycling
Coordinator shall have completed or be in the process of completing the requirements for the
certification as a "Certified Recycling Professional" (CRP) no later than January 13, 2010, as
required by the New Jersey Recycling Enhancement Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. § 13:1E-96.2.
§ 325-8. Collection by authorized persons.
The Borough Council may use municipal personnel to collect recyclable material set forth herein at
curbside and/or from a dropoff center and shall sell said recyclable material if a market exists
therefor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
The Borough Council may elect to enter into agreements with qualified persons or corporations
authorizing them to collect said recyclable material at curbside or from a dropoff center and to sell
said recyclable material, provided that the amount of money realized exceeds the cost of
collection.
§ 325-9. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Borough of Oceanport once
placed on the curbside or brought to a dropoff center.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Borough Council to pick up
or cause to be picked up said recyclable material as defined herein. Each such collection in
violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 325-10. Direct disposal by resident.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person, partnership or corporation who is owner,
lessee or occupant of a residential or nonresidential property may donate or sell said recyclable
material as defined herein to any person, partnership or corporation, whether or not operating for profit.
Said person, partnership or corporation, however, shall not pick up said recyclable materials at
curbside or at a municipal dropoff center.
§ 325-11. Prohibited acts.
[Added 8-18-1988 by Ord. No. 573]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 253/392
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity not a lawful resident of the Borough of Oceanport or any
owner or occupant of a nonresidential establishment to deposit or place any recyclable materials either
at a municipal dropoff center or at any other location within the Borough.
§ 325-12. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this article
or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction
thereof, by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, except that the maximum fine
or penalty for the failure to comply with § 325-5A and B thereof, or any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto, shall not exceed $50. As an alternate penalty, a convicted person
may be ordered to perform community service in the recycling program for a period not to exceed
90 days.
[Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and be punishable as such.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Monmouth County Health Department and the Police
Department are hereby jointly and severally empowered to inspect solid waste and recycling
arrangements and compliance at local residences, businesses, schools and institutions and to
enforce the provisions of this article, by issuance of warnings, notices or summonses.
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
Article III. Multifamily Housing
[Adopted 2-17-1994 by Ord. No. 643[1] (Ch. 325, Art. II, of the 1970 Code)]
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 643 is intended to supplement the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances of
the Borough of Oceanport. See Ch. 336, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 390, Zoning, of this Code,
respectively.
§ 325-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
A building containing three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons
living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA
Space allocated for collection and storage of source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 325-14. Recyclable collection area.
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that requires subdivision or site
plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially
generated recyclable materials.
The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or
containers which are of adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be determined in consultation
with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 254/392
B.
C.
adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable
requirements of the Municipal Master Plan, adopted pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28).
The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential disposition of source-separated
recyclable materials, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel
and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without interference
from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
§ 325-15. Collection containers.
The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be designed so as to provide
protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper or
cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid or
otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
§ 325-16. Sign requirements.
Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent
to all points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
§ 325-17. Landscaping of area.
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be
developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
§ 325-18. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15,
General penalty.
Article IV. Yard Waste Collection
[Adopted 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 795]
§ 325-19. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish a yard waste collection and disposal program in the Borough of Oceanport,
so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 325-20. Definitions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 255/392
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein, unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED
The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the
yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way which is an existing
state, county, or municipal roadway and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE
Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 325-21. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste which is not containerized at the curb or
along the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection
and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at
the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this article. If such
placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street, or said party shall be deemed to be in violation of this article.
§ 325-22. Enforcement.
The primary parties responsible for the enforcement of the within article and the issuance of a
complaint for any violation thereof shall be the Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 325-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Article V. Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
[Adopted 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 873]
§ 325-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse containers that are outdoors or
exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or
otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 256/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Oceanport and/or the waters of the state so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 325-25. Word usage; definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is
owned or operated by the Borough of Oceanport or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of
this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER
Any waste container that a person controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including
dumpsters, trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER
Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE
The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 325-26. Prohibited conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse container or dumpster
must ensure that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from
spilling out or overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that
such container or dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 325-27. Exceptions to prohibition.
Permitted temporary demolition containers.
Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 257/392
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater under a valid NJPDES permit.
Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white goods placed curbside for
pickup).
§ 325-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Oceanport.
§ 325-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, for each violation.
§ 325-30. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is declared to be an independent
section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this
article to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other
portion of this article.
§ 325-31. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and any publication as may be
required by law.
Article VI. Debris Management Plan for Construction
Permits
[Adopted 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 325-32. Requirement for construction and demolition permits;
deposit amount.
The Construction Department shall issue construction and demolition permits only after the
applicant has provided a debris management plan identifying the estimated number and types of
containers to be used for the handling of all solid wastes and recyclables generated during the
project and arrangements for the proper disposition of the generated materials.
A refundable deposit in the amount of $200 shall be submitted with the debris management plan,
which shall be returned after completion of the project and appropriate documentation is
presented regarding the disposition of same. Inadequate or incomplete documentation may result
in the forfeiture of some or all of the required deposit.
Chapter 326. Special Events
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 258/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 7-18-2013 by Ord. No.
915. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police services — See Ch. 78, Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 261.
Fees for road closures — See Ch. 204, § 204-11.
§ 326-1. Road closure or traffic control; permit required.
Any event requesting or requiring the closure of any road or requiring traffic control within the Borough
for any amount of time shall be required to apply for a permit.
Events shall include, but not be limited to: sporting events, concerts, sales, and/or any other type
that would cause traffic to be increased or altered.
It shall be the determination of the Oceanport Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau, hereafter
referred to as Traffic Safety, whether the closure of a road, traffic controls or traffic officers are
required.
The number of roads closed or requiring traffic control shall be determined by Traffic Safety.
The method and number of traffic control devices and/or officers shall be determined by Traffic
Safety.
§ 326-2. Request for permit.
The permit shall be requested through the Clerk's office a minimum of 30 days prior to the event.
§ 326-3. Review of permit; traffic control recommendation.
Permits will be reviewed by Traffic Safety.
Once reviewed by Traffic Safety, a recommendation will be made for approval or rejection.
If approved, the permit will be forwarded to the Oceanport Mayor and Council for approval
with recommendations for needed traffic control.
If rejected by Traffic Safety, it shall be returned to the Clerk's Office with the reason for
rejection and any recommendations of changes for approval.
Traffic Safety shall also determine if traffic control will be required and to what extent.
Traffic control recommendations shall include, but not be limited to:
Cones, barricades, etc.
Detour, road closed, traffic signs.
Traffic control officers.
All traffic control requirements are to be supplied by or paid for by the applicant.
§ 326-4. Approval or rejection; required changes; fees.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 259/392
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
D.
The Mayor and Council will review the permit request and shall either approve, reject or require
changes.
If approved, the Clerk's Office shall issue the permit, subject to the fee schedule below.[1]
See Ch. 204, Fees, § 204-11, Events requiring road closure or traffic control.
A copy of the permit will be provided to the Police Department.
If rejected, the Clerk's Office shall notify the applicant as to the reason.
If changes are required, the Clerk's Office shall notify the applicant of the changes required
for approval. If the changes are met by the applicant, the Clerk shall have the authority to
approve and issue the permit.
At any time should any Borough official become aware that changes are made to the event plan
without approval, the permit may be withdrawn.
§ 326-4.1. Charge for services by first aid and Fire Department.
[Added 6-18-2015 by Ord. No. 952]
The Borough of Oceanport is hereby authorized to charge the sponsors of nonmunicipal special
events for services by the Borough's volunteer first aid and/or volunteer Fire Department as may
be required.
The rate to be charged to the sponsors shall be as so promulgated in the Borough Fee Ordinance.
[1]
Editor's Note: See § 204-13.1, Special events requiring first aid and/or Fire Department presence.
The Borough of Oceanport is hereby authorized to require the sponsors of the nonmunicipal
special events to sign the attached agreement,[2] or a document substantially similar thereto.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
The within section shall take effect upon adoption and final passage, according to law.
§ 326-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or organization that shall violate any provision of this chapter by not applying for and
receiving a special event permit if so required shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 328. Stormwater Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 2-7-2008 by Ord. No. 833.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Hazard Mitigation and Floodplain Management Plan Committee — See Ch. 29, Art. IX.
Regional Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 96.
Construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 229.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Sewers — See Ch. 306.
Soil removal — See Ch. 320.
Street and sidewalk excavations — See Ch. 331, Art. I.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 260/392
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
§ 328-1. Scope and purpose.
Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through
nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for "major development," as defined in § 328-2.
Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the following major
developments that require preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
Nonresidential major developments; and
Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted by the Residential Site
Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by Borough of
Oceanport.
Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. Development approvals issued for
subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by
any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate,
or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that,
where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
§ 328-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP
The geographic depiction of the boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA
Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES
Those areas within boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 261/392
A.
B.
COMPACTION
The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE
A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the surrounding municipality,
generally including housing and access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY
An agency designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may
either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or
resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER
A State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission, such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER
A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services
that may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT
The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land
or extension of use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands,
development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA
A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving water body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS
An area or feature which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas
of contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame
Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
A neighborhood designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction
with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 262/392
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
A surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration
by water.
INFILTRATION
The process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT
Any development that provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing
impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing,
cutting or removing of vegetation. Projects undertaken by any government agency which
otherwise meet the definition of “major development” but which do not require approval under the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., are also considered major development.
[Amended 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 854]
MUNICIPALITY
Any city, Borough, town, township, or village.
NODE
An area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities and activities which
are not organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT
A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and
promotes the development of organisms.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, Borough of Oceanport, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil,
grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended
(42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE
The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT
Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved
from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE
The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
SOIL
All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1)
An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization
efforts.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 263/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP
Is defined as the geographic application of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's
goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER
Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF
Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN
An excavation or embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration
basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland
vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE
Any structural or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method
intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control
the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
A flood hazard area, which may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment
Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES
A zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA
Previously developed portions of areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1),
Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
WATERS OF THE STATE
The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water or
groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND
An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 264/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
§ 328-3. General standards.
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.
Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed to meet the
erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 328-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design. If these strategies
alone are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and are intended to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major development to the
extent that alternative design and performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
§ 328-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of a major development in accordance with § 328-10.
Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow on habitat
for threatened and endangered species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of § 328-4F and G:
The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the disturbed areas are
revegetated upon completion;
The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the existing conditions are
maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with a maximum
width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of permeable material.
A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of § 328-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian
access, provided that the following conditions are met:
The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that cannot be
accomplished by any other means;
The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that, through the use of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of § 328-4F and G to the maximum extent
practicable;
The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of § 328-4F and G,
existing structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 265/392
(4)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(i)
(2)
E.
condemned; and
The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas, including the
potential to obtain through condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide additional
opportunities to mitigate the requirements of § 328-4F and G that were not achievable on site.
Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 328-4F and G shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at § 328-4E into the
design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of
the project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures identified
in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site design shall:
Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly susceptible to
erosion and sediment loss;
Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of runoff over
impervious surfaces;
Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from preconstruction to post
construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest within a
watershed;
Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
Minimize soil compaction;
Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and planting of native
vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into and through
stable vegetated areas;
Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or exposure of pollutants at
the site, in order to prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash and debris in
drainage systems, including features that satisfy § 328-4E(3) below;
Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris from drainage
systems;
Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills or other harmful
accumulations of pollutants at industrial or commercial developments; and
When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying fertilizer in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 266/392
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(3) Site design features identified under § 328-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and
other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 328-
4E(3)(c) below.
Grates.
Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate
in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways
and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels,
and stormwater basin floors.
Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
This standard does not apply:
Where the review agency determines that this standard would cause inadequate
hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or
larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified in § 328-4G(1) are
conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option does
not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch
spacing between the bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in § 328-4G(1); or
Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment
or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 267/392
(4)
(5)
(a)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
[a]
[b]
[3]
(b)
(1)
F.
Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to meet the
performance standards in § 328-4F and G shall be dedicated to a government agency,
subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office, or
subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 328-7, or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to control erosion,
encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control are those
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater recharge are as
follows:
The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff
and groundwater recharge calculations at § 328-5, either:
Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the site and its
stormwater management measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the increase of
stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction to post construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects within the urban
redevelopment area or to projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High pollutant loading areas
are areas in industrial and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with Department-approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills of
toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
Industrial stormwater exposed to source material. "Source material" means any
material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is directly or
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 268/392
[4]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(2)
(1)
G.
The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater table and
design the site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high
water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater recharge
area.
In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design engineer shall, using
the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at § 328-5, complete one
of the following:
Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for stormwater leaving
the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no increase, as
compared to the preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater
leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood
damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the analysis of
impacts of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full development
under existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
Design stormwater management measures so that the post-construction peak runoff
rates for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to
the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site
on which the proposed development or project is to be constructed. The percentages
shall not be applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages
below the point of discharge; or
In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in accordance with
Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and [3] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of major
development at § 328-2 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and any applicable
Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For
the purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally associated
with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
Stormwater runoff quality standards.
Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the post-construction load of
total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management measures shall
only be required for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any
stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS
imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 269/392
(2)
(3)
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water
quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account
the implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the presumed removal
rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address
identified in § 328-7 or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP
Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in § 328-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and methods to the
review agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625-0418.
If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required eighty-percent TSS
reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90%
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90%
Extended Detention Basin 40% to 60%
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 270/392
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(8)
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Infiltration Structure 80%
Manufactured Treatment Device See § 328-6C
Sand Filter 80%
Vegetative Filter Strip 60% to 80%
Wet Pond 50% to 90%
If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent TSS removal rate shall
apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted average.
Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the maximum extent
feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of
nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include nonstructural
strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
performance standards in § 328-4F and G.
Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address identified in § 328-
7.
In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4, stormwater management
measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all waters designated
Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be
established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological
significance, exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance, and
exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category One waters. These areas
shall be designated and protected as follows:
The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource protection area in
accordance with one of the following:
A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection area shall be provided on
each side of the waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway where the bank is not
defined, consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
Encroachment within the designated special water resource protection area under
Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be allowed where an applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection area be reduced to less
than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All encroachments
proposed under this subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 271/392
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
A.
All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the special water resource
protection area and shall comply with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey established under the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special water resource
protection area cannot comply with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in
accordance with the requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of the Category One
waterway;
Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section shall achieve a
ninety-five-percent TSS post-construction removal rate;
Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on the receiving waterway;
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special water resource protection area
will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable;
A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the appropriate Department
staff and Soil Conservation District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
All encroachments proposed under this section shall be subject to review and
approval by the Department.
A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional stormwater
management planning committee as an element of a regional stormwater management
plan or by a municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If
a stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 328-4G(8) has been
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 328-G(8) shall
maintain or enhance the current functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area as defined in § 328-G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject
to this subsection.
Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one individual single-family
dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the construction begins
on or before February 2, 2009.
§ 328-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 272/392
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
A.
The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology, including the
NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology and Technical Release 55: Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method for hydrograph
computations.
For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge, there is a
presumption that the preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land
use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS
methodology at § 328-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and Modified Rational Methods at § 328-
5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition
may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic
condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition
and conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall account for all
significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer shall consider the
relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To
calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as
described in the NRCS Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, and
other methods, may be employed.
If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is below the flood
hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into
account the effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater management measures.
Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following: The New Jersey
Geological Survey Report, GSR-32: A Method for Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in
New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
§ 328-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into account the
existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; floodprone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks
(limestone).
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 273/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize maintenance,
facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with
one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of
the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the requirements of
§ 328-8D.
Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed, and installed to
be strong, durable, and corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant
portions of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5
shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice size shall be a
minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum safety standards for
stormwater management basins at § 328-8.
Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management measures may be utilized,
provided the design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality design and
performance standards established by § 328-4 of this chapter.
Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of § 328-4 of this chapter,
provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
§ 328-7. Sources for technical guidance.
Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the documents listed
at Subsections A(1) and (2) below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment
devices, pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual, as amended.
Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be obtained from the
following:
The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey promulgated by the
State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these
standards may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or any of
the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and
telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609) 292-5540;
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 274/392
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
B.
The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and
telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
§ 328-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the clogging of outlet
structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the
following:
The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six-inch spacing between the
bars.
The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic performance
of the outlet pipe or structure.
The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed 2.5 feet per
second under the full range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosionresistant,
and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds
per square foot.
An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure. If an outlet
structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements:
The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable for
emergencies and maintenance.
The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosionresistant,
and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds
per square foot.
For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the permanent installation of
ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include escape
provisions as follows:
If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape provisions shall be
incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in § 328-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement.
Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater management
basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 275/392
(c)
(1)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See § 328-8D
for an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for an earthen dam,
embankment or berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
Variance or exemption from safety standards.
A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may
be granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality,
county or Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public
safety.
Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 328-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
Submission of site development stormwater plan.
Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to this chapter,
the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at § 328-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the checklist for site
development stormwater plans in accordance with § 328-9C of this chapter.
Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site development project shall be
reviewed as a part of the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official
from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the engineer
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 276/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
C.
retained by the Planning Board to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied
and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage
system information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of the
site be submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour
intervals. The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that
drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant
natural and man-made features not otherwise shown.
Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features and to those that
provide particular opportunities or constraints for development.
Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base
map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in
natural conditions may also be provided.
Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide a demonstration of how
the goals and standards of §§ 328-3 through 328-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall
be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
Stormwater management facilities map. The following information, illustrated on a map of the
same scale as the topographic base map, shall be included:
Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land area to be
occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of stormwater.
Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after construction,
including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
Calculations.
Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and
post-development conditions for the design storms specified in § 328-4 of this chapter.
When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e.g., infiltration basins)
depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The
soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed
to determine the suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 277/392
(7)
(8)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the stormwater management facility
shall meet the maintenance requirements of § 328-10.
Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or board reviewing an
application under this chapter may, in consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive
submission of any of the requirements in § 328-9C(1) through (6) of this chapter when it can
be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
§ 328-10. Maintenance and repair.
Applicability.
Projects subject to review as in § 328-1C of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of
§ 328-10B and C.
General maintenance.
The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and schedules;
cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of
an individual property in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant
owns or leases the entire residential development or project.
If the person responsible for maintenance identified under § 328-10B(2) above is not a public
agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based on § 328-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance described in
the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the function of the
stormwater management measure, including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal
of sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair
or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 328-10B(2) above shall maintain a
detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a record of
all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 328-10B(2) above shall evaluate
the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 278/392
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 328-10B(2) above shall retain and
make available, upon request by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental,
or safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
§ 328-10B(6) and (7) above.
The requirements of § 328-10B(3) and (4) do not apply to stormwater management facilities
that are dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have
14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time
allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or
refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major development is located
from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 328-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure
or land in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the standard penalties set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-
15, General penalty.
§ 328-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county review agency or 60 days
from the receipt of the ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency should fail to
act.
Chapter 331. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Excavations
[Adopted 6-5-1925 by Ord. No. 24 (Ch. 51 of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 6-15-1978 by
Ord. No. 417]
§ 331-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH CLERK
The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Oceanport or such other Borough official as the governing
body may designate. He shall act as the administrative officer for this article and coordinate with
the Borough Engineer and other Borough officials and entities, as may be required.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 279/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
EMERGENCY
A condition or circumstance which involves immediate danger to life or property, or both, or which
involves a possibility of interruption or curtailment of any service furnished to the public by a public
utility.
PERMITTEE
Any public utility, individual or company to which a permit has been issued under and pursuant to
this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY
Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
§ 331-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation work or to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or
under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth
or other excavated material, obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, or dig up,
break, excavate or undermine or in any way affect any other public improvement within a public rightof-
way unless such person shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk as herein
provided.
§ 331-3. Application requirements.
[Amended 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493]
Application for a permit shall be made on forms to be provided by the Borough. The application
shall state the purpose of the excavation and the name and address of the person who will restore
the permanent pavement when the same is not to be done by the Borough or the applicant. The
application shall be accompanied by a diagram indicating the nature and extent of the excavation
to be made and the work to be done, the proposed dates of commencement and completion of the
excavation, which date shall be the expiration date of any permit issued pursuant to the
application, and other data as may reasonably be required. If during the course of the work any
major variation is required, the permittee shall file an amended diagram showing the manner in
which the work is actually being done.
Whenever the excavation will or may take more than one working day to complete or whenever
the excavation site shall be left unattended, the permittee shall furnish to the Oceanport Police
Department an emergency telephone number.
No permit for a street excavation in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be issued until the
application shall have been reviewed by the Borough Engineer.
All street excavations in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be supervised by an inspector to be
designated by the Borough Engineer, and the permittee shall be required to reimburse the
Borough for the cost of such inspection.
§ 331-4. Fees.
[Amended 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493]
The following schedule of fees is hereby fixed, determined and established as being the
nonrefundable fees to be paid to the Borough of Oceanport to be drawn upon by the Borough
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 280/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
Engineer in conjunction with the issuance and servicing of such permits, and supervision and
inspection of such openings to proper restoration.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758; 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
Opening not greater than 50 square feet or occupancy only: $75.
Opening up to 100 square feet: $100.
Opening up to 200 square feet: $125.
Opening up to 400 square feet: $175.
Opening over 400 square feet: $250, plus $0.50 per square foot in excess of 400 square feet.
The Borough Clerk shall forward a copy of each application for a street opening permit to the
Oceanport Police Department and, upon receipt thereof, the Chief of Police or his designee shall
review the subject application to determine whether traffic control shall be needed during the
period of construction. If it is determined that the permittee shall need the assistance of a law
enforcement officer to control traffic in the vicinity of the construction site, then the applicant shall
be required, in addition to the other fees provided for in this article, to pay to the Borough of
Oceanport the prevailing police overtime rate for each hour or part thereof that a member of the
Oceanport Police Department will be required to direct traffic at the site.
§ 331-5. Cash repair deposits.
[Amended 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493; 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758; 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
Before any permit is granted, a refundable performance guaranty shall be deposited with the
Borough to insure proper restoration of the trench, pavement surface, and any other
improvements within the Borough right-of-way.
For openings and excavations, the deposit shall be $1,000 or $25 per square foot of the
actual excavated trench size, whichever is greater. The amount of the deposit shall be
computed by multiplying the trench length in feet by the trench width in feet, which produces
square feet.
For temporary occupancy of a Borough right-of-way with a residential or commercial
structure, the deposit shall be $10,000.
For temporary occupancy of all other obstructions, the deposit shall be $1,000 or $25 per
square foot of the actual occupied area, whichever is greater. The amount of the deposit shall
be computed by multiplying the trench length in feet by the trench width in feet, which
produces square feet.
The guaranty shall be refunded if the surface or other improvements are replaced according to
Borough specifications, and will be forfeited in lieu of restoration in the event that the Borough
specifications are not met. For paved roads, the guaranty will be retained for a period of three
months to one year from the date of completion of the permitted construction, at which time the
guaranty will be refunded upon the written approval of the Borough Engineer. In the event the
Borough Engineer does not approve the same in writing, and upon recommendation to the
Borough Council, the guaranty will be forfeited.
§ 331-6. Surety bonds.
If an individual cash repair deposit required by § 331-5 exceeds $500 or if the applicant is a public
utility regulated by the federal government and/or the State of New Jersey, the applicant may
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 281/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
deposit with the Borough Clerk a surety bond in the amount of the cash repair deposit or an
annual bond in the amount of $5,000 made payable to the Borough of Oceanport. The required
surety bond must be:
With good and sufficient surety.
By a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of New Jersey.
Satisfactory to the Borough Attorney in form and substance.
Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this article and to secure and hold the
Borough and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising
from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the
Borough, the Borough Council or any Borough officer may be made liable by reason of any
accident or injury to person or property through the fault of the permittee, either in not properly
guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee,
and further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition, as nearly as it
can be to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Borough Administrator, all
openings and excavations made in streets and to maintain any street where excavation is
made in a condition as good as before said work shall have been done, for the period of 12
months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted. Any settlement
of the surface within the said one-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of
defective backfilling by the permittee.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to
pavement made by the Borough if such repairs should prove defective.
Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its
entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.
In the event of any suit or claim against the Borough by reason of the negligence or default of the
permittee, any final judgment against the Borough requiring it to pay for such damage shall, upon
the Borough giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, be conclusive upon the
permittee and his surety.
An annual bond may be given under this provision which shall remain in force for one year
conditioned as above, in the amount specified above and in other respects as specified above, but
applicable as to all excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of one
year from said date.
Public utilities may deposit a corporate bond conditioned as in the case of a surety bond in the
amount of $5,000 in lieu of said surety bond, but such corporate bond must be in addition to a
cash repair deposit of $500. Such cash repair deposit may, by Council action, be returned with
interest to the utility after a twelve-month period wherein the Borough has made no charges or
written demands against the deposit.
§ 331-7. Emergency approval.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
In case of emergency, any public utility, individual or company may make an excavation in or tear up
the surface of any road without first having obtained from the Borough of Oceanport a permit therefor,
in which case the public utility, individual or company shall make application for such permit within five
working days after the occurrence of such emergency, provided that the public utility, individual or
company first telephones to the office of the Borough Clerk a statement concerning the emergency in
question or, in case such office is closed, the telephone call shall be made to the Borough Police
Department, which shall log the information for the Clerk.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 282/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
A.
B.
C.
§ 331-8. General requirements for excavations, backfilling and
resurfacing.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
The permittee shall comply with the following general conditions with regard to the opening or
excavation and the backfilling and resurfacing of any public street or public place:
The permittee shall keep each opening properly guarded and at night have lights placed thereat
and, in doing the work, interfere as little as possible with the travel along the road and open no
greater part of the road at any time than shall be allowed by the Borough. If the excavation is to
extend the full width of the road, no more than 1/2 of the road shall be opened at one time, and
such half shall be backfilled before the other half is opened, so as to permit the free flow of traffic.
The applicant shall give a forty-eight-hour notice to the Borough Engineer prior to making an
opening or prior to beginning surface restoration.
[Amended 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
No opening shall commence on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, except in case of an emergency.
On roads having either a concrete or bituminous concrete surface, the excavation work area shall
be saw cut so that the edges of the opening shall be cut straight through the bituminous or
concrete surface before the trench is excavated.
If the distance from the edge of the excavation work area to the existing edge of pavement/curb is
less than two feet, the permittee shall excavate to the curb and extend the trench repair to the
edge of pavement/curb.
[Amended 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains, gas lines, sewer lines or
their connections with houses unless the permission of the proper authorities shall have been
obtained. All rock within five feet of a water main or other pipe which might be damaged thereby
shall be removed without blasting. No excavation which will damage trees shall be made.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsections G, H, I, and J, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982.
§ 331-8.1. Requirements for backfilling.
[Added 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
The methods of construction for excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with Section 202 of
the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and such other provisions as are included herein and as may be
added in the special conditions.
No road opening, excavation or occupancy of a cross trench shall extend beyond the center line of
the road before being backfilled, compacted and the surface of the roadway temporarily restored.
All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage of
those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary. Storm drains, pipe culverts or other
facilities encountered shall be protected by the permittee. If the work performed interferes with the
established drainage system of any street or road, provision shall be made by the permittee to
provide proper drainage during construction and restore the existing system, all to the satisfaction
of the Borough Engineer.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 283/392
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
No dewatering equipment, wells, points or piping shall occupy the traveled portion of roadways
unless specifically approved and adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
In addition, effluent from dewatering systems shall be discharged in such a manner that erodible
soils are not adversely affected. All silt and sediments being carried in the dewatering effluent
must be intercepted prior to effluent discharge into any drainage system through the use of a
sediment basin designed to allow retention of discharge for sufficient time to render such waters
free from suspended silt and sediments. The use of screening devices in lieu of a sedimentation
basin must receive specific approval and be employed only for minor flows.
Any gravel, earth or other excavated material which is caused to roll, flow or wash upon any
Borough road shall be removed from the roadway within 24 hours after deposit. In the event the
earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the Borough shall remove
the material, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
Applicants are put on notice that due to the work schedule of the Public Works Road Department,
it will be necessary to make such repairs after normal working hours. The permittee shall employ
construction methods and means that will keep flying dust to the minimum to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer.
In the event of a snow or ice storm, the permittee will be required to take whatever steps the
Department of Public Works deems necessary to secure the traveled way for snow removal
operations. At the first sign of precipitation, all work on the shoulders and traveled way shall stop,
and they shall be cleared of all dirt, etc., and the area backfilled so as not to interfere with Borough
snow operations until the weather permits resumption of work.
Right-of-way or property monuments and/or makers, traffic control devices and other Boroughmaintained
devices on the right-of-way shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do
so is first obtained in writing from the Borough Engineer. Permission shall be granted only upon
the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the replacement of such
monumentation and/or devices.
If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with rammed concrete
composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand (1:10).
If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall be done in strict
compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 331-8.2. Restoration of surface paving and subsurface
foundation.
[Added 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
Within grassed areas, all trench openings and damaged areas shall be backfilled for the top four
inches with topsoil as defined in Section 804 of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition. Then, both the trench
and area disturbed by excavated material and construction operations shall be seeded with
fertilizing and seeding, Type A, as specified in Section 917.05.01 of the same specifications.
Within the limits of gravel roadways, driveways and parking areas, all trench openings shall be
backfilled and compacted as heretofore noted. The top eight inches shall be backfilled with eight
inches of compacted dense-graded aggregate base course as defined in Section 302 of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest edition.
Within the limits of bituminous concrete or bituminous-treated roadways, all trench openings shall
be backfilled and compacted as required in Section 301 of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition. The
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 284/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
upper 12 inches of the trench shall receive a temporary repair of six inches of compacted densegraded
aggregate base course as defined in Section 302 of the above-listed specifications, topped
with six inches of hot mix asphalt 19M64 base course, as defined in Section 401 of the abovelisted
specifications.
The temporary pavement shall remain in place until any residual settlement takes place,
which time shall not exceed four months. During this time, the permittee shall assure
maintenance of the pavement surface level. Manholes, valve boxes or other physical utility
obstructions shall have feathered approaches not to exceed a 5% slope where necessary,
and pavement lining shall be restored by the permittee for adequate traffic control.
Where 20% or more of the pavement surface has been destroyed or disturbed, final
restoration shall consist of milling as designated and final paving with a two-inch overlay of
the entire pavement surface width with hot mix asphalt 9.5M64 surface course, as defined in
Section 401 of the above-listed specifications. All vertical seams shall receive polymerized
joint adhesive.
Where less than 20% of the existing pavement surface has been destroyed or disturbed, final
paving shall be as follows: The existing pavement shall be saw-cut back to a clean, straight
line approximately 12 inches away from each side of the existing disturbed pavement, and
any material within one inch of the proposed surface shall be removed and any depressions
filled. Two inches of hot mix asphalt 9.5M64 surface course, as defined above, shall then be
placed in the prepared area. All vertical seams shall receive polymerized joint adhesive.
If it is determined, prior to release of the cash repair deposit, by the Borough Engineer that
the repair seams are not acceptable, then the area shall receive an infrared treatment to
create a seamless repair.
Within the limits of portland cement concrete roadways, all trench openings shall be backfilled and
compacted as previously required, a satisfactory foundation prepared, the reinforcement restored
and the concrete pavement equal in thickness to that in place in the roadway replaced with
concrete as defined in Section 405 of the above-listed specifications.
Road openings and/or trenches involving unusual or special conditions, including attachment to
bridges, shall be restored in accordance with and pursuant to the direction of the Borough
Engineer.
In the event that temporary paving, patching, final paving, or any other aspect of the restoration
process is not completed to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, the Borough shall complete
the restoration, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
§ 331-8.3. Specifications for concrete sidewalks, aprons, and
curbs.
[Added 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
Materials, measuring, mixing, preparation of the foundation forms, joints, depositing of concrete,
finishing, curing and protection are to be in accordance with the current New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction or the latest
revision thereof.
All sidewalk, driveway apron, curb, gutter, or other right-of-way improvements shall be constructed
in accordance with standard construction detail established by the Borough Engineer.
The contractors shall be required to confer with the Borough Engineer before starting any work,
and further shall not be permitted to pour any concrete until the Borough Engineer has checked
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 285/392
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
and approved the forms for alignment and grade.
For the installation of curb or sidewalk in the Borough, forms shall be of wood or metal, straight,
free from warp, of sufficient strength to resist springing during construction and of a height equal to
the full depth of the finished curb or sidewalk. Wood forms shall be two-inch surfaced plank, it
being understood that dressed lumber of 1 5/8-inch width is herein permitted (where sharpness of
curvature does not permit the use of two-inch material, plywood or fiberboard of lesser thickness
may be used with the permission of the Borough Engineer) or as provided in the particular
specifications for the job in question.
§ 331-9. Excavations in recently improved streets.
[Added 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493]
Whenever the Borough Council enacts any ordinance or resolution providing for the paving or
repaving of any street, the Borough Clerk shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each
person owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility in or under said street. Such notice shall
notify such persons that no excavation permit shall be issued for opening, cuts or excavations in
said street for a period of five years after the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution.
The notice shall notify such persons that applications for excavation permits, for work to be done
prior to such paving or repaving, shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the
excavation permit may be completed not later than 45 days from the date of enactment of such
ordinance or resolution. The Borough Clerk shall also promptly mail copies of such notice to the
occupants of all houses, buildings and other structures abutting said street for their information
and to the state agencies and departments or other persons that may desire to perform excavation
work in said street.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
Within said 45 days, every public utility company receiving notice as prescribed herein shall
perform such excavation work, subject to the provisions of this article, as may be necessary to
install or repair sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations. In the event any owner of real
property abutting said street shall fail within said 45 days to perform such excavation work as may
be required to install or repair utility service lines or service connections to the property lines, any
and all rights of such owner or his successors in interest to make openings, cuts or excavations in
said street shall be forfeited for a period of five years from the date of enactment of said ordinance
or resolution. During said five-year period, no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut or
excavate in said street unless, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer, an emergency as
described in this article exists which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be
issued. Nonemergency openings for roads under moratorium shall be approved only by resolution
of the governing body.
[Amended 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1004]
Every Borough department or official charged with responsibility for any work that may necessitate
any opening, cut or excavation in said street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform
such excavation work within said forty-five-day period as to avoid the necessity for making any
openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in said Borough street during said five-year
period.
Repairs to roads under moratorium, both emergency and nonemergency, shall consist of a twoinch
milling and paving from curb to curb or, where appropriate, edge to edge for the length of the
repair. Tack coat shall be placed on all edges of the milled area and over the base course. At the
discretion of the Borough Engineer, if a patch is deemed not acceptable, then infrared pavement
repair may be required.
[Added 7-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1004]
§ 331-10. Preservation of monuments.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 286/392
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
A.
[Added 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493]
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work
until ordered to do so by the Borough Engineer.
§ 331-11. Excavations in winter months.
[Added 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493; amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
Unless authorized by prior written approval of the Borough Engineer, no permit for the excavation of
any street shall be issued between December 1 and March 1, except for emergencies as provided in
§ 331-7 or by resolution adopted by the Borough Council. All street excavations commenced after
March 1 must be completed, backfilled and restored prior to December 1.
§ 331-12. Indemnity.
In accepting a permit, the permittee shall be deemed to have agreed to indemnify and save harmless
the Borough from and against any and all loss, costs or damages incurred by reason of any damage to
any property, injury to any person or any loss of life resulting from any negligence of the permittee, its
agents or servants in performing the work covered by the permit.
§ 331-13. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the direction of
competent Borough officials, by employees of the Borough or by any contractor of the Borough or
agency or department of the Borough performing work for and in behalf of the Borough necessitating
openings or excavations in streets, nor shall the provisions of §§ 331-4 and 331-5 apply to any
excavation work performed adjacent to or within public rights-of-way by subdividers or site developers
in accordance with approved subdivision or site plans, provided that such subdividers or site
developers have posted cash guaranties and surety in accordance with the applicable ordinance
requirements.
§ 331-14. Liability insurance required.
[Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758; 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder, shall furnish the Borough
Administrator with certificates of liability and workers' compensation insurance satisfactory to the
owner.
The minimum amounts of insurance to be carried by the permittee shall be as follows:
Workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance. The permittee shall take out and
maintain during the life of this contract adequate workers' compensation and employers'
liability insurance for all employees employed in connection with the work, and in case any
work is sublet, the permittee shall require each subcontractor similarly to provide workers'
compensation and employers' liability insurance for the latter's employees, unless such
employees are covered by the protection afforded by the permittee's insurance.
Coverage A (workers' compensation) shall be New Jersey statutory.
Coverage B (employers' liability) shall be in the amount of $1,000,000 or unlimited as per
the New Jersey workers' compensation laws.
Comprehensive general liability.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 287/392
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(3)
(4)
B.
Limits shall be $1,000,000 bodily injury (BI), each occurrence, and $500,000 property
damage (PD), each occurrence.
The certificate of insurance must indicate coverage at the above limits for:
Explosion, collapse and underground utilities (XCU).
Contractual: indicated on the face of the certificate as being in accordance with the
wording of the contract.
Independent contractors.
Completed operations.
Comprehensive automobile liability.
Limits shall be $1,000,000 bodily injury (BI), each occurrence, and $500,000 property
damages (PD), each occurrence.
Certificate of insurance must indicate coverage at the above limits for:
Hired vehicles.
Non-owned vehicles.
Owners protective policy. The permittee shall supply an owners protective policy written in the
name of the owner, the engineer, and their agents, with limits of $1,000,000 bodily (BI) and
$500,000 property damage (PD). In lieu of this policy, the permittee may indicate on the
comprehensive general liability certificate of insurance the owner, the engineer, and their
agents have been named as an additional insured for this contract.
In cases where the character or nature of the proposed excavation work is such as to present an
unusual hazard or a higher-than-normal risk of damage or injury, the Borough Council may require
provision of increased amounts of liability and property damage insurance. Any permits which
occasion such increased hazard or liability shall be referred by the Borough Administrator for the
consideration of the governing body prior to the issuance of a permit.
§ 331-15. Violations and penalties.
[Added 9-20-1984 by Ord. No. 493; amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 758]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Article II. Street Dedications
[Adopted 4-3-1952 by Ord. No. 165 (Ch. 53 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 331-16. Requirements.
[Amended 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 982]
No road, street, avenue or highway in the Borough of Oceanport dedicated to the public use shall be
accepted as a public road, street, avenue or highway unless it is in compliance with the Residential
Site Improvement Standards for a residential development; otherwise the following requirements must
be complied with:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 288/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
All roads, streets, avenues or highways aforesaid shall be not less than 50 feet wide between
property lines and not less than 30 feet wide between curblines.
No dead-end roads, streets, avenues or highways shall be accepted unless and until proper
provisions have been made for the turning around of vehicles at the "dead end."
All roads, streets, avenues or highways shall be curbed on both sides thereof.
All curbs shall not be less than 16 inches deep.
All curbs shall be constructed of concrete or bluestone or granite, and the minimum width of any
curb at the top shall be five inches for concrete and three inches for bluestone or granite.
All roads, streets, avenues or highways shall be graded with a longitudinal grade of not less than
six inches to 100 feet, and a cross section of not less than 1/4 inch to the foot, nor more than 1/2
inch to the foot, each side of the center line.
The minimum requirement for the surface of any road, street, avenue or highway aforesaid shall
be road gravel not less than six inches in depth after ultimate compaction, and the road gravel
used thereon shall first be approved by the Borough Engineer and the Street Committee.
All roads, streets, avenues or highways aforesaid shall be provided with catch basins and pipes
where the same may be necessary for proper surface drainage.
Where subbase conditions of proposed roads, streets, avenues or highways aforesaid are wet,
springy or of such nature that surfacing would be inadvisable without remediation, the permittee
shall submit a signed and sealed engineering design by a New Jersey professional engineer. The
design and calculations shall be submitted for review and approval by the Borough Engineer.
The approval of any map of land delineating roads, streets, avenues or highways by the governing
body of the Borough of Oceanport shall in nowise be construed as an acceptance of any road,
street, avenue or highway indicated thereon.
Article III. Maintenance of Streets and Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 997]
§ 331-17. Curbs and sidewalks.
For any road maintained by the Borough or any other public entity that is lined with curbing and/or
sidewalk, said curbing and/or sidewalk, regardless of the installer and absent of an agreement and
resolution to assume responsibility, shall be maintained by the fronting property owner.
§ 331-18. Trees, plantings and other objects.
For any road maintained by the Borough or any other public entity that is lined with trees, plantings or
has any other object within its right-of-way, said trees, plantings or any other object, regardless of the
installer and absent an agreement and resolution to assume responsibility, shall be maintained by the
fronting property owner.
§ 331-19. Notice of violating conditions.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 289/392
A.
B.
C.
If any condition exists that violates this article, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
owner, tenant or other person in possession of the property of such condition or conditions, in writing,
by regular mail or personal delivery. The owner, tenant or person in possession of the property shall
have 14 days from the date of such written notice to correct the condition or conditions so noticed. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the lands in question after the fourteen-day period has
expired to determine if the condition or conditions have been abated or remedied.
§ 331-20. Failure to abate or remediate conditions.
If the property owner of the lands in question fails to abate or remediate the condition or conditions
noticed by the Code Enforcement Officer within 14 days of the notice, the following shall occur:
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a complaint for the violation or
violations of this article, which complaint shall be brought before the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Oceanport.
If it is necessary to preserve the public health, safety or general welfare of the Borough, the
Zoning Officer shall cause the condition or conditions complained about to be abated or remedied
and shall certify the cost of abatement or remediation to the Council of the Borough of Oceanport.
The amount of such abatement or remediation shall be paid by the owner, tenant or person in
possession within 10 days of the date of the mailing by which the invoice is sent to the aforesaid
person.
If the said invoice is not so paid, the amount so charged shall be added to and become a part of
the taxes next to be assessed upon the lands in question and shall bear interest at the same rate
as municipal real estate taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the
same manner as delinquent taxes.
§ 331-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 336. Subdivision of Land
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 12-3-1970 by Ord. No.
289 (Ch. 55 of the 1970 Code).[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 29, Art. II.
Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund — See Ch. 55, Art. I.
Regional Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 96.
Construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Fees — See Ch. 204.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 229.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Sewers — See Ch. 306.
Soil removal — See Ch. 320.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 328.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 331.
Payment of taxes as condition of permit issuance — See Ch. 348, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 390.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Schedule of Street Design Standards
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 290/392
[1]
[1]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.),
Ord. No. 289 was readopted 1-20-1977 by Ord. No. 397, which ordinance also provided that, to the
extent that it conflicts with Ord. No. 392 (Chapter 250, Land Use Procedures), the provisions of the
latter shall prevail, and those parts found to be inconsistent are repealed and declared invalid.
Article I. General Administrative Provisions
§ 336-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Revised Land Subdivision Ordinance of the
Borough of Oceanport."
§ 336-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards to guide the
subdivision of land in the Borough of Oceanport in order to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the Borough. It shall be administered to ensure the Borough's
orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate
provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 336-3. Approving agency.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.14 and 40:55-1.15,[1] the approval provisions of this
chapter shall be administered by the Borough Council after favorable referral by the Borough Planning
Board, except as to minor subdivisions, as defined herein, applications for which and approval of which
shall be administered by the Planning Board as hereinafter set forth.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 to 40:55D-7, 40:55D-25, 40:55D-37, 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-
41, 40:55D-47, 40:55D-48.
§ 336-4. Definitions.
Certain words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
CIRCULATION
A provision for the movement of people, goods, water, sewage or power by means of streets,
highways, railways, waterways, airways, pipes, conduits or other means, and including facilities for
transit, transportation and communication.
EXISTING IMPROVED STREET AS APPLIED TO MINOR SUBDIVISION
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct or alley, or other way which is an
existing state, county or municipal roadway presently maintained by the state, county or
municipality and which by reason of its condition can be traversed at all times of the year by
modern motor vehicles and provides adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and
other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and safety.
FINAL PLAT
The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision, which is presented to the Planning Board for
recommended approval in accordance with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed
with the proper county recording officer.
LOT
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 291/392
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
B.
A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a
subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease or
separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION
All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN
A composite of the mapped and written proposals recommending the physical development of the
Borough which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board under Section 10 of this Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.10[1]).
MINOR SUBDIVISION
[Amended 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 548]
One of the following:
Any subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel into not more than three lots, all of which front on
an existing improved street and all of which are adequately drained; not involving a new
street or the extension of municipal facilities; and not adversely affecting the development
of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property; and not in conflict with any provision
or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance[2] or this chapter.
Any subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel into two lots for the sole purpose of merging one
of the subdivided lots with an adjoining lot, tract or parcel, provided that all the following
conditions are complied with:
The remaining subdivided lot fronts on an existing improved street and conforms to
the Zoning Ordinance.
The adjoining lot, tract or parcel fronts on an existing improved street.
The merging lot, although not required to front on an existing street or conform to the
size or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, when combined with an
adjoining lot, forms a single lot, tract or parcel which is not in conflict with the Zoning
Ordinance.
The subdivision will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the
subdivided parcel or the adjoining property and is not in conflict with any portion of
the Master Plan, Official Map or this chapter.
The newly formed combined lot, resulting from the combination of the merging lot
and the adjoining lot, is adequately drained.
Any application to subdivide a single lot, tract or parcel into not more than two lots and
situated in any of the single-family or two-family districts may be classified as a "minor
subdivision" notwithstanding that such application may require the approval of one or more
variances pursuant to Section 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c), provided that
all other conditions for minor subdivision classification can be satisfied.
OFFICIAL MAP
A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953). Such a map
shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks
and playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OWNER
Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or corporation having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 292/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY
Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made
before the Planning Board recommends and the Borough Council approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PLAT
The map of a subdivision.
SKETCH PLAT
The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion
and classification and prepared in accordance with the requirements of Article III of this chapter.
STREET
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing
state, county or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded
in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
[Amended 5-15-1980 by Ord. No. 444]
SUBDIVIDER
Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal
entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder
for himself or for another.
Divisions of land for agricultural purposes, where the resulting parcels are three acres or
larger in size;
Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; or
Divisions of property upon court order.
Subdivision also includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites or other divisions of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or for building development; except that
the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions; provided, however, that no new
streets or roads are involved:
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE
A committee of at least three Planning Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board
for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred on this Committee by the
Board.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25, 40:55D-28.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Zoning.
Article II. Procedure
§ 336-5. Informal discussion with Planning Board.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 293/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
The Planning Board will be available at any regularly scheduled meeting for informal discussion with
any person wishing to subdivide land. The Board may, if it so desires, schedule specific meeting nights
for such informal discussions, at its discretion.
§ 336-6. Submission of sketch plat for classification.
Any subdivider of land within the Borough of Oceanport shall, prior to the subdivision of land,
submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board, at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of
the Planning Board, the following:
Thirteen copies of the sketch plat of the proposed subdivision, as follows: 10 paper, two cloth
and one vellum.
Three copies of the completed application form for classification of a sketch plat.
A fee of $10 to cover the cost of processing the application.
The Secretary of the Planning Board shall, upon receiving an application for sketch plat
classification, transmit copies of the sketch plat to the following:
Borough Planning Board: eight copies.
Borough Engineer: one copy.
Borough Planning Consultant: one copy.
Monmouth County Planning Board: one copy.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority: one copy.
The Planning Board, or Subdivision Committee thereof, shall classify the plat as either a major or
a minor subdivision.
If classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the sketch plat, and
one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, together with instructions to proceed under
compliance with the requirements of this chapter governing submission of preliminary plats of
major subdivisions for tentative approval.
If classified as a minor subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the sketch plat,
which shall then be considered by the Planning Board, or Subdivision Committee thereof, for
approval or disapproval.
§ 336-7. Minor subdivision approval.
If approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action of the Subdivision Committee, a notation
to that effect shall be made upon the plats, which shall be forwarded to the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board for their signatures, and then seven copies of the plat to the
Borough Clerk, with one copy being retained in the Planning Board files.
In the event that the minor subdivision is not approved by unanimous action of the Subdivision
Committee, it shall be referred to the full Planning Board.
In the event that the minor subdivision is not approved by the Planning Board, the Secretary
thereof shall, within three days of such action, notify the subdivider in writing by certified mail of
such disapproval and the reasons therefor and return one copy of the plat.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 294/392
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
If the subdivision is approved by the Planning Board, a notation to that effect shall be made upon
the plat, together with the signatures of the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary, and seven
copies of the plat shall be forwarded to the Borough Clerk, with one copy being retained in the
Planning Board files.
No subdivision shall be approved by either the Subdivision Committee or the Planning Board until
a written report has been received from the Monmouth County Planning Board, or until a thirty-day
period has elapsed from the time that said plat was received by the County Planning Board, in
accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3.
Upon receipt of an approved minor subdivision from the Planning Board, the Borough Clerk shall
retain one copy for his file and distribute one copy each to the following:
Tax Assessor.
Zoning Officer.
Borough Engineer.
Monmouth County Planning Board.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority.
Subdivider.
Either a deed description or a plat map drawn in compliance with Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953
shall be filed by the subdivider with the County Recording Officer within 90 days of the date of
approval of the minor subdivision. In the event of the failure of the subdivider to so file within the
ninety-day period, the approval shall be deemed to have expired, unless application is made prior
to the expiration of the initial ninety-day period by the subdivider to the Borough Council for an
extension of the time for filing the plat for an additional period, not to exceed 90 days. In the event
the subdivider fails to file the plat within the extended time period, if granted, the approval shall be
deemed to have expired, and any further proceedings shall require the filing of a new sketch plat
as in the first instance.
§ 336-8. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision for
tentative approval.
At least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting at which consideration
is desired, the subdivider shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board the following:
Fourteen paper print copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision.
Three completed application forms for tentative approval.
A fee of $10 plus a fee of $15 per lot to cover the cost of processing, inspection, examination
and review of the subdivision.
Any plat submitted less than two weeks prior to a regular meeting shall not be considered
until the second regular meeting of the Planning Board next following the filing date.
Upon receipt of a preliminary plat, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall distribute copies of
the preliminary plat as follows, retaining one copy for his files:
Borough Planning Board: six copies.
Borough Engineer: one copy.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 295/392
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Board of Health: one copy.
Borough Planning Consultant: one copy.
Monmouth County Planning Board: two copies and one copy of the completed application
form.
State Water Policy and Supply Council: one copy.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority: one copy.
The subdivider shall notify by certified mail, at least 10 days prior to the public hearing, all property
owners of adjoining property or property directly across the street, as their names appear on the
Borough tax record. The subdivider shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper of the Borough or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough at least
10 days prior to the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain a brief description of the property
involved, a statement as to its location, a list of the maps and other documents to be considered,
and a summary statement of the matters to be heard. Copies of the maps and other documents to
be considered at the hearing shall be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall be made
available at said office for public inspection. The applicant shall be responsible for all fees for the
services rendered by a certified public stenographer where such services are required by the
Planning Board.
Tentative approval shall not be granted until a written report has been received from the
Monmouth County Planning Board, or until a thirty-day period has elapsed from the time that said
plat was received by the County Planning Board, in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:27-
6.3, nor shall tentative approval be granted until a written report has been received from the
following:
Borough Engineer.
Borough Planning Consultant.
State Water Policy and Supply Council.
Borough Board of Health.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority.
The Planning Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90 days after its submission to the
Secretary of the Planning Board.
If the plat is disapproved, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall, within three days of such
action, notify the subdivider in writing by certified mail of such disapproval and the reasons
therefor. The reasons enumerated by the Secretary for disapproval shall be remedied by the
subdivider prior to any further consideration of the plat. If the corrected plat is resubmitted within
90 days of the date of disapproval, no further filing fees shall be charged.
If the plat is given a favorable recommendation by the Planning Board, or a recommendation for
approval subject to conditions, notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, and five copies of
the plat shall be forwarded to the Borough Clerk for action by the governing body. One copy of the
plat shall be retained in the Planning Board's files.
The governing body shall take action upon the plat no later than the second regular meeting after
such referral by the Planning Board or within such further time as the applying party may agree to.
The action of the governing body shall be noted on the plat, which shall be signed by the Mayor
and Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk shall retain one copy of the signed plat for his files and
forward one copy to each of the following:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 296/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
I.
J.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
Subdivider.
Borough Engineer.
Monmouth County Planning Board.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority.
Tentative approval shall confer upon the subdivider the following rights for a three-year period from
the date of the tentative approval:
The general terms and conditions upon which the tentative approval was granted will not be
changed.
The said subdivider may submit on or before the expiration date the whole or part or parts of
said plat for final approval.
In the event that a legal action is instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or other party
to protect the public health and welfare during the three-year period from the date of preliminary
approval of a plat or during an extension of said period pursuant to this act which bars or prevents
a developer or builder from proceeding with a subdivision approval or a project or a development,
and said developer or builder is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed with said subdivision
approval or project or development, the running of the said three-year period from the date of
preliminary approval or any such extension thereof shall be suspended during the period said
legal action is pending.
§ 336-9. Improvement or guaranties prior to final approval.
Subsequent to the approval of the preliminary plat of a major subdivision, and prior to the
commencement of construction of any of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider shall obtain from the Borough Engineer an estimate of the costs of construction of said
improvements and shall tender to the governing body a fee of 5% of the estimated costs to cover
the costs of inspection required by the Borough.
Prior to the submission of the final plat for consideration for final approval, the subdivider shall:
Have installed the improvements required by this chapter, or
Have obtained from the Borough Engineer an estimate of the costs of construction of said
improvements and have tendered to the governing body a fee of 5% of the estimated costs to
cover the cost of inspection by the Borough, and have tendered to the governing body a
performance guaranty conditioned upon the completion of such required improvements in an
amount equal to the estimated costs of the improvements shown on the Borough Engineer's
estimate. The performance guaranty shall consist of a minimum of 10%, cash or certified
check, and up to 90% in the form of a performance bond executed by a surety company
authorized to issue such performance bonds in the State of New Jersey. The condition of the
performance guaranty shall be that the subdivider will fully complete the required
improvements within a three-year period from the date of approval of the final plat.
Upon completion of the required improvements, the subdivider shall notify the governing body in
writing by certified mail, with a copy sent to the Borough Engineer, of the fact that said
improvements have been completed.
Upon receipt of such notice, the Borough Engineer shall inspect the improvements.
Following inspection of the improvements, the Borough Engineer shall file with the governing body
a detailed written report indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection, including reasons
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 297/392
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
for a recommendation for rejection or nonapproval of specific improvements. The Engineer shall
submit cost estimates for all remaining improvements for which the report recommends rejection
or nonapproval.
On the basis of the Borough Engineer's report, the governing body shall accept or reject the
improvements, grant partial approval or withhold approval. Partial approval releases the subdivider
from liability on his bond, except that portion adequately sufficient to secure the improvements not
yet approved. The amount of bond to remain in effect shall be based upon the Borough Engineer's
cost estimates prepared after inspection of the improvements.
The governing body shall notify the subdivider in writing by certified mail of the contents of said
report and its action thereon not later than 180 days following the receipt of the subdivider's notice
of the completion of the improvements.
If the governing body fails to send such notice to the subdivider within the said one-hundredeighty-
day period, the subdivider may notify the governing body by certified mail, with a copy to
the Borough Engineer, that failure to provide the subdivider with such notice within 60 days shall
constitute approval of the improvements. Failure of the governing body to send such notice within
the sixty-day period shall be deemed to constitute approval, and the subdivider and surety, if any,
shall be released from all liability under the bond.
The subdivider shall complete all rejected or partially approved improvements. Upon their
completion, the same notification procedures apply as above.
All inspection fees of the Borough Engineer shall be paid by the subdivider.
Prior to release from a performance guaranty, a maintenance guaranty shall be required in the
amount of 15% of the amount of the original cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer.
Said guaranty shall be in the form of cash, certified check or bond, and shall be conditional upon
the maintenance by the subdivider of all such improvements for a period of two years from the
date of acceptance of the improvement by the governing body, and shall particularly guarantee the
remedying of any defects in such improvements which occur or become evident during said
period.
§ 336-10. Submission of final plat of major subdivision for final
approval.
In the event a subdivider wishes to proceed with all or any part of a subdivision which has
received tentative approval, he shall, within three years from the date of tentative approval, and at
least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting at which consideration is
desired, submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board the following:
The original tracing of the final plat.
One translucent tracing cloth copy of the final plat.
Two cloth prints of the final plat.
Fourteen paper print copies of the final plat.
Three completed application forms for final approval.
A written statement from the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of final construction plans
and final construction profiles showing all utilities in the subdivision and the exact location and
elevation identifying those portions already installed and those to be installed.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 298/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
The Secretary of the Planning Board shall, upon receiving an application for final approval,
transmit copies of the final plat to the following:
Borough Planning Board: the original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth
prints and nine paper print copies.
Borough Engineer: one paper-print copy.
Borough Planning Consultant: one paper-print copy.
Monmouth County Planning Board: two paper-print copies and one copy of the completed
application form.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority: one paper-print copy.
The Planning Board shall take action upon the final plat within 45 days of the date of submission
thereof to the Secretary of the Planning Board within such further time as the applicant may agree
to.
No final action shall be taken by the Planning Board until a written report has been received from
the Monmouth County Planning Board, or until a thirty-day period has elapsed from the time that
said plat was received by the County Planning Board, in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.3.
If the final plat is disapproved by the Planning Board, the Secretary thereof shall, within three days
of such action, notify the subdivider in writing by certified mail of such disapproval and the reasons
therefor. Prior to further considerations of the plat, all stated reasons for disapproval shall be
remedied by the subdivider, and corrected maps shall be resubmitted to the Borough Clerk within
90 days of the date of disapproval. Failure of the subdivider to submit such corrected maps within
said period shall render said subdivision, and all previous approvals therefor, null and void.
If the Planning Board gives a favorable recommendation to the final plat, a notation to that effect
shall be made on each plat, and said plats shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board Secretary shall retain one paper-print copy for the Planning
Board's files and transmit the remaining signed tracings and copies to the Borough Clerk for action
by the governing body.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time, or within such further time as the
applicant may agree to, shall be deemed to be a favorable referral, and the Borough Clerk shall
issue a certificate to that effect.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board, appeal in writing to the
governing body may be taken within 10 days after the date of the action by the Planning Board. A
hearing thereon shall be had on notice to all parties in interest who shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. After such a hearing the governing body may affirm or reverse the action
of the Planning Board by a recorded vote of the majority of the total members thereof. The findings
and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the governing body,
and the applying party shall be given a copy thereof within three days of such action by certified
mail.
Following a favorable referral by the Planning Board, the governing body shall take action on the
plat no later than the second regular meeting following such referral, or within such further time as
the applying party may agree to. Otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved,
and the Borough Clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect.
If the governing body disapproves the plat, the findings and reasons for such action shall be stated
upon the records of the governing body, and the applicants shall be given a copy thereof within
three days of such action by certified mail.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 299/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
If the governing body approves the plat, a notation to that effect shall be made upon the plat and
the signatures of the Mayor and Borough Clerk shall be affixed thereto. The Borough Clerk shall
retain one copy for his files and distribute the remaining signed plats as follows:
Subdivider: the original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth prints and one
paper printup.
Borough Engineer: one paper-print copy.
Assessor: one paper-print copy.
Zoning Officer: one paper-print copy.
Monmouth County Planning Board: one paper-print copy.
Board of Health: one paper-print copy.
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority: one paper-print copy.
The final plat, after final approval by the governing body, shall be filed by the subdivider with the
County Recording Officer within 90 days from the date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed
within this period, the approval shall expire. The governing body for good cause shown may
extend the time for plat filing for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Article III. Plat Details
§ 336-11. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be prepared to scale to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and
shall show or include the information listed below. The scale of the map shall be not less than 100 feet
to the inch except where otherwise directed by the Planning Board.
A key map showing the location of the property in relation to the entire tract and in relation to all
properties adjoining the tract. The name of the owner or owners of the land being subdivided, and,
if other than the owners, the name of the prospective developer. The names of all adjoining
property owners.
The location and dimension of all boundary lines of the property and the location of all structures
and wooded areas within the tract, certified by a licensed surveyor.
The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
All existing streets, roads and streams adjoining or within 500 feet of the tract, including the
location of all previously dedicated areas, whether accepted or not.
Proposed connections with existing water supply or sanitary sewage systems, or alternative
means of providing for water supply and sanitary waste disposal systems. Proposed provisions for
collecting and discharging surface water drainage.
The approximate location of all streets, lots and public-use areas.
Sufficient elevations or contours as to determine the natural slope and drainage of the land and
the high and low points. Unless otherwise required by the Planning Board, contours at five-foot
intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
§ 336-12. Preliminary plat.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 300/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet; the preliminary plat shall be designed and/or drawn by a party properly
authorized for such purpose by the Laws of the State of New Jersey. The plat shall be designed in
compliance with the provisions of Article V of this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to surrounding areas.
The tract name, Tax Map sheet block and lot number, date, reference meridian, graphic scale and
the following names and addresses:
Name and address of record owner or owners.
Name and address of subdivider.
Name and address of person who prepared map.
Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and natural drainage of the land at
the high and low points and tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for all proposed new
streets.
The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any natural features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
Plans of proposed or existing utility layouts, sewers, drains, water, gas and electricity showing
feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply
and/or sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by the
appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public sewage-disposal system is not
available, the developer shall have percolation tests made and submit the results with the
preliminary plat. Any subdivision, or part thereof, which does not meet with the established
requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations shall not be approved. Any remedy
proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county or
state health agency.
A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being subdivided shall
be submitted with the preliminary plat.
§ 336-13. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet
and in compliance with all statutory requirements. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
Date, name and location of subdivision, name of record, owner and subdivider, graphic scale and
reference meridian, and name of person who prepared the map.
Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names, easements and other right-of-way
park areas, or land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines,
watercourses, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves.
The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public use shall be designated,
and the proposed use of sites other than residential shall be noted.
The lots within each block shall be numbered consecutively.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 301/392
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
A.
Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
Location and description of all monuments.
Names of owners of adjoining lands and of land directly across the street or streets from property
involved.
Certification by engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of details of plat.
Certification that the applicant is agent for the owner or is the owner of the land, or that the owner
has given consent under an option agreement.
When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such municipality, state or county,
approval shall be certified on the plat.
Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Borough Engineer, shall be required to
accompany the final plat.
Plans and profiles approved by the Borough of Oceanport Engineer of sewers, storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, headwalls and other drainage structures, as well as sanitary sewers, water,
gas and electric layouts showing feasible connections to existing or proposed utility systems, shall
be required to accompany the final plat. Similar cross sections and profiles shall be shown for all
existing pipes, culverts or other devices in downstream areas which are proposed to be used to
carry surface water or storm drain water through or from the subdivision for a distance of 1,000
feet downstream in any such subdivision. Headwalls, when required, shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard specifications of the New Jersey State Highway Department. The
pipe size for sanitary sewers shall be in accordance with the determination of the Eatontown
Sewerage Authority.
When an individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such
system must be approved by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation tests made and
submit the results with the final plat.
Sufficient elevations or contours as to determine the natural slope and drainage of the land and
the high and low points. Unless otherwise required by the Planning Board, contours at five-foot
intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slopes. In
addition to existing contours on the tract, the applicant shall submit on the same sheet the
proposed grading plan for the tract. Said plan shall show contours at the same interval as required
above and shall utilize such variety of lines as to satisfactorily distinguish between existing and
proposed contours.
No street or road shall be designed which has an elevation at the center line of less than 12 feet
above mean low-water level, as indicated by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
In the event a proposed subdivision includes the construction of lagoons, or other form of manmade
waterways, said lagoons shall not be less than 100 feet in width at their narrowest point.
A certificate from the Borough Tax Collector verifying that all billed property taxes have been paid.
Article IV. Improvements
§ 336-14. Performance guaranty prior to final approval.
Prior to the submission of the final plat to the Planning Board, the developer or owner shall obtain
from the Borough Engineer an estimate of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof,
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 302/392
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
A.
in accordance with the requirements and specifications in this article, together with an estimate of
any damage to any existing accepted streets abutting the proposed subdivision, which may be
caused by reason of work performed in said subdivision.
As a condition to the final approval of the final plat by the governing body, a performance guaranty,
as required in § 336-9B(2), shall be posted.
§ 336-15. Required improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or shall have furnished to the
governing body performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the following.
Streets. All streets shall be constructed and graded and provided with surfacing in keeping with
the following standards and specifications:
Subgrades. All topsoil shall be stripped from the proposed subgrade. The subgrade, when
completed, shall be true to the lines, grades and cross sections given on the plan
accompanying the road profile. After the profile has been shaped correctly, it shall be brought
to a firm, unyielding surface by rolling the entire surface with a three-wheel power roller
weighing not less than 10 tons. All soft and spongy places shall be excavated to such depth
as shall be necessary to stabilize the foundation of the road and refilled solidly with subbase
consisting of broken stone, broken slag, gravel, suitable earth or sand, as directed by the
Borough Engineer. All loose rock or boulders shall be removed or broken off six inches below
the subgrade surface. All stumps and roots shall be removed in their entirety. This shall be
done before completing the rolling of the entire surface of the subgrade.
Embankments. Embankments shall be formed of suitable material placed in successive layers
of not more than 12 inches in depth for the full width of the cross section and shall be
compacted by distributing uniformly over each succeeding layer, or by rolling with a ten-ton
roller, as directed by the Borough Engineer, to a compaction sufficient to prevent settling.
Stumps, trees, rubbish and any other unsuitable materials of substance shall not be placed in
the fill. The fill shall be allowed to thoroughly settle before constructing the pavement upon it
and must be approved by the Borough Engineer.
Underdrains. Underdrains shall be installed where the character and composition of the earth
in the roadbed itself or adjacent terrain renders such installation necessary. These
underdrains shall consist of vitrified tile, perforated metal pipe of porous wall-concrete pipe, to
be of a minimum diameter of six inches and to be laid in the bottom of a trench at such depth
and width as shall be necessary in view of the conditions involved. The trench shall be filled
with material approved by the Borough Engineer. The fill material shall be covered with a
layer of salt hay, minimum of one-inch thickness, and the remainder of the trench filled with
suitable earth properly compacted.
Foundation course and wearing surface. No pavement shall be laid unless the subgrade has
been thoroughly inspected by the Borough Engineer and approved by him.
Foundation course shall be constructed of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base course
in accordance with the requirements set forth in Articles 3.2A.1., 3.2A.2 and 3.2A.3 of the
New Jersey State Highway Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for
1961, as amended. The base course shall be a minimum of six inches thick. Where
required due to poor ground conditions additional base course shall be placed as
directed by the Engineer.
Wearing surface shall consist of bituminous-concrete surface course in accordance with
Articles 3.10.1, 3.10.2 and 3.10.3, of the New Jersey State Highway Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for 1961, as amended, and shall be
Type FABC-1 or Type SM-1. The wearing surface shall be a minimum of two inches thick
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 303/392
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
and shall not be installed until the streets are ready for final acceptance. Prior to the
construction of the wearing surface, the Borough Engineer shall inspect the base course.
Where required, all areas of the base course shall be repaired, after which the wearing
surface shall be constructed.
Width of pavement. Pavement shall be installed from curb to curb except in unusual
conditions of terrain and where otherwise required, as determined by the Borough Engineer.
Materials. Inspection and general requirements:
All material and appurtenances, unless otherwise specified herein, shall comply with the
requirements set forth in the current New Jersey State Highway Specifications.
The work shall be inspected throughout the course of construction by the Borough
Engineer or his duly authorized representatives, who shall be notified in writing 24 hours
before any work is started or continued.
The requirements herein shall be considered as minimum requirements for street
improvements. Where special circumstances or condition of drainage, terrain, character
of soil, or otherwise, require different construction or materials, such construction or
materials shall be determined by the Borough Engineer.
All subsurface utilities shall be installed prior to the application of the wearing surface on
the streets.
Storm drains; cross drains (pipe culverts).
Storm drains, culverts, catch basins and other drainage structures shall be installed in each
subdivision in accordance with the map submitted to the Planning Board in accordance with
Article III hereof.
These drains or culverts shall consist of sections of cast-iron pipe, fully bituminous-treated
corrugated multiplate or reinforced-concrete pipe having a bell-and-spigot joint or slip joint
and, if required, an approved patented rubber gasket to exclude infiltration. All pipe shall
comply with the requirements of the current New Jersey State Highway Department
Specifications governing construction.
Culverts or drains shall be constructed as specified herein below. The location, length, depth,
grade, type and size of pipe shall be designated on the plans indicated herein, except where
unusual or exceptional soil or other conditions are discovered at the time of construction
which are not provided for in the plans, in which case such construction shall be determined
by the Borough Engineer. Trenches shall be bridged at all street crossings, intersecting
streets, public and private entrances in such a manner that traffic will not be interrupted.
The contractor shall have a sufficient quantity of timber and equipment constantly on hand for
planking, sheet piling, fencing or shoring, and adequate pumping apparatus to meet all
requirements of construction for use in case of accident or emergency.
All trenches for culverts, drains or french drains shall be excavated at least nine inches wider
than external diameter of the pipe to be used therein.
When rock is encountered it shall be removed to at least six inches below the grade line, the
trench then being filled with earth to the grade and from the pipe and thoroughly tamped.
The pipe shall be laid on a firm bed, and the bottom of the trench shall be excavated to the
line and grade given or directed by the Borough Engineer. The bottom of the excavation shall
have the shape and dimensions of the lower half of the pipe. When rock is encountered and
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 304/392
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
removed from the trench, as specified, this excess depth shall be refilled with suitable
materials and tamped thoroughly.
The pipe shall be laid and all joints shall be treated as determined by the Borough Engineer.
The filling around the pipe shall be made in layers with approved materials free from rock, and
each layer shall be tamped thoroughly around and over the pipe.
Where indicated or directed, old pipe or insufficient-sized culverts shall be removed and
relaid, extended or renewed, in the same manner as specified above for new pipe culverts or
drains.
Easement of a width sufficient to allow proper maintenance, but in no case less than 20 feet,
shall be provided for the outletting of all drains, pipelines, etc., to streams, existing storm
drains or other legal drainagecourses. These easements shall be granted to the Borough in
writing, subject to the approval of the Borough Attorney.
Combination drains shall be installed where the character and composition of the earth in the
roadbed itself or adjacent terrain renders such installation necessary. These combination
drains shall be constructed in the following manner in accordance with the latest New Jersey
Highway Department Specifications: The bottom 1/3 of the pipe shall be caulked with jute or
equivalent material, and the pipe shall be laid in a stone bed for a depth equal to 1/2 the
diameter of the pipe. The trench shall then be filled in the same manner as described in
§ 336-15A(3) above.
Street signs. In accordance with Borough requirements, street signs shall be installed by the
developer at the intersection of all streets in conformity with Borough specifications and approved
by the Borough Engineer as to location.
Curbs. Curbs shall be installed on both sides of all streets within a major subdivision. Curbs shall
be six inches by eight inches by 18 inches and shall be concrete, Class B air-entrained with a
minimum breaking strength of 3,000 pounds in accordance with the New Jersey State Highway
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for 1961, as amended. Preformed
bituminous cellular-type joint filler shall be used at all expansion joints, 1/2 inch thick, to be
installed at intervals not exceeding 20 feet.
Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in all cases, except as permitted
otherwise in Article V. Where sidewalks are required to be installed, they shall be four feet wide
and four inches thick, of concrete, according to specifications required for curbing described under
Subsection D above.
Shade trees. Subdivider shall be required to plant such number of trees as shall be necessary,
when taking into consideration existing trees, to provide at least one tree every 50 feet in front
yards. Such trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter, measured one foot from the
butt, and shall be of a kind and size approved by the Shade Tree Committee. No tree shall be
planted less than 25 feet from an existing or proposed streetlight or street intersection. The
subdivider shall be responsible for the care and/or replacement of such trees for a period of three
years from the date of approval.
Topsoil protection. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed evenly to
all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. Said seeding and
planting must have attained a growth sufficient to stabilize the soil before this section of the
chapter will be considered as being complied with. No topsoil shall be removed from the
subdivision site.
Monuments and iron stakes. Monuments are to be the size and shape required by Section 4 of
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953, and amendments and supplements thereto. In addition, after all
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 305/392
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
finished grading, the developer shall install a solid iron stake not less than one inch in diameter
and 30 inches in length on all lot corners.
Water supply and other utilities. Water mains in major subdivisions must be connected with a
water supply from a public utility system approved by the Public Utilities Commission to provide
adequate service to lot owners of such subdivision.
Electric and telephone utilities. For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall arrange with the
serving utilities for the underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions,
incorporated as a part of their tariffs, as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utility Commissioners, The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board prior to
approval of the final plat a written instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence full
compliance with the provisions of this paragraph; provided, however, that lots in such subdivisions
which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines have
theretofore been installed on any portion of such streets may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines or extensions thereof, except that the service
connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
General requirements. Said utilities may be required to be located along the rear property lines
with easements, as provided in this chapter. All utility installations shall be connected with a public
utility system and shall be adequate for all present and probable future development of the
subdivision.
§ 336-16. Inspection.
All of the above-listed improvements, § 336-15A to J, shall be subject to inspection and approval of the
Borough Engineer or the Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority, as appropriate,
who shall be notified in writing by the developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of each phase of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved.
§ 336-17. Driveway aprons.
Driveway aprons shall be required between the curbing and the sidewalk. They shall be six inches
of concrete according to specifications required for curbing described under § 336-15D above.
When sidewalks are not required, there shall be constructed on each building lot a bituminousconcrete
apron 10 feet wide between the curb and the right-of-way line, which shall be two inches
thick, of bituminous concrete, Type FABC, and built over a quarry-blend-stone base four inches
thick.
§ 336-18. Notice to Borough Engineer required.
No construction work on the above-required improvements shall commence without the Borough
Engineer being notified in advance of such proposed construction, and such notice shall be given by
the subdivider at least 24 hours before the commencement of said work.
§ 336-19. Acceptance procedures.
Procedure on acceptance of public improvements. When the subdivider has constructed and installed
the streets, drainage facilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs, monuments and other improvements in
accordance with Borough regulations, standards and specifications, and desires the Borough to accept
the said improvements, he shall, in writing, addressed to the governing body, with copies thereof to the
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 306/392
[1]
A.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
Borough Engineer, request the Borough Engineer to make an inspection of the said improvements.
Accompanying this request the subdivider shall submit an as-built plan showing the subsurface utilities,
such as drains, combination drains, sanitary sewage disposal systems, both public and individual
waterlines and control valves, gas lines, telephone conduits, monuments, property iron markers, and
any other utility installed but not shown on the original engineering detail plan.
Article V. Design Standards
§ 336-20. General standards.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of land subdivision in the
design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage good development
patterns within the municipality. Where either or both an Official Map or/and a Master Plan has or
have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon.
The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on an
officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats.
Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage and rights-of-way shall be
shown on the final plat, in accordance with Section 1.20 of Chapter 55 of Title 40 of the Revised
Statutes[1] and shall be such as lend themselves to the harmonious development of the Borough
and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the following design standards.
Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 to 40:55D-7.
§ 336-21. Streets.
The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as to
provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets.
Subdivisions abutting state and/or county highways may be required to provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other means of separation of
through and local traffic, as the Planning Board may determine appropriate.
All arterial, major and secondary streets shall be designed in accordance with the proposals
contained in the Master Plan of the Borough of Oceanport. The design and location of collector,
minor and marginal access streets shall be determined by the Planning Board in its review of the
application and shall be related to the size and location of the tract being subdivided with streets
designed so as to conform to the "Schedule of Street Design Standards"[1] appended to and part
of this chapter. The enumerated standards are to be construed as minimum standards and may be
increased in special cases where, because of high traffic volumes, steep grades or other such
reasons, the Planning Board determines that such action is necessary.
Editor's Note: For Schedule of Street Design Standards, see § 336-32.
Where land strips are created between marginal service roads and state and/or county highways,
such land strips shall be dedicated to the Borough of Oceanport at the time of the dedication of the
marginal service roads, in accordance with § 336-19.
Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths as shown on the
Master Plan or Official Map or the street-width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side
only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated. The additional dedicated width when
improved shall have a foundation course which shall be constructed of bituminous stabilized base
material six inches thick. The wearing surface shall be constructed of two inches of bituminous
concrete from the center line of said road to the newly installed curbs and blended into the existing
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 307/392
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
pavement on the opposite side of the center line. The new cross section for the existing road shall
be constructed so as to provide a parabolic contour constructed to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer.
Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and shall provide a turnaround at
the end with a radius of not less than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of
the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and
provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the
adjoining properties.
No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the
names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
Proposed street names shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
Four-way (cross) intersections involving minor or collector streets shall be avoided.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets.
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than 70°. T-intersections shall not enter the same street,
regardless of direction of entry, with less than 125 feet between center lines.
Changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves sufficient to provide adequate sight
distance.
No municipal services shall be required of the Borough of Oceanport on a street or in connection
with a facility until said street or such facility incidental to the service is completed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 336-22. Blocks.
Block length and width or acreage within boundary roads shall be such as to accommodate the
size of lot required in the area by the Zoning Ordinance[1] and to provide for convenient access,
circulation control and safety of street traffic.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Zoning.
Blocks shall not be in excess of 1,500 feet long. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian
walkthroughs may be required through the block in locations deemed necessary by the Planning
Board. Such walkways shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be sufficient to meet all area and
yard requirements for such use.
§ 336-23. Lots.
Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved
streets.
Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such
extra-width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 308/392
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
A.
Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors
such as rock formations, flood conditions, topographic irregularities, erosion conditions or similar
circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such
lots.
All grading of the subdivision shall be in accordance with the final plan.
Only those trees shall be removed as shall be necessary to permit construction of streets,
driveways, lawns and dwellings and other authorized structures.
Five percent of the gross land area of any tract being subdivided as a major subdivision shall be
allocated for public use for recreational facilities, such public use area to be in such location and
improved as to grading and seeding in such manner as shall be acceptable to the Planning Board.
This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board where, because of the peculiar conditions
pertaining to this land or its location, such requirement is deemed by the Planning Board to be
impracticable or may effect undue hardship. Such waiver shall be upon such reasonable terms
and conditions in lieu of such requirements as shall be prescribed by the Planning Board.
Flag lots are not permitted.
[Added 4-2-2015 by Ord. No. 945]
§ 336-24. Public use and service areas.
Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such
easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies of
municipal departments concerned.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage right-of-way, channel or street, there
shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for
the purpose.
Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved whenever possible in
designing any subdivision containing such features.
Any land shown on the Master Plan as proposed for park, playground, school site or other public
use may be designated and reserved for such use.
§ 336-25. Design of residential units.
In order to preserve and assure the harmonious relationship of residential units to the comprehensive
neighborhood pattern, and to prevent undue similarity of design which may lead to undue impairment
of the stability and value of residential units and produce neighborhood degeneration and blight with
attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants thereof and the Borough at large, no major subdivision shall be approved until the planned
construction (including front, side and rear elevations) of residential units has been reviewed and
approved by the Design Committee in accordance with the standards enumerated below or unless a
waiver of these requirements has been granted by the Planning Board, as provided for elsewhere in
this chapter.
The residential unit shall be of such character, quality or architectural design and construction
materials as will assure that:
The proposed structure will be in keeping with the general character of the area in which it is
located.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 309/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The proposed structure will have a harmonious relationship to the surrounding residential
units within 500 feet thereof.
The proposed structure will have a harmonious relationship to the comprehensive community
plan.
The proposed structure is not likely to produce any of the harmful effects which lead to
neighborhood degeneration and blight with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough at large.
The front facade for each residential unit shall be substantially different from the front facade of
any existing or planned residential unit within three lots in either direction on the same side of the
street from any portion of the above-described lots; in the case of corner lots, from the side and
rear elevations of any existing or planned residential unit or any other corner lot at the same street
intersection. To be deemed substantially different, the facade or side and rear elevation thereof, as
the case may be, must be different in at least three of the following five respects:
The relative location of a garage, if attached, a portion, if any, of any other such structural
appurtenance with respect to the residential unit itself.
The relative location or type of windows and doors.
The type or pitch of the roof.
The type or color of siding material.
The type of roofing material, or the color thereof, or the pattern.
Article VI. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy
§ 336-26. Requirements for issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy for any lot within a major subdivision shall be issued until the following
improvements are installed and the following conditions met:
Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers, electric
lines and telephone lines, shall be installed as approved on the final subdivision plat.
Curbs and sidewalks. Curbing and sidewalks, as required, shall be installed in accordance with
the details and specifications as approved on the final subdivision plat.
Street base. The bituminous stabilized base for all streets shall be installed in accordance with the
details and specifications as approved on the final subdivision plat.
Article VII. Administration
§ 336-27. Violations and penalties.
If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells, or agrees to sell, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning
Board and the governing body is required to act, such person shall be subject to a penalty as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be
deemed a separate violation.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 310/392
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said
land in the subdivision would meet requirements for a building permit under Section 3 of the
Official Map and Building Permits Act (1953), the municipality may institute and maintain a civil
action:
For injunctive relief;
To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract or sale if a
certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with Section 23 of Chapter 433 of
the Laws of 1953.
In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion
of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and
also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title-closing expense, if any. Any such action
must be brought within two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale
and/or conveyance of said lien or within six years, if recorded.
§ 336-28. Interpretation of provisions.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Oceanport. Any
action taken by the governing body and the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give
primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
enact undue hardship, the Planning Board and governing body may permit such variation or variations
from procedure as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
Article VIII. Street Design Specifications
§ 336-29. Schedule of street-design standards.
(The Street Design Specifications are included in a table at the end of this chapter.)
Chapter 348. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business licensing — See Ch. 158.
Construction permits — See Ch. 170.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 250.
Article I. Personal Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-2-1961 by Ord. No. 218 (Ch. 57 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 348-1. Exemption.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 311/392
[1]
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within the Borough of Oceanport
shall not be assessed and taxed.
§ 348-2. Commencement; effect on prior acts or taxes.
This article shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property and personal effects due and
payable in the year 1962 and thereafter so long as this article shall be in effect.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-3. Filing of certified copies.
Certified copies of this article shall be filed with the Division of Taxation in the Department of the
Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the County Board of Taxation of Monmouth County.
Article II. Race Horse Meetings Admission Tax
[Adopted 2-6-1975 by Ord. No. 364 (Ch. 58 of the 1970 Code)]
§ 348-4. Authority for tax.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 5:5-48, as amended, there is hereby established an admissions
tax of $0.05 per person for every paid admission, as defined within said statute, for persons admitted
to horse race meetings by licensed permit holders within the limits of the Borough.
§ 348-5. Application of tax.
The admissions tax authorized by N.J.S.A. 5:5-48 and implemented by this article shall be imposed at
every race meeting held within this Borough subsequent to the adoption of this article and shall remain
in effect until repealed by this governing body.
§ 348-6. Collection and distribution.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to make payment of the admission tax receipts
provided for in this article to the State Treasurer for his distribution as provided by law, and said
payments shall be made at the same time the permit holder makes payments to the New Jersey
Racing Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:5-66.
Article III. Payment of Taxes as Condition of Permit
Issuance
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 348-7. Payment required.
No license shall be issued with respect to any business or activity or to any property whereon is
situated the business or activity for which the license or permit is sought unless there shall have first
been paid all delinquent property taxes and assessments for which said property is liable.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 312/392
[1]
§ 348-8. Suspension of license or permit.
The Borough shall suspend any previously issued license or permit at such time as a tax or an
assessment levied upon the property whereon the licensee or permittee conducts its business or
activity shall have remained unpaid for more than three consecutive quarters.
§ 348-9. Restoration of license or permit.
Said license or permit shall be restored upon payment of the delinquent tax assessment together with
interest accrued and penalties imposed thereon.
§ 348-10. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to alcoholic beverage licenses or permits issued pursuant to Title 33 of the
New Jersey Statutes.
Chapter 361. Towing and Storage
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 3-7-1996 by Ord. No. 675
(Ch. 60 of the 1970 Code), as amended through 2-4-1999 by Ord. No. 709[1] Subsequent amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 64.
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for changing the title of the chapter from "Towing" to "Towing and
Storage." It also added § 361-20.
§ 361-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
GARAGE
Any building or property, other than a private garage, available to the public, operated as a
business and which is used for the storage, repair, rental, lubrication, washing, servicing, adjusting
or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles and, if located within the Borough of
Oceanport, which complies with the provisions of Chapter 390, Zoning.
TOWING APPARATUS
A motor vehicle, including but not limited to a wrecker, tow truck or flatbed truck, employed for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying and removing any vehicle without causing damage to
the vehicle being towed or transported.
VEHICLES
Includes but is not limited to automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, motorcycles, minibikes,
mopeds, go-carts, trail bikes, buses, ski mobiles, farm equipment or any other mechanically
powered conveyance which shall become disabled or required to be towed from the scene of an
accident or in order to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 361-2. License required; transferability.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 313/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
No person, firm or corporation shall participate in the police towing of vehicles within the Borough
without first having obtained a towing license as hereinafter provided.
A license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
§ 361-3. Application; fee.
Applications for licenses issued under this regulation shall be made upon forms made available by the
Chief of Police. An application fee of $16 to cover administrative expenses must be paid in full at the
time of the submission of the completed application. The application shall include the following
information:
The description, by make, model, license number, year, vehicle identification number and color, of
all towing apparatus for which licenses are requested, together with the principal location at which
the towing apparatus will be maintained.
The block and lot number and mailing address of the garage at which the applicant has space
available for properly accommodating and providing for the security of all towed motor vehicles.
The storage facility must be able to accommodate at least 10 motor vehicles. The location of the
storage facility and the location where their wreckers are principally housed may not be more than
three driven statute miles over roadways leading to and from the boundaries of the Borough of
Oceanport. In order to ensure the prompt clearing of Oceanport roadways and further ensure the
safety of drivers and stranded motorists, priority will be given applicants who meet the abovereferenced
criteria and are closest in statute miles over roadways leading to and from the
boundaries of the Borough of Oceanport.
[Amended 12-23-2009 by Ord. No. 876; 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 928]
A letter from the Zoning Officer of the municipality in which the premises is located verifying that
the storage of motor vehicles is a permitted use upon the premises where the garage is located.
At no time shall there be more vehicles stored upon the premises where the garage is located
than that permitted by Chapter 390, Zoning, or the municipality where vehicles are stored.
The certificates of required insurance.
A fully executed employment nondiscrimination statement.
Certification that the applicant is in full compliance with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
A copy of a mercantile license issued to the business if the municipality wherein the business is
located requires such license.
§ 361-4. Filing date; issuance of license.
[Amended 12-23-2009 by Ord. No. 876; 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 928]
Upon this chapter becoming effective, applications shall be received by the Chief of Police during the
thirty-day period immediately following and shall be acted upon in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Mayor and Council the issuance of towing
licenses for their consent and approval. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the last
day of December next succeeding the date of issuance. Prior to renewal of any license issued
hereunder, the Chief of Police shall conduct a review of all license holders to assess their compliance
with the terms and provisions of the within ordinance and, if applicable, Chapter 390, Zoning.
§ 361-5. Investigation; decision on application.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 314/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Within 30 days after the receipt of an application, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be
made of the applicant and his or her proposed business operation and shall make or have made an
inspection of the towing apparatus proposed to be used in connection therewith. All applicants and/or
operators shall be fingerprinted, and a license shall not be issued to a person convicted of a crime of
moral turpitude. The Chief of Police may delegate the inspection of the towing apparatus to a person or
persons who shall make such an inspection and who shall report to the Chief of Police whether the
towing apparatus is in a condition that will not interfere with the public health, safety and welfare and
complies with the requirements and standards of this chapter. Upon completion of the investigation and
inspection, the Chief of Police shall either refuse to approve the application or shall approve the
application in accordance with the standards herein provided and shall inform the applicant of his
decision.
§ 361-6. Conditions of issuance of license.
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the following requirements have
been met by the applicant:
The insurance policies as required have been procured and supplied.
The applicant has at least one wrecker/tow truck in use and operation in order to assure the
efficient and diligent dispatch of towing apparatus upon the request of the Police Department.
The requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws, statutes and ordinances have been
complied with.
All towing apparatus proposed to be used have been properly licensed and conform to the State
Motor Vehicle Laws.
The towing apparatus to be approved meet the required minimum standards as set forth herein.
The towing contractor must be able to respond to all calls for service by the Oceanport Police
Department within a reasonable amount of time, preferably 10 minutes but not more than 30
minutes. Although it is stated in other sections of this chapter, failure to meet this time requirement
will initially result in the Police Department calling the next wrecker in the rotation; however, any
two failures to comply with the required response time could result in the offending wrecker
service being dropped from the list and revocation of its license.
[Amended 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 928]
Payment of a $50 licensing fee.
There shall be no charge for any towing of any municipally owned vehicle to a location within five
driven miles of the boundaries of the Borough of Oceanport.
[Added 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 928]
§ 361-7. Minimum standards for towing apparatus.
The following shall serve as a minimum standard for towing apparatus. A wrecker or tow truck or
flatbed truck shall be capable of handling, removing and towing any vehicle as defined in § 361-1 of
this chapter and must have or be equipped with the following:
All wreckers and towers and flatbed trucks shall have a minimum weight of one ton, according to
the manufacturer's specifications.
A power takeoff or an adequate electric-operated winch with a minimum cable thickness of threeeighths-
inch steel.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 315/392
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A three-eighths-inch safety chain. The lift chair and the safety chain are not to be attached in any
form or manner to the same part of the tow truck or wrecker or a flatbed truck.
Front and rear flashing hazard lights.
A 360° rotating amber beacon light mounted above the cab or an approved light bar. Proper
permits are required for the amber light and proof for such permit shall be provided with
application for the towing license.
All lights shall be of such candlepower and intensity so as to be visible 1/4 of a mile away.
The company name, address and phone number permanently affixed on both sides of the wrecker
or tow truck or flatbed truck. The letters and numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
A proper motor vehicle car dolly for each wrecker.
Approved towing slings.
Clean-up equipment. All tow vehicles are responsible for the prompt and safe removal of the
disabled vehicle(s) and for the prompt and complete removal of all litter, debris and spillage
resulting from the accident and must carry a broom, rake, trash can and bags, shovel and speedy
dry-type material to absorb, remove and properly dispose of any litter, debris and or spillage
resulting from the accident, with the exception of hazardous materials, as set forth in N.J.S.A.
39:4-56.8.
Commercial motor vehicle plates.
One twenty-pound dry chemical fire extinguisher.
§ 361-8. Insurance policies and indemnification agreement.
Each licensee shall obtain and provide proof of coverage for the following policies of insurance
naming the Borough, where applicable, as an additional named insured prior to the issuance of
the towing license:
Automobile liability in an amount not less than $500,000 combined single limit.
Garage keeper's policy covering fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of $500,000
as well as collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
Garage liability in an amount not less than $500,000 combined single limit.
Miscellaneous coverage to provide complete protection to the Borough against any and all
risks of loss or liability, including comprehensive general liability.
Each insurance policy required herein must contain an endorsement providing 10 days notice to
the Borough in the event of cancellation, revision or modification. The aforesaid insurance policies
must be in full force and effect for the entire time period the towing license is issued, and these
insurance policies must be written by insurance companies authorized to conduct business in New
Jersey and have a satisfactory rating from the Commissioner of Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a towing license, the licensee must duly execute an indemnification
agreement in which the licensee agrees to indemnify and hold the Borough harmless from any
and all loss or damages, including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs of suit, arising from
the conduct of the licensee in the course of towing or attempting to tow any vehicles pursuant to
the terms of the license granted.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 316/392
[1]
A.
B.
C.
§ 361-9. Inspection; enforcement.
The Chief of Police or his designee is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations
for the inspection and operation of towing apparatus and for the design, construction, maintenance and
conditions for the safe conduct of a towing service business, in accordance with the standards
provided in this chapter. All vehicles shall be maintained in good working order and meet minimum
safety standards. If at any time the Chief of Police shall find the equipment inadequate or unsafe or not
complying with the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of New Jersey or in the event that the towing
business operator shall fail to comply with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Oceanport[1] or
the municipality in which it is situated, he shall have the power to demand immediate correction, and, if
not corrected to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Chief shall have the authority to revoke
or suspend the license and schedule a hearing relative thereto. The Chief of Police is also hereby
authorized and empowered to establish from time to time such additional rules and regulations, not
inconsistent herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary in effectuating and carrying out the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Zoning.
§ 361-10. Appeal.
An appeal of the Police Chiefs ruling shall be filed with the Borough Clerk within 10 calendar days of
the Chiefs decision. A hearing before the governing body shall be held within 30 calendar days of the
filing, with a ruling forthcoming from the governing body within 20 calendar days of the conclusion of
the hearing.
§ 361-11. Rates.
Every licensed owner of towing apparatus shall give the owner of the vehicle a written receipt for the
fee paid for the rendering of any towing service hereunder. Copies of receipts shall be maintained by
the garage owner for three years and be made available for inspection by authorized Borough officials.
This chapter requires that all towing contractors adhere to rules and rates and schedules established
by the Department of Insurance, N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 et seq. A copy of
said laws will be provided to all approved contractors. Fees may be charged that are less than the
rates specified in N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 et seq. This chapter also seeks to
assure the timely dispatch of adequate towing equipment to scenes of accidents and in other
circumstances requiring the removal of vehicles in order to safeguard the public health, safety and
welfare. The Borough shall not be liable for any of the services performed by the tower unless those
services are performed for municipal vehicles. The tower shall proceed directly against the owner of
the motor vehicle for the recovery of any fees or charges.
§ 361-12. Conduct of owners and operators.
A tow license hereunder shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
No person owning or operating a towing apparatus licensed under this regulation shall permit or
invite loitering within or near the towing apparatus when in use.
No person shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any commission or fee except the fee
for transporting the vehicle to be towed.
No person shall pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person not involved in the towing or
removal of any vehicle or to any police officer for any information as to the location of any accident
or for soliciting the employment of the operator's services.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 317/392
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
The holder of a towing license shall not release to anyone any motor vehicles towed by said
license holder without first obtaining a towed vehicle release form issued by the Oceanport Police
Department or a verbal release authorization if that is all that is required by the Police Department.
The holder of a towing license shall forthwith and without delay release to the owner thereof any
motor vehicle which has been towed or stored by said license holder upon payment of the towing
and/or storage fee and obtaining of a receipt for said vehicle from the owner thereof, during
reasonable hours of business.
§ 361-13. Records required to be kept.
Vehicles towed by the Police Department. All companies on the towing list shall maintain a record
regarding all vehicles towed at the request of the Police Department. This record shall be made
available to any police officer for inspection upon request and shall contain the following
information:
The date, time, location and name of the towing apparatus and the name of the driver who
towed at the Department's request.
The physical location of the vehicle after being towed.
Identification of the towed vehicle, to include make, year, model, color, vehicle identification
number, license number and the name of the registered owner or operator, if known.
Fee charged for such towing service and the manner in which said fee was calculated.
A list of all vehicles presently stored shall be submitted to the Oceanport Police Department,
including the following:
The make, model and color.
The registration number and state of registration.
The vehicle identification number.
The officer's name requesting the tow or impound.
§ 361-14. Notice to vehicle owners.
All tow wrecker operators shall be required to contact the registered owner of the towed vehicle in
order to promptly facilitate the removal of said vehicle from the storage facility. Failure to notify
promptly will require the towing contractor to adjust his or her total storage charges as is reasonable
for his or her failure to notify. The tow operator will be required to contact the registered owner via the
postal service, by registered mail, after the vehicle has been at the storage facility for 20 days. If this
mail notification has not been performed, storage charges arising after that period of time will not be
charged. The towing contractor may continue charging storage fees providing that all conditions have
been met. A copy of the receipt, along with the time and date of telephone conversations, will be
maintained and be made available to the Police Department immediately upon request. Failure to
submit the required information will result in the removal of the towing service from the tow list, and any
request for storage fees will be subject to critical examination. The Oceanport police will, at the tow
operator's request, supply related information as to the owner of the vehicle, the owner's last known
address and any other data that may be of assistance.
§ 361-15. Rotating call list; heavy-duty vehicles.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 318/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Police Department shall establish and publish a call list for all eligible licensees for the
purpose of towing services within the Borough. Each licensee deserving to be placed on the list
shall agree to the terms and conditions as may be set and approved by the Chief of Police. The
list shall be in alphabetical order and rotated so to be equal to all licensees. Any licensee shall be
removed from the list upon:
Written request from the licensee.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
Revocation of towing license.
Approved towing contractors will be placed on a daily rotating call basis. On their respective
designated days, towing contractors will be expected to respond anywhere in the Borough of
Oceanport. In the event that the holder of a towing license is unavailable or unable to perform all
or part of his or her designated days, it shall be that towing contractor's obligation to provide the
Police Department with the name of another licensed towing contractor who has agreed to provide
service for all or part of that rotation. A towing contractor who fails to provide such coverage shall
forfeit his next scheduled rotation. A second failure to provide coverage could result in that towing
contractor's removal from the list and revocation of his or her license. The Police Department shall
keep a list of all requests for towing apparatus, indicating therein the date, time and place to which
called and whether the tower called was available and, if not available, the reason why and the
name of the towing license holder next called. No tower shall respond to the scene of an accident
except upon notification by the officer in charge at the scene of an accident or at police
headquarters or upon the request of the driver or owner of the vehicle concerned. Towing
apparatus must be dispatched upon receipt of notification from the Police Department and shall
arrive at the scene within a reasonable period of time, preferably not more than 10 minutes after
being so notified. If at anytime more than two wreckers are required in order that the performance
of towing services may be efficiently rendered and the public's traffic safety assured, the Police
Department is hereby authorized to call upon one or more approved holders of towing licenses to
respond to the dispatch of the Police Department.
Additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of wreckers as may be promulgated
hereunder by the Chief of Police shall take effect immediately after mailing, by certified mail return
receipt requested, a copy thereof to all license holders for towing apparatus in the Borough, which
mailing may be made by addressing same to the license holders at their last known addresses.
The foregoing shall not limit in any way the authority herein conferred upon the Chief of Police to
promulgate rules and regulations providing for the removal and storage of disabled heavy-duty
motor vehicles such as tractor-trailers and construction equipment requiring specialized towing
equipment.
§ 361-16. Clean up at scene of accident.
The driver of the towing apparatus shall be required to clean up broken glass and debris from the
scene of any accident to which it is called before leaving the scene thereof. All towing apparatus shall
be equipped with a broom, rake, shovel and special dry and waste containers.
§ 361-17. Application of regulations.
This chapter shall not apply where the towing apparatus is called to perform services by the owner of
the disabled vehicle to be towed or serviced, nor shall any provision contained herein be interpreted or
construed in any manner as to interfere with or obstruct a member of the Oceanport Police Department
in the performance of his duties and the enforcement of the Motor Vehicle Traffic Laws of the State of
New Jersey.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 319/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 361-18. Preservation and release of evidence.
The tower shall take all reasonable precautions to protect evidence when required to by the
Oceanport Police Department. When required, all such vehicles shall be stored as requested and
in a manner so as to protect the evidentiary nature of the vehicle. Such vehicles shall be stored
and covered so as to prevent any unauthorized individuals from tampering with or removing any
item(s) from the vehicle.
Release of any evidence, property or vehicle shall not occur unless written authorization has been
obtained by the tower from the Oceanport Police Department authorizing said release.
§ 361-19. Conduct of employees; complaints.
The licensee shall be solely responsible for the conduct of his or her employees.
Any complaints received by the Borough of Oceanport regarding the licensee or his or her
employees involving excessive charging, damage to vehicles, theft from vehicles, discrimination or
failure to comply with local, state or federal laws regarding workers' employment regulations shall
be addressed to the Chief of Police for review. After review, if the complaint(s) is substantiated, the
license of said tower may be revoked or suspended.
§ 361-20. Storage on municipal property; fees.
In the event that it shall become necessary to store any privately owned motor vehicle, or any type of
trailer or similar accessory equipment, upon municipal property, the owner or owners of such vehicle or
equipment shall be charged a fee of $15 for each day of storage or part thereof. No such vehicle or
equipment shall be released until the storage fee provided herein shall have been fully paid.
§ 361-21. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
Any persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-15, General penalty, for each violation and/or removal from the approved towing list.
§ 361-22. Severability.
[Added 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 928]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is declared to be an
independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this chapter to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 371. Trees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 10-4-1973 by Ord. No.
338 (Ch. 20, §§ 20-11, 20-12 and 20-16, of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 371-1. New plantings.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 320/392
A.
[1]
B.
In all new developments, the construction of which shall have been commenced following the
effective date of this chapter, trees shall be planted by the developer on each side of every street
therein, providing one tree at least every 50 feet. Such trees shall be at least two inches in
diameter.
Such trees shall be first-class nursery stock, planted while in a dormant state and properly staked,
with topsoil sufficient to cover all roots. Said trees shall be in good growing condition at the end of
one year or shall be replaced by the developer in accordance with this chapter. The Shade Tree
Committee[1] shall direct the placement, planting and selection of trees in all new developments
and shall certify its approval thereof to the Planning Board and the Mayor and Council. The
location of such new plantings or replacements shall be such that, wherever possible, conflict or
interference with existing overhead or underground utilities or other facilities will be avoided. No
new plantings shall be made in the area between sidewalks and curbs, nor shall any such existing
plantings be replaced.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Art. II, Shade Tree Committee.
§ 371-2. Trimming or removal of public trees.
[Amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 997]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring for any lawful purpose to cut, prune, trim or remove any tree in
a public highway in the Borough of Oceanport or to replace an existing tree or plant an additional tree
within the public highway shall submit a request, in writing, to the Borough Clerk for permission by the
Shade Tree Committee, or other official so designated by the governing body, to do the particular act.
The applicant shall, in writing, indicate the location and type of work and the species of tree to be
planted or destroyed. Upon approval of the application, the Shade Tree Committee, or other official so
designated by the governing body, shall issue a permit, and thereafter, the work shall be performed
and/or the tree planted in accordance with the instructions issued by and under the supervision of the
Shade Tree Committee or other official so designated by the governing body. In the case of the
replacement of existing trees or the planting of additional trees, after the maintenance period of one
year has expired, the tree or trees, if satisfactory, will be accepted and classed as other trees existing
along the public highways.
§ 371-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty.
Chapter 384. Watercraft, Personal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 7-21-1994 by Ord. No.
655 (Ch. 66 of the 1970 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic—See Ch. 64.
§ 384-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and
construction of this chapter:
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT
A power vessel as defined in N.J.S.A. 12:7-62.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 321/392
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
PUBLIC LANDS
All parcels or lots owned by the Borough other than public rights-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Any street or road, whether improved or unimproved, depicted as a public thoroughfare on the
Official Tax Map of the Borough.
§ 384-2. Restricted and prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to launch personal watercraft from any public land or right-ofway
providing direct access to any river or waterway within the confines of the Borough of
Oceanport or to transport personal watercraft over and cross any public land or within 50 feet of
the waterline of any right-of-way.
The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to any public boat launching facility where
it shall be lawful to transport and launch personal watercraft consistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 12:7-62 et seq.
§ 384-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this chapter or refusing or neglecting to comply with any of the
provisions hereof shall, upon conviction therefor, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-15, General penalty.
Each day's persistence in the things or acts prohibited by this chapter shall be and constitute a
separate and distinct offense subject to any and all penalties prescribed in this chapter.
Chapter 390. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport 7-3-1969 by Ord. No. 278
(Ch. 68 of the 1970 Code); amended in its entirety 12-18-1975 by Ord. No. 380.[1] Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Schedule I, Permitted Land Uses for R and V-C Districts
Attachment 2 - Schedule II, Bulk and Coverage Controls
Attachment 3 - Schedule III, Minimum Habitable Floor Area Per Family; Minimum
Habitable Floor Area (Multifamily)
Editor's Note: Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40-55D-1 et seq.),
Ord. No. 380, as amended, was readopted 1-20-1977 by Ord. No. 396. Such amendments are cited in
the text of this chapter. Said Ord. No. 396 also provided that, to the extent that it conflicts with Ord. No.
392 (Chapter 250, Land Use Procedures), the provisions of the latter shall prevail, and those parts
found to be inconsistent were repealed and declared invalid.
Article I. Title; Intent; Purposes
§ 390-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Oceanport Zoning Ordinance."
§ 390-2. General intent.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 322/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed plan for the use of land in the Borough
of Oceanport based on the Master Plan for the Borough of Oceanport and enacted in order to promote
and to protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the
people.
§ 390-3. Purposes.
Such regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
Limit congestion in streets: to limit congestion in the public streets and so protect the public health,
safety, convenience and the general welfare by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles
and for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
Protect against hazards: to provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and the general welfare.
Regulate intensity of use: to regulate the intensity of use of lots and to determine the area of open
spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air privacy and
convenience of access to property and to protect the public health.
Regulate location of buildings: to establish building lines and the location of buildings designated
for residential, commercial, manufacturing or other uses within such lines.
Establish standards of development: to fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform.
Promote orderly development: to protect the character and maintain the stability of residential,
business and manufacturing areas within the Borough, and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas.
Conserve taxable value of land: to conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Borough.
Article II. Definitions
§ 390-4. Word usage; terms defined.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and
construction of this chapter.
Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure," and
the word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased
or intended to be used;" the word "zone" shall include "district," and the word "shall" is mandatory
and not optional.
Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING
A subordinate use, structure or building, the purpose of which is incidental to that of the main
use or building and on the same lot.
AUTOMOBILE, BOAT OR TRAILER SALES AREA
An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor
vehicles, motor or sail boats and/or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 323/392
done.
BOARDINGHOUSE
Any dwelling in which more than four persons, either individually or as families, are housed or
lodged for hire with or without meals. A rooming house or a furnished room house shall be
deemed a boardinghouse.
BUILDING
A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls, built, erected and framed of component
structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals,
animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA
The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building
and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL
A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. In any
residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the zone lot on
which it is located.
CARPORT
A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles and enclosed on not
more than two sides.
CEMETERY
Any land or place dedicated for use, used or intended to be used for the interment of the
human dead, in the ground, in a mausoleum or in a crypt, and a crematory located in the
cemetery and a columbarium for cinerary interments, or lands held for burial purposes.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
COLUMBARIUM
A structure or room or other space in a building or structure containing niches for permanent
inurnment of cremated human remains.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
CONTRACTOR FACILITIES
A use either for office or for storage of equipment and materials necessary to the conduct of
any contracting business and which is conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
CREMATION
The reduction of the body of a deceased person to incinerated remains.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
CREMATORY
A body or structure containing one or more furnaces or retorts intended for the reduction of
bodies of deceased persons to incinerated remains.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
CRYPT
A space in a mausoleum used or intended to be used, above ground or underground, to
entomb human remains.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
DRIVEWAY
A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles, and allowing access from a
street to a building or other structure or facility. The driveway shall be an improved surface
that starts at the driveway apron and is composed of asphalt, concrete, pavers, gravel or
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 324/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
other hard durable material. Loose materials such as stone and gravel shall have edge
restraint to minimize the lateral migration of the material. The restraint shall be durable
material, such as pressure treated wood, composite lumber, concrete, granite or brick curbing
or metal.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
DWELLING
Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping
place of one or more persons, except a mobile home and as otherwise provided herein.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY
A detached building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters
exclusively for one family or one household, with direct access from the outside and
further provided with separate cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities for the exclusive
use of the occupants of the unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
A building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for two families
or two households, with direct access from the outside for each and further provided with
separate cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants
of each. The separation of units can be either horizontal or vertical.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY
A building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than
two families or more than two households, with direct access from the outside or through
a common hall and further provided with separate cooking, sleeping and bathroom
facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof. This definition includes rental
facilities, condominiums and cooperatives.
DWELLING, ELDERLY HOUSING
A building occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for up to 50
households containing no more than two persons in each living quarter. Each unit is to be
occupied or intended for occupancy by at least one person aged 62 or older.
[Added 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693]
ESSENTIAL SERVICE
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
or other transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stations, telephone lines,
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories therewith reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health, safety or general welfare.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building or part of a main building used principally for the storage of motor
vehicles as an accessory use, when the storage space does not exceed that permitted in the
schedule.[1]
GARAGE, PUBLIC
A building or part thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, care or repair of
motor vehicles for profit, including any sale of motor vehicle accessories.
GASOLINE STATION
Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other
motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including any sale of motor
vehicle accessories, and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 325/392
polishing, greasing, washing or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles or making
minor repairs.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of a floor or several floors of a building measured
between the inside face of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two
dwelling units and having a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 1/2 feet. Any cellar, basement,
garage space, porch or breezeway is not to be included as habitable floor area.
HALF STORY
The vertical distance between a floor and the roof with a ceiling height of not less than 7 1/2
feet for no more than 1/3 of the floor area of the next floor below that is accessed by a fixed
stairway and shall have an egress window which is acceptable to the Construction Official.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING
The vertical distance as measured by the crown of the road of the improved street on which it
fronts at the midpoint of the lot to the highest point of the structure, excluding such
appurtenances as outlined in § 390-13. On a corner lot, the building height shall be measured
from that street which is to be regarded as the front of the building.
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 728; 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
HOTEL and MOTEL
A building containing a minimum of 50 lodging units for transients. Each lodging unit shall
contain less than 300 square feet, including bathroom and closet space.
HUMAN REMAINS or REMAINS
The body of a deceased person or the dismembered part of a body of a living person, and
includes cremated remains.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
A surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. Such surfaces include but are not limited to buildings, driveways
(including gravel), streets, parking lots, swimming pools, tennis courts, concrete pavers, brick
pavers and any other structures that meet the above definition.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
INTERMENT
The lawful disposition of human remains by burial, entombment or inurnment.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
JUNKYARD
The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any lot for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
LOT
Includes the word "plot" and is a piece, parcel, tract or plot of land occupied or to be occupied
by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required
under the provisions of this chapter, and having not less than the minimum area required by
this chapter for a lot in the zone in which such lot is situated and having the required frontage
on a street.
LOT AREA
The computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 326/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting or intercepting
streets, when the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 150°.
LOT DEPTH
A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general
direction of its side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE
The length of the front lot line.
LOT LINE
A line of record dividing one lot from another.
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line separating the lot from the street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street
is called a side street lot line.
LOT WIDTH
The distance between the side lines of a lot, measured at its setback line.
MAUSOLEUM
A permanent structure or building used for the entombment of human remains in crypts,
vaults or niches. A public mausoleum shall be distinguished from a private mausoleum in that
it is constructed by or for a cemetery company on lands owned exclusively by it, and not by a
lot owner, for the sale to the general public of crypts or niches therein for interment purposes.
A private mausoleum is one which is constructed by or for a lot owner on interment space
owned by him in the cemetery for the interment of such persons as he may have the right to
designate. A private mausoleum shall not exceed an area of 500 square feet.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
MINOR SITE PLAN
A development plan of one or more lots which proposes new development within the scope of
development specifically permitted by ordinance, does not involve planned development, any
new street or extension of an off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, and contains the information required pursuant to § 390-10B.
[Added 8-2-1984 by Ord. No. 490]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING
A building which in its design or location upon a lot does not conform to the regulations of this
chapter for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A lot of record existing at the date of the passage of this chapter which does not have the
minimum width or depth or contain the minimum area for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use of a building or of land that does not conform to the regulations of the ordinance for the
zone in which it is located.
NURSING HOME or NURSING FACILITY
A facility that is licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services to provide health
care, under medical supervision, and continuous nursing care for 24 or more consecutive
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 327/392
hours to two or more patients who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a
hospital provides and who, because of their physical or mental condition, require continuous
nursing care and services above the level of room and board.
[Added 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693; amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
PARKS and PLAYGROUNDS
Those municipally owned lands which the Mayor and Council have dedicated to the public
and which may be used by the public for their physical and mental recreation, including any
activity sponsored by a nonprofit corporation or association which has as its objectives the
promotion of the health, safety, needs and personal welfare of the community.
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE STRUCTURES
Any container, storage unit, shed-like container, fabric “tent-like” or other portable structure
that can or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind and which is located for
such purposes outside an enclosed building other than an accessory building or shed
complying with all building codes and land use requirements.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
The office of a member of a recognized profession such as that of a physician, dentist, lawyer,
engineer, architect and other professions requiring a like amount of education and training.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which includes but is not limited to boats, travel trailers, truck campers, camping
trailers and motor homes.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA or SATELLITE ANTENNA
A parabolic reflector antenna which is designed for the purpose of receiving signals from
and/or transmitting signals to a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.
[Added 10-16-1986 by Ord. No. 530]
SETBACK LINE
A line within any lot, parallel to any street line, between which it and the street line no building
or portion thereof may be erected.
SHOPPING CENTER
Any commercial development consisting of a group of permitted principal uses developed as
a single entity and containing at least 50,000 square feet of floor area and at least five acres
of land area.
SIGN
Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject
thereof to the attention of others, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any public,
quasi-public, civic, charitable or religious group.
SIGN, ADVERTISING
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted,
sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
SIGN, BILLBOARD
Includes any sign in excess of 10 square feet used to identify the product made or the activity
being pursued by any individual, business, service, commercial or industrial enterprise for the
purpose of apprising the public of the location of such enterprise and/or type of activity in
which it is engaged.
SIGN, BUSINESS
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 328/392
A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity,
service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF
The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign
and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such
perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such
sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
STORY
The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor
surfaces, and for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling
joists, or where there is no ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. "Story" is defined as habitable
space and does not include a ground-floor garage or storage area that is less than seven feet
11 inches.
[Amended 9-4-2014 by Ord. No. 934]
STREETS
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an
existing state, county or local municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat
heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat
duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of
a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
lands between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines.
STRUCTURE
An assembly of materials forming construction for occupancy or use, including, among others,
buildings, stadiums, gospel and circus tents, reviewing stands, grandstands, platforms,
staging and observation towers, radio towers, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open
sheds, decks, open and covered porches, coal bins, shelters, fences, helicopter landing pads
and signs.
[Amended 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597; 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
TRAILER or CAMP CAR
Any vehicle used or intended for the use as a conveyance upon the public streets or
highways, whether self-propelled or non-self-propelled, so designed, constructed and
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such a manner as to permit the
occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons and
having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be integral with
or portable by said trailer or camp car.
USED CAR LOT
Any place out of doors where two or more motor vehicles in operating condition are displayed
or offered for sale.
YARD
An open space, as may be required by this chapter, of uniform width or depth on the same lot
with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the principal building or
group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as herein permitted.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and
the nearest line of the building. The depth of the front yard shall be measured at right angles
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 329/392
[1]
[2]
to the front line. This yard is considered to be that which fronts on a public street and upon
which the postal address is commonly fixed.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and
the nearest line of the building. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles to
the rear building line from a point in the center of the rear building line to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE
An open, unoccupied space between the side lines of the lot and the nearest line of the
building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of a side yard shall be
measured at right angles to the side lines of the lot.[2]
Editor's Note: See Schedule II, Bulk and Coverage Controls, included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The definition of "Zoning Board," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725.
Article III. Establishment of Zones
§ 390-5. Designation of zones.
[Amended 1-20-1977 by Ord. No. 396; 5-15-1980 by Ord. No. 443; 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693; 2-18-
2016 by Ord. No. 962; 4-21-2016 by Ord. No. 963; 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1017; 2-20-2020 by Ord. No.
1018]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Oceanport is hereby divided into the following classes
of zones:
R-1 Residential Single-Family
R-2 Residential Single-Family
R-3 Residential Single-Family
R-4 Residential Single-Family
R-5 Residential Single-Family and Two-Family
R-7.5 Residential Single-Family
R-M Residential Multifamily
RMO Residential Multiple-Family Development (fee-simple owner)
RMW Residential Multiple-Family Waterfront
B-1 Professional and Office
B-2 General and Recreational Commercial
V-C Village Center (retail commercial)
VC-AH Village Center-Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone
I Industrial
MPAR-AH Monmouth Park Age-Restricted Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone
§ 390-6. Zoning Map.
[Amended 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693; 2-18-2016 by Ord. No. 962; 4-21-2016 by Ord. No. 963]
The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on the Zoning Map of the Borough
of Oceanport dated September 11, 1996, and revised March 2, 2016, which is attached hereto and is
hereby made a part of this chapter.[1] Said Map or Maps and all notations, references and designations
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 330/392
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
shown thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the same were all fully described and set
forth herein.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 390-7. Interpretation of boundaries.
Designation of zone boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the
center lines of streets; the center lines of railroad rights-of-way; existing lot lines; the center lines
of rivers, streams and other waterways; and municipal boundary lines. Where a district boundary
line does not follow such a line, its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific
dimension expressing the distance in feet from a street center line or other boundary line as
indicated.
Determination of doubtful lines. In case of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of
any zone boundary line, the determination thereof shall lie with the Planning Board as hereafter
provided.
Article IV. General Regulations
§ 390-8. Schedules of regulations.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth in the
attached schedules, which are supplemented by other sections of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The schedules of regulations are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 390-9. Application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or
enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used or intended to be used, for any
purposes or in any manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted
in the district in which such building or land is located.
No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located.
No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall
any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity with the yard, lot area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the
district in which such building or open space is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a variance
shall not be required for the construction of a patio, deck, porch or building addition which does
not further encroach upon the existing nonconformity; provided, however, that a variance shall be
required for any such addition which would increase the bulk lot coverage beyond that which is
permissible under the existing ordinance.
[Amended 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597]
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for a building on any other lot.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 331/392
E.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
[1]
(l)
(1)
B.
In the event that any application for construction of a handicap ramp shall require variance
approval, the Construction Official may issue a temporary building permit, which shall be valid for
a period not exceeding six months from the date of issue. If the property owner shall fail to obtain
final variance approval prior to the expiration of such temporary building permit, the Construction
Official shall compel the removal of such handicap ramp.
[Added 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597]
§ 390-10. Site plan approval.
Application. Upon application for a building permit for the construction of any new building or
structure of a permanent nature, excluding detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings and
accessory buildings, the Construction Official shall forward, within 10 days, such application and
14 copies of supporting documentation to the Planning Board for its review and approval of the
site development plan and to the Borough Engineer for his comment. Moreover, any changes,
conversions or alterations in use to existing structures are subject to the provisions of this section.
[Amended 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597; 7-18-1991 by Ord. No. 615; 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Supporting documentation.
Fourteen sets of plot plans prepared by a licensed engineer and bearing his seal shall be filed
with the Planning Board, together with such application fee as may be set by resolution of the
governing body. Said plot plan shall show in detail the following:
[Amended 7-18-1991 by Ord. No. 615; 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Existing and proposed contour lines at intervals of one foot.
Existing and proposed sewer and storm drainage facilities.
Sources of water supply.
A statement from the Two Rivers Water Reclamation Authority that effluent will be
accepted and plans are adequate.
[Amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
The location and arrangement of grouping of buildings and their proposed use.
The location and arrangement of entrances and exits for trucks and automobile traffic
and of the roads or driveways to building service entrances and to parking areas,
respectively.
The location and arrangement of all pedestrian walks along main thoroughfares, from
parking areas to buildings and around or in front of and between buildings.
The location and arrangement of all landscaping along the boundaries of the zone,
around the buildings and in the parking areas.
The location of, arrangement and specifications for all exterior lighting facilities and
electric signs.
Parking area layouts, location and arrangement.
The location and arrangement of all signs.
A development schedule indicating:
Approximate date when construction can be expected to begin.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 332/392
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Stages of construction and the approximate date when construction of each stage
can be expected to begin.
Anticipated rate of development.
Approximate dates when the development of each of the stages will be completed.
Area and location of open space that will be provided at each stage.
Any changes or revisions made from the original plot shall be listed with the date of said
changes.
The applicant shall notify all property owners within 200 feet of the subject premises by
written notice, which notice shall state the time and place for the public hearing by the
Planning Board. Such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the Planning Board and shall
be served upon such property owners personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
at least 10 days prior to said meeting. The applicant shall supply, at the time of said hearing,
an affidavit of service, setting forth the names and addresses of all property owners served
with notice, together with a copy of the notice served.
Site plan approval shall only be effective for a term of one year and, unless a building permit
is obtained within that time period, site plan approval shall lapse, and the Construction Official
shall not issue a building permit unless new site plan approval has been obtained. No building
permit for a new structure or for any addition to or alteration of an existing structure that is
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be issued by the Construction Official until the completion of all required site
improvements has been certified to the Construction Official by the Planning Board; provided,
however, that the applicant may, in lieu of completing such improvements prior to the granting
of such building permit, file with the Borough Treasurer a performance guaranty sufficient in
amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof that
involve all public roads, facilities and structures intended to become the property of the
Borough of Oceanport or intended to be maintained by same and in an amount to cover the
cost of correcting drainage or erosion problems, including the silt of brooks or watercourses,
that may occur if the applicant fails to complete the project. Such performance guaranty shall
be in the form of cash, bond or other acceptable security as determined by the Planning
Board; provided, however, that a portion of the guaranty required equal to 1 1/2 of the cost of
correcting possible drainage or erosion problems shall be in the form of a certified check
drawn on a bank and payable to the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey. The amount of the
performance guaranty shall be fixed by the Planning Board and shall be equal to the cost of
improvements as estimated by the Borough Engineer.
Prior to the installation of any site improvement shown on a site plan, a cash guaranty shall
be paid to the Borough of Oceanport to cover the cost of inspection by the Borough Engineer
of the installation of the required site improvements. Such guaranty shall be in the form of a
certified check drawn on a bank and payable to the Borough of Oceanport, New Jersey. The
amount of such guaranty shall be equal to 5% of the cost of installing all required site
improvements as estimated by the Borough Engineer.
Upon the satisfactory completion of the improvements, the Borough Engineer shall certify
compliance with the approved site plan to the Planning Board.
Any portion of said guaranty that is not required to cover the cost of inspection by the
Borough Engineer shall be refunded to the applicant upon completion of the improvements.
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the Construction Official unless and until all
of the conditions placed by the Planning Board on the site plan approval shall first have been
met. In the event any of said conditions are of such a nature that their accomplishment must
be delayed because of weather conditions or other extenuating circumstances, the Planning
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 333/392
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(b)
(c)
[a]
[b]
[c]
[1]
(d)
(9)
Board may grant an extension of time for their completion on posting by the applicant of a
certified check or bond. Said bond or certified check is to be in an amount which is
determined by the Borough Engineer to be sufficient to accomplish the work, with sureties
acceptable to the Planning Board, and to be deposited with the Borough Treasurer. The
Construction Official shall issue a temporary certificate of occupancy upon notification from
the Borough Treasurer that the requisite certified check or bond has been posted. Upon
completion of the work, either by the applicant or, in the event of his default, by the Planning
Board, a permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
Environmental impact statement.
[Added 8-15-2002 by Ord. No. 754A]
In addition to the other conditions and requirements contained in this section, any
application for site plan approval involving the following uses shall be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement, without which an application shall not be deemed
complete for purposes of review:
Major subdivisions.
When the project is classified as a "planned development."
Commercial and industrial developments.
For any lot or parcel of land which exceeds five acres in size.
Definition. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
A written description and analysis of all possible direct and indirect effects a project
will have upon the project site and upon surrounding areas, with particular
references to the effects of the project upon the public health, welfare and safety, the
protection of public and private property, and the preservation and enhancement of
natural resources.
Purpose. The purpose of providing an environmental impact statement is to allow the
Planning Board to assess impacts of the proposed project upon the environment,
including physical, social and aesthetic considerations, both natural and man-made,
which affect the quality of life. Particular emphasis should be made on assessing the
impact upon surface water and groundwater, air resources, pollution of all kinds, waste
disposal, drainage, wetlands, floodplains, landscapes and waterfront.
Contents. The environmental impact statement shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
Plan and description of development.
A project description, complete with maps and drawings, and also by narrative
which specifies what is to be done and how it is to be done during construction
and after construction is completed.
The project description shall include a key map showing the location of the
project, Tax Map and physical features within 500 feet of the project site.
The information shall include, but not be limited to, existing and proposed
contours, grading, buildings, roads, paved areas and utility lines and also
adjacent watercourses, flood hazard boundaries and zoning information. The
information and technical data shall be adequate to permit a careful assessment
of the environmental impact of the project.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 334/392
[i]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[xvi]
[xvii]
[xviii]
[xix]
[xx]
[xxi]
[xxii]
[a]
[b]
[2]
[a]
[3]
Inventory of existing environmental conditions.
An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project site and in the
immediate area to the site which is affected by the plan of development
includes:
Sewer facilities.
Water supply.
Water quality.
Surface and subsurface hydrology.
Air quality.
Traffic volume, noise and flow.
Lighting conditions and levels.
Noise.
Demography.
Geology.
Soils and soil properties, including capabilities and limitations.
Topography.
Slopes.
Vegetation.
Regulated wetlands.
Wildlife and wildlife habitats.
Watercourses.
Waterfront/shoreline features.
Historical sites and archeological resources.
History, including past or present use that might have involved subsurface
disposal of waste and toxic or hazardous materials.
Flood and flood hazard areas.
Elevation at two-foot contours.
Where applicable, quality standards shall be described with reference to those
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) and federal agencies.
Assessment of the anticipated impact of the project:
An assessment of the environmental impact of the project shall be stated,
supported by environmental data. The assessment shall include an analysis of
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 335/392
[i]
[ii]
[A]
[B]
[C]
[D]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[ix]
[x]
[b]
the public costs, such as but not limited to schools, roads, police protection, fire
protection, waste disposal, water supply, sewerage and other similar direct and
indirect costs of the project, including the effects on recreational facilities, open
space and other similar municipal services.
Assessment data shall specifically include the following:
Sewerage facilities. A showing that sewage can be disposed of through
public facilities of adequate capacity and to preclude water pollution. If onsite
subsurface disposal is proposed, data on underlying water table, soil
analysis, soil stratigraphy, percolation tests for each sewage disposal site,
topography, depth of aquifers, depth and type of construction of all wells
within 500 feet, and any other pertinent data or compliance with all federal,
state and local sewerage and health regulations shall be provided.
Water supply. A showing that an adequate water supply is available.
Drainage. A showing that storm runoff from the site is so controlled that onsite
and off-site erosion is neither caused nor worsened and that potential
downstream flooding is not increased. Information provided shall show:
Volume and peak flows of stormwater runoff expected from the existing
site and to be generated by new improvements.
Data/mapping on existing on-site landscaping, vegetation and tree and
ground cover compared with that proposed.
Changes in runoff rates and volume and the time of concentration to be
caused by changes in land use.
Plans for disposition of stormwater, whether by retention on site or by
means of channeling so as to protect downstream property.
Stream encroachments. A stream encroachment permit is required from the
NJDEP for fill or diversion of a water channel, alteration of a stream, or
repair or construction of a bridge, culvert, pipeline or cable crossing.
Floor plans. Description of protection against flood damages and proposed
elevations.
Air quality. A statement of anticipated effects on air quality due to vehicular
traffic and on-site activities such as heating, incineration and any
processing of materials.
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A statement of projected effects of
anticipated traffic on internal, access, bordering and regional roadways.
Noise. A statement of anticipated effects on noise levels, magnitudes and
characteristics related to on-site activities and proposed methods of control.
The applicant must also list neighboring properties that will be affected by
the noise.
Artificial light. A statement of anticipated effects of light levels, magnitudes
and characteristics related to on-site activities and proposed methods of
control.
Demography. A statement of the on-site and off-site effects on the utilization
of public facilities due to the changes in population density and
demographics.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 336/392
[xi]
[xii]
[xiii]
[xiv]
[xv]
[a]
[b]
[4]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(e)
Solid and hazardous wastes. A statement of the type, amount and
anticipated methods of disposal. A list of all licenses, permits and other
approvals required by municipal, county, state or federal law shall be
provided.
Listing of all unavoidable adverse impacts. A listing and evaluation of
adverse impacts and damages to natural resources which cannot be
avoided, with particular emphasis upon, but not limited to, air or water
pollution, increased noise, damage to vegetative and wildlife systems,
changes to waterfront and waterfront views, displacement of people and
businesses, increase in sedimentation and siltation, increase in municipal
services and consequences to municipal tax structure. Off-site impacts
shall also be stated and evaluated.
Steps to minimize and mitigate environmental damage. A description of
steps to be taken to minimize and mitigate adverse environmental impacts
during construction and operation, both at the project site and in the
affected surroundings. Such description shall include necessary maps,
schedules, renderings and other explanatory data as may be needed to
clarify and explain the actions to be taken.
Alternatives. A statement of alternatives to the proposed project which
might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects of the
proposed project. The statements should include the reasons for the
acceptability or nonacceptability of each alternative.
Reference to federal, state or local statutes or regulations. Whenever
possible, the above-referenced assessment shall describe anticipated
impacts with reference to standards as may have been determined by
federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations.
Submission requirements:
Six complete copies of the environmental impact statement, including all maps,
drawings, narratives and technical data, shall be submitted to the Planning
Board.
Any environmental impact statement shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board 30 days prior to the hearing date of the subdivision or site plan.
Evaluation procedure.
Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall forward the
environmental impact statement to the Environmental Commission and to any other
Borough agency that the Planning Board may desire for consultation.
The Environmental Commission and other Borough agencies shall review the
applicant's environmental impact statement and shall report its findings and
comments within 25 days of the date submitted to the Planning Board.
The Planning Board and/or Environmental Commission may require the opinions of
experts in their review of the environmental impact statement. The Planning Board
and/or Environmental Commission may hire an expert consultant to assist them in
the evaluation of the submitted information by the applicant.
Fees for the cost of such a consultant described in Subsection B(9)(e)[3] above shall
be paid by the applicant.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 337/392
(f)
(g)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
Conditions of approval. As a condition of approval of the application, the Planning Board
may require that steps be taken to minimize the adverse environmental impact during
and after construction, and no construction permit or certificates of occupancy, as the
case may be, shall be issued until all such requirements have been satisfied. The
Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive all or any portion of the requirements for an
environmental impact statement whenever either the nature of the application or the
physical characteristics of the project site or the surrounding area would warrant such
waiver.
Qualifications of preparer. The environmental impact statement shall be prepared by a
person or firm having expertise in the field by virtue of experience and/or education. Such
person or firm may be required to submit his/her qualifications to the Planning Board at
its discretion. The applicant shall choose the person or firm to prepare the environmental
impact statement.
Criteria for review.
Planning Board review hereunder shall be for the purpose of determining whether the
standards and requirements imposed by this section and this chapter are met and, further,
whether the requirements of all other local, state or federal laws and agencies have been
satisfied.
In addition, the Planning Board shall consider the following items and their impact on adjacent
uses and on the immediate neighborhood:
Traffic.
Access and egress.
Land use.
Parking.
Utilities.
Aesthetics.
Building orientation.
The Planning Board shall forward a copy of the plot plan and such other details of the
application as may be deemed to be necessary to both the Shade Tree Committee and the
Environmental Commission with a request that they promptly report their recommendations or
comments in writing to the Planning Board.
[Added 7-18-1991 by Ord. No. 615]
Approval prior to construction.
Plans as submitted must be reviewed by the Planning Board and receive its approval before
the issuance of building permits and any necessary licenses for the erection, construction,
operation or maintenance of any building, buildings or business in the zone. Findings by the
Planning Board shall be completed within 180 days after receipt of a plan.
If the Planning Board does not present its findings within 180 days, then the site plan shall be
considered approved.
Minor site plan.
[Added 8-2-1984 by Ord. No. 490]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 338/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
If the Planning Board or a committee of the Board appointed by the Chairman finds that the
application for site plan approval conforms to the definition of "minor site plan," as set forth in
§ 390-4B of this chapter, then the Planning Board may waive all notice and public hearing
requirements which would otherwise be applicable pursuant to ordinance in connection with
an application for site plan approval before the Planning Board. Minor site plan approval shall
be deemed to be final approval of the minor site plan by the Board.
Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date of submission
of a complete application to the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute minor site plan approval, and a certificate of an
appropriate officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of
the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval otherwise required.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions upon which minor site plan
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor
site plan approvals.
Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection E, an application for minor site plan approval
shall conform in all respects and shall be reviewed under the same standards as those set
forth in § 390-10 regarding application for site plan approval.
Planning Board action. When the Planning Board's action is:
Approval, it shall forward two sets of material received, together with its letter of approval, to
the Borough Construction Official for his use.
Disapproval, it shall return two sets of said material to the applicant, together with its letter of
explanation and recommendations for resubmission.
§ 390-11. Waiver of site plan approval.
[Added 8-18-1988 by Ord. No. 575; amended 2-2-1989 by Ord. No. 583]
The requirement for the submission of a site plan for review and approval may be waived if the
application or proposed development:
Involves the construction of minor improvements, such as, but not limited to, a new roof, new
siding or similar activity;
Does not significantly affect existing traffic circulation, drainage, building arrangements,
landscaping, buffering, lighting or other considerations of site plan review; and
Does not conflict with the terms, provisions or conditions of any site plan previously approved
for the same premises.
An application for a waiver of site plan approval shall be filed initially with the Construction Official,
who shall accept such application without a fee or other charge. If the Construction Official is
satisfied that a waiver may be properly granted in accordance with this section, he shall cause to
be issued all permits and approvals as may be required by the proposed improvement upon the
payment of such fees as may be required by law. Otherwise, the Construction Official shall issue
forthwith a letter of denial.
Any applicant who has been denied a waiver of site plan approval by the Construction Official may
appeal such denial to the Planning Board within 30 days of the date of such denial. The Planning
Board shall only grant such a waiver if it finds, on the basis of an on-site inspection and any other
documentation presented, that the proposed development satisfies the criteria set forth in
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 339/392
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Subsection A of this section and will not detrimentally affect or impair considerations of sound
planning. Application for a waiver of site plan approval shall be submitted in triplicate to the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application, as in the case of an application for site plan approval, and shall act on the application
for a waiver at its meeting during which it holds the public hearing or within such additional time as
may be agreeable to the applicant. Any waiver of site approval shall be valid for the same period
of time as final approval of a site plan would have been valid.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article V. Supplementary Lot Regulations
§ 390-12. Lot regulations.
Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the building setback line. Where a single
lot under individual ownership extends from one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street,
either street may be deemed the street upon which the property fronts.
Visibility at intersections. At the intersection or interception of two or more streets, no hedge, fence
or wall higher than 2 1/2 feet above gutter grade, nor any obstruction to vision other than a post or
tree not exceeding one foot in diameter, shall be permitted on any lot within the triangular area
formed by two intersecting gutter lines bounding said lot, or the projection of such lines, and by a
line connecting a point on each gutter line located 25 feet from the intersection of the street line.
Visibility on horizontal curves. On any street containing a horizontal curve, the sight distance along
any chord of less than 200 feet shall be visually clear, that is, the area formed by such a chord and
the horizontal curve shall be kept clear of all structures and vegetation exceeding a height of 2 1/2
feet above the gutter grade.
§ 390-13. Height regulations.
Permitted exceptions. Chimneys; flagpoles; fire towers; steeples; tanks; water towers; hotel and motel
ornamental towers or spires; communications, radio or television towers, masts and aerials; or
necessary mechanical appurtenances and permanent and partially enclosed grandstand facilities may
be erected in excess of the height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter; provided, however,
that a setback of one foot from all front, side and rear lot lines shall be provided for each additional two
feet of height of such structures in excess of the established maximum height limitations as established
in this chapter. Furthermore, no tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant purposes. No
sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or
attached to any chimney, tower, tank or other structure which extends above the maximum height
limitations.
§ 390-14. Yard exceptions.
General.
Required yards shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projection of
parapets, windowsills, doorposts, rainwater leaders and ornamental fixtures which may not
project more than six inches into such yards.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the projection of a cornice over any required yard.
Chimneys or flues may be erected within a rear yard or side yard, provided that they do not
exceed 20 square feet in aggregate external area.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 340/392
(4)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
In residence districts, an open porch one story in height can project not more than six feet into
the front yard and not more than five feet into the side yard but in no instance nearer than 10
feet to a side lot line and 24 feet to the front lot line (except R-M Districts).
Front yard. In residence districts, no principal building shall be nearer to the street line of any
street than the average alignment of the existing principal buildings within 200 feet of each side of
the lot within the same block.
Side yard of a corner lot. The side street setback lines of any corner lot platted on the Borough's
Tax Maps as the lot existed at the time of adoption of this chapter, and of any corner lot shown on
any subdivision plat which received final approval prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall not be
less than 1/2 of the depth of the minimum front yard required on any adjoining lot fronting on a
side street. Any corner lot delineated by subdivision after the adoption of this chapter shall provide
a side street setback line which shall not be less than the minimum front yard required on any
adjoining lot fronting on a side street.
Waterfront properties. In residence districts, no principal building shall be nearer to the natural
waterline than the average alignment of the existing principal buildings within 200 feet of each side
of the lot within the same block. This shall not apply in the RMW District.
[Amended 2-18-2016 by Ord. No. 962]
§ 390-15. Number of buildings restricted.
[Amended 1-20-1977 by Ord. No. 396; 2-18-2016 by Ord. No. 962]
There shall be not more than one principal dwelling on each residential zone lot in any R District
except in the R-M District, RMO District, RMW District, and the R-5 District (two-family dwellings).
§ 390-16. Landscaping.
Enclosed uses. Any use within a completely enclosed building required by this chapter to be
landscaped in accordance with this section shall provide a visual screen such as, but not limited
to, a nontransparent fence, a minimum of four feet high, or dense cover consisting of evergreen or
evergreen-type hedges or shrubs, spaced at intervals of not more than six feet, located and
maintained in good condition within 10 feet of the property line.
Unenclosed uses. Any use which is not constructed within a completely enclosed building, such as
storage yards and areas for commercial vehicles and equipment, lumberyards and building
materials yards, and any other areas associated with the principal permitted use or accessory use,
shall be entirely enclosed by a fence and/or hedge no more than 40% open, a minimum of six feet
high. Any hedge shall be evergreen shrubs six feet high, spaced at intervals of not more than six
feet, located and maintained in good condition within 10 feet of the property line. This section shall
not apply to nurseries and the display-for-sale purposes of new or used cars, trucks, trailers and/or
boats, except when abutting an R Zone.
Maintenance. Any fencing or landscaping installed in accordance with this section shall be
maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of this section. Failure to maintain fencing or to
replace dead or diseased landscaping shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 390-17. Accessory structures.
Attached accessory structures in R Districts. When an accessory structure is attached to the
principal building, it shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter
applicable to the principal building.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 341/392
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
Erection of accessory structure. No accessory structure is to be erected prior to the completion of
the principal building.
Location of accessory structure. No accessory structures are permitted in the front yard except:
[Amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Flagpoles.
Sheds no greater than 10 feet by 12 feet by 10 feet that meet the setbacks, for properties
directly on the waterfront.
Height of accessory building. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet or one story in height.
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 728]
Alternative energy sources, such as wind turbines and solar panels are not permitted.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Improvements shall not be placed or constructed within the Borough’s right-of-way, i.e., sprinkler
heads, decorative mailbox columns, pillars, fencing and any curbing, specialty or otherwise, such
as Belgian block, not part of an approved development plan, a Borough road-improvement
program or a right-of-way not having curbing without written permission from the Borough Council.
Such items that are placed in the Borough rights-of-way shall not be the responsibility of the
Borough should they be damaged, whether it be by snow plowing or otherwise.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Article VI. Supplementary Use Regulations
§ 390-18. Special exceptions.
[Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 725]
Special exception uses, as enumerated in Schedule I,[1] shall be permitted only upon authorization by
the Planning Board, provided that such uses shall be found by the Planning Board to comply with the
following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this chapter. Applications for
special exception uses shall be made upon forms provided by the Zoning Officer.
That the use is a permitted special use as set forth in Schedule I hereof.
That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety,
welfare and convenience will be protected.
That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood
where it is to be located.
That the use will be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the
zone district where it is to be located.
That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required herein.
That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided and ingress and egress is so designed as
to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.
That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where it is located.
Editor's Note: Schedule I, Permitted Land Uses, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 390-19. Recreational uses.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 342/392
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
B.
Indoor recreational uses.
Such uses shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure and include amusement
centers, bowling alleys, skating rinks, movie theaters and similar places of amusement.
There shall be no offensive noise or vibration. Such elements may be emitted only in
accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.
No bowling alley or roller-skating rink shall be maintained or operated within 300 feet of an
entrance or exit of a public or private school, public library, church, hospital, children's or old
people's home or other similar public or semipublic institution.
Outdoor recreational uses.
Such uses shall include golf courses, ice skating rinks, swimming pools, tennis courts and
horse racing tracks.
In any district where permitted, no building shall be located within 200 feet of any boundary of
a residential zone.
In any district where permitted, there may be permitted retail sales which are clearly
secondary to the principal use.
Unenclosed recreational facilities shall be located not less than 200 feet from any boundary of
a residential zone, except where greater distances are otherwise required herein, and shall be
effectively screened from adjoining residential use.
Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away or shielded from adjoining residential
properties in such a way as not to disturb the occupants thereof.
No public address system shall be permitted which is audible at any property line between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
All commercial recreational uses shall provide off-street parking facilities as specified in § 390-
22B.
§ 390-20. Community facility uses.
Essential services, enclosed. Such uses include electric substations, transformers, switches and
auxiliary apparatus serving a distribution area, and water pumping stations except sewer pumping
stations. Such uses shall be subject to the following regulations:
Such facility shall not be located in a residential zone.
The location, design and operation of such facilities shall not adversely affect the character of
the surrounding area.
Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided on the premises and
shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of § 390-16.
Noise emitted from electric substations shall not be greater than permitted in accordance with
the performance standards set forth in § 390-35C.
Fire stations and police stations. Such facilities shall be permitted in all R Districts, provided that:
Such facility, in the opinion of the governing body, is necessary to serve the surrounding
residential area where it is not possible to serve such area from a facility located in a B-1 or
less restrictive district.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 343/392
(2)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
A.
Such facility shall be located on a major traffic street, unless no other site is available, and
shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.
Private schools and similar institutions of learning. All private schools and other similar private
institutions of learning shall occupy an area of no less than that required in the following schedule:
[Amended 9-5-1996 by Ord. No. 683]
Grades Served School Site
Nursery school/day-care center 2 acres, plus 500 square feet additional for each
child over a total of 20
K through 6 5 acres, plus 1 additional acre for each 100 pupils
7 through 12 15 acres, plus 1 additional acre for each 100 pupils
9 through 12 25 acres, plus 1 additional acre for each 100 pupils
§ 390-21. Commercial and industrial uses.
General. Uses in nonresidential districts when abutting a residence district or a waterway shall be
screened from such districts or waterway in accordance with § 390-16.
Industrial establishments. In addition to meeting the minimum yard and lot coverage requirements,
uses in the I District shall be subject to the following regulations:
The side or rear yard setback from the nearest property line for accessory buildings shall be
waived in such cases as the side or rear property line abuts a railroad right-of-way or siding.
No building, storage area or parking or loading area shall be located within 100 feet of the
boundary of a residential zone. Ingress and egress to each lot shall be provided by not more
than two driveways, each not less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet in width. No driveway
shall be located within 200 feet of the intersection of two public streets.
[Amended 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597]
Each use located in this zone shall provide truck loading and unloading facilities on the same
lot and in other than the front yard or setback area so as to permit the transfer of goods in
other than a public street.
All industrial activities or processes shall take place within an enclosed building. Incidental
storage shall be effectively screened from any public street or adjacent residential zones by
fencing or landscaping.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit or the change of type of manufacturing in this zone,
the applicant shall submit evidence to the Construction Official that the proposed industrial
operation complies in all respects with the regulations and standards of the various agencies
of the State of New Jersey.
All buildings in this zone shall be connected to a source of public water supply by means of a
service line having a minimum inside diameter of six inches, and adequate sewage disposal
shall be provided, subject to the approval of the state and local Boards of Health.
§ 390-22. Automotive uses.
Gasoline stations, parking areas and garages.
Location of exits and entrances. No gasoline filling station, commercial parking area or garage
for 10 or more motor vehicles shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 200 feet of a
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 344/392
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
school, public playground, church, hospital or institution for dependents or children. Such
access shall be not closer to the intersection of any two streets than 50 feet.
Location of oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts. No outdoor hydraulic or mechanical lifts or oil
drainage or mechanic pits shall be permitted.
Outdoor storage areas. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a solid fence or a
solid wall or other suitable visual screen adequate to control the view of such facilities and the
contents thereof from adjacent property in conformance with the provisions as established in
§ 390-16.
Off-street parking. In all districts, in connection with every manufacturing, business, institutional,
recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided at the time any new building or
structure is erected, enlarged or increased off-street parking spaces for automobiles in
accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
Number of parking spaces required.
The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as set forth in Table 1. The use
of "paper" streets as parking areas to meet the required parking shall be prohibited.
In the case of any building, structure or premises which is not specifically mentioned
herein, the Planning Board shall determine the amount of off-street parking required.
Size. Each off-street parking space shall have a minimum area of 180 square feet with a
minimum width of nine feet, exclusive of shape and condition. Except in the case of dwellings,
no parking area provided hereunder shall be established for less than three spaces. In
residential districts, the accumulative area devoted to access and parking shall not exceed
15% of the total lot area.
Access. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces.
Access drives or driveways should be no less than 15 feet wide for ingress or egress and 25
feet wide for both ingress and egress. No driveway or access drive should be closer than 50
feet to any street intersection.
Size of aisles. Aisles providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall have a width of
not less than 20 feet for parking stalls placed at an angle of from 61° to 90° and not less than
18 feet for parking stalls placed at an angle of 60° or less. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles serving parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°.
Location. All permitted and required accessory off-street parking and loading spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be located on the same lot as the use to which such spaces are accessory.
Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are accessory.
Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking and loading areas for four or more vehicles
shall be effectively screened by a fence or hedge on the side or sides adjoining or abutting an
R District.
Minimum distances and setbacks. Off-street parking and loading facilities for four or more
spaces in a B, V-C or I District shall not be closer than 10 feet to an R District or any street
right-of-way line, nor located within the minimum setback area.
[Amended 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693]
Surfacing. Any off-street parking or loading area for four or more spaces shall be surfaced
with an asphaltic or portland cement pavement or similar durable and dustless surface. All
areas shall be marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage
of self-propelled vehicles.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 345/392
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
D.
Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises.
Drainage. Any off-street parking and loading area shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water without detriment to surrounding uses.
No motor vehicle shall be parked on any premises in any zone except within a garage or on
an improved driveway.
Commercial vehicles, except for one pickup or panel truck with up to a three-fourths-ton
capacity rating, parked in a residential zone shall be kept in an enclosed garage, except when
engaged in delivery or pickup.
Parking for churches, synagogues and houses of worship. The number of required off-street
parking spaces may be eliminated or reduced if there exists, within 500 feet of the church,
synagogue or house of worship, public or private parking lots containing a sufficient number of offstreet
parking spaces to satisfy the requirements of Table 1. The church, synagogue or house of
worship must provide the difference if the number of parking spaces in the private or public lots is
below the number required by Table 1. Any spaces provided in public or private lots must be
shown to be available for worshipers on the day or days of greatest use.
Table 1: Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Parking spaces, each of which shall have
dimensions of not less than nine feet in width by 20 feet in length, shall be included as follows:
[Amended 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693; 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 765]
Table 1
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Uses
Minimum Required Off-
Street Parking Spaces
Bowling alleys 5 for each alley
Cemeteries As per the recommendations of the Municipal
Engineer using Institute of Traffic Engineers' standards
Churches and synagogues 2 for each 3 permanent seats. When individual seats
are not provided, each 20 inches of bench shall be
considered 1 seat
Community buildings, country clubs,
social halls, lodges, fraternal
organizations, private schools and
similar uses
1 for each 75 square feet of floor area occupied by all
principal and accessory structures
Doctors and dentists 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof
Motels and hotels 1 for each rentable unit, plus 1 per employee
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 for each car used in connection with the business,
plus 1 for each 40 square feet of floor area of
assembly
Hospital, nursing and convalescent
homes
1 for each 3 beds
Manufacturing, industrial and general
commercial uses not otherwise specified
herein
1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 for
each 4 employees in the maximum working shifts
Offices (including banks and financial
institutions)
4 for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 346/392
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
Table 1
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Uses
Minimum Required Off-
Street Parking Spaces
Multiple-family apartments 1-bedroom or studio: 1.8
2-bedroom: 2
3-bedrom: 2.4
Dwelling units (elderly housing) 1 for every 4 dwellings
Single-family residential 3 (excluding garages)
Restaurants, bars and nightclubs 1 for every 3 seats
Retail stores, store groups, shops, etc. 5 for every 1,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof
Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 for each 2 employees in the maximum shift. The
total parking area shall be not less than 20% of the
building floor area
Convention halls, skating rinks,
exhibition halls, stadiums, sports arenas,
auditoriums and other places of public
assembly
1 for each 3 permanent seats, plus 1 for every 2
employees
Planned commercial development
groups
1 for each 100 square feet of floor area where the floor
area shall be or exceed 2,000 square feet
Any other uses not specified above In determining minimum parking space requirements
for uses not covered in this section, the Planning
Board shall be guided by the number of persons
employed in said building or by the use and the
number of persons expected to visit or patronize the
building or use
NOTE: Reverse parking, with off-street parking located in the rear yard, is preferred. Off-street
parking or loading shall not be permitted within the first 15 feet of any front yard.
Off-street loading.
In any district, in connection with every building group or part thereof hereafter erected and
having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by
manufacturing or commercial uses or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution
by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same
lot with such buildings off-street loading berths or unloading berths as follows:
Ten thousand to 49,999 square feet: one space.
For each additional 100,000 square feet: one space.
The loading berth required in each instance shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in
length and 14 feet in height, and may occupy all or any part of any required yard, except as
elsewhere regulated herein.
Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as per the recommendations of the Municipal
Engineer using Institute of Traffic Engineers' standards.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
Joint facilities for parking or loading.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 347/392
(1)
(2)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(a)
(1)
H.
Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total
number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
use and provided that all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to
the use served are adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as
a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the purposes and procedures set forth herein.
Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as per the recommendations of the Municipal
Engineer using Institute of Traffic Engineers' standards.
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
§ 390-23. Multiple-family development.
Any multifamily development shall be substantially in accordance with the Master Plan and shall
consider the surrounding land features of the area, including but not limited to residences;
schools; parks; other reservations of open spaces; location, width and grade of streets and
location and arrangement of parking spaces; local and regional business areas and shopping
centers; densities proposed for surrounding areas; and other such features as shall contribute to
the harmonious development of the area, with due regard to the character of the neighborhood
and its peculiar suitability for this type of use.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be
designed as a unified architectural unit with appropriate landscaping.
If the development of multifamily units is to be carried out in stages, each stage shall be so
planned that the foregoing requirements and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any stage.
The developer shall assure the provision of required improvements by means of a proper
completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow to
cover the cost of the improvements. The work shall be performed in accordance with all
requirements and the approved plans.
The area shall be adaptable to community development, being located in relation to major
thoroughfares, streets, shopping or other facilities, and as far as possible shall have within or
through it no major thoroughfare or other physical feature which will tend to destroy the
neighborhood or community cohesiveness.
Area of tract. Not less than five acres shall be provided for every area to be used in whole or in
part for multifamily development.
Building area. Not more than 25% of the land area may be occupied by buildings.
Setbacks from streets. There shall be a setback from the ultimate right-of-way of each street on
which the area abuts which shall be not less than 75 feet in depth.
Setback from other residential zones. There shall be a setback from other residential zones which
the area abuts of not less than 100 feet.
Distance between buildings.
In the layout of multifamily units on a lot or tract of land, the following minimum distances shall
be maintained:
Between all main buildings and detached accessory buildings: 40 feet.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 348/392
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
I.
J.
K.
[2]
L.
M.
N.
O.
Between the ends of all buildings, where walls are parallel to each other: 40 feet.
Between the ends of all buildings, where walls are parallel to each other and driveways
are introduced in order to reach parking areas: 50 feet.
From the front facade of a structure to the front or rear of an opposite structure, where
walls are parallel: 70 feet.
From the rear facade of a structure to the rear facade of an opposite structure, where
walls are parallel: 60 feet.
From the front facade of a building to the side wall of an adjoining building, where walls
are parallel: 40 feet.
The term "parallel" as used in this section shall include the meaning "approximating or
approaching parallel position," but in any event the deviation from true parallel shall not
exceed 20°, provided that, in the event of cluster-type development, the distance shall be as
approved by the Planning Board in its site plan approval. In no event shall there be more than
12 building units per structure.
Parking. Not less than two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling
unit. Such parking area shall be so placed as not to interfere with any recreation or service area
and shall not be less than 25 feet from residential property lines or ultimate right-of-way lines.
Dwelling units per acre. There shall be no more than an average of six dwelling units per gross
acre. There shall be no more than an average of seven units per developable acre. For the
purpose of this subsection, the term "developable" shall mean those areas included within the site
which are suitable for development and do not lie within any floodplain area. "Developable area"
also means all that area included within the site which is an integral part of the site design,
including but not limited to structures, parking areas, access driveways, walkways, recreation
areas, common areas, open spaces and any other area devoted to the aesthetic considerations
conducive to the development.
[Amended 5-15-1980 by Ord. No. 443]
Height of building. No building shall exceed the height of 80 feet or two stories (exclusive of
basement), whichever is greater. Height shall be measured from the average elevation of the
lowest and highest points of the property to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys.
[Amended 12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 597]
Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in
accordance with all pertinent specifications within the subdivision regulations.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 336, Subdivision of Land.
Service. Areas for loading and unloading delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
refuse collection, fuel and other service shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blockage or interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking facilities.
Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public
streets and highways serving the development without undue congestion to or interference with
normal traffic flow. The Planning Board shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfare to
carry the additional traffic engendered by the apartment as well as to the street frontage of the
proposed district.
Utilities. All buildings within the development shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal
system and public water supply or available public utilities. All utility lines shall be placed
underground.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 349/392
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
[1]
A.
(1)
B.
Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
Lighting facilities shall be required where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of
residents.
Landscaped planting shall be provided around buildings, parking areas and as otherwise required
by this chapter, as well as along the perimeter of land occupied by a multifamily development.
Open space. The developer shall be required, where possible, to preserve or incorporate natural
features such as woods, streams and open space areas which add to the overall cohesive
development of the area. However, all conditions deemed hazardous by the Planning Board,
including natural feature hazards, are to be eliminated, or all precautions deemed appropriate by
the Planning Board to reduce the hazard are to be provided by the developer.
Recreation. The developer shall provide community areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds, tot-lots
and other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of residents.
An operator-manager or other responsible representative of the landlord should be in residence at
all times.
Fire walls shall be provided between adjacent units, running to the roof.
Trash and garbage collection. The owners of any apartment complex shall provide for daily
collection of garbage from central points. Central points shall be located internally to the site so as
not to be visible from any public street. They shall be effectively screened by a fence and/or hedge
at least six feet high and not more than 40% open.
Heating. Before construction, the developer must produce an affidavit from a heating engineer
certifying that each dwelling unit can maintain an inside temperature of 70° F. with an outside
temperature of -10° F.
Storage. The developer shall provide an additional space of a minimum of 500 usable cubic feet
for each multifamily dwelling unit separate from the normal closet space for the storage of items
not necessary to everyday living requirements and where personal belongings and effects may be
stored under lock and separated from the belongings and effects of other occupants.
§ 390-24. Multiple-family development (fee-simple owner).
[Added 9-6-1979 by Ord. No. 435]
Any proposed multifamily development which contemplates the sale of fee-simple units shall be
substantially in accordance with the Master Plan and shall consider the surrounding land features
of the area, including but not limited to residences; schools; parks; other reservations of open
spaces; location, width and grade of streets and location and arrangement of parking spaces; local
and regional business areas and shopping centers; densities proposed for surrounding areas; and
other such features as shall contribute to the harmonious development of the area, with due
regard to the character of the neighborhood and its peculiar suitability for this type of use.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be
designed as unified architectural units with appropriate landscaping.
If the development of multifamily units is to be carried out in stages, each stage shall be so
planned that the foregoing requirements and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any stage.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 350/392
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
H.
The developer shall assure the provision of required improvements by means of a proper
completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow to
cover the cost of the improvements and the requirements by § 390-10B(5). The work shall be
performed in accordance with all requirements and the approved plans.
The materials used for exterior construction shall be of a permanent nature requiring minimal
maintenance and subject to Planning Board approval.
The area shall be adaptable to community development, being located in relation to major
thoroughfares, streets, shopping or other facilities, and as far as possible shall have within or
through it no major thoroughfare or other physical feature which will tend to destroy the
neighborhood or community cohesiveness.
Area of tract. No less than 20 acres shall be provided for every area to be used, in whole or in
part, for multifamily development.
Building area. Not more than 25% of the land area may be occupied by buildings.
There shall be setbacks from streets as follows:
There shall be a setback from the ultimate right-of-way of each public street on which the site
abuts which shall be not less than 75 feet, except that the setback from existing Pleasant
Place shall be not less than 30 feet, and provided that the provisions of Subsection Q are
met.
There shall be a setback from the right-of-way of any railroad of not less than 30 feet, and the
provisions of Subsection Q shall be met.
There shall be a setback from any residential parcel not committed to an RMO use of not less
than 30 feet, and the provisions of Subsection Q shall be met.
There shall be a setback requirement from any cartway of 26 feet in front, 20 feet in the rear
and 15 feet on either side.
There shall be no minimum setback requirement from other residential zones except as may be
provided herein.
Distance between buildings.
In the layout of a multiple-family development on a site within a RMO Zone, the following
minimum distances shall be maintained:
Between any building or portion thereof designed for residential use and any other
structure designed as a dwelling unit: 40 feet.
Between all main buildings and detached accessory buildings: 40 feet.
Between the ends of all buildings where walls are parallel to each other: 40 feet.
Between the ends of all buildings where walls are parallel to each other and driveways
are introduced in order to reach parking areas: 50 feet.
From the front facade of a structure to the front or rear of an opposite structure, where
walls are parallel: 70 feet.
From the rear facade of a structure to the rear facade of an opposite structure, where
walls are parallel: 60 feet.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 351/392
(g)
(h)
(2)
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
From the front facade of a building to the sidewall of an adjoining building, where walls
are parallel: 40 feet.
There shall be no minimum side yard setback requirements except those stipulated in all
subsections of Subsection F above, where fee-simple sales developments are proposed
by the developer.
The term "parallel," as used in this subsection, shall include the meaning "approximating or
approaching parallel position," but in any event the deviation from true parallel shall not
exceed 20°, provided that, in the event of cluster-type development, the distance shall be as
approved by the Planning Board in its site plan approval. In no event shall there be more than
eight building units per structure. There shall be a horizontal break of at least four feet in the
facade at least every four units in a row.
Parking. Not less than two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling
unit, inclusive of at least one garage space. In addition, off-street parking areas shall be provided
at the rate of 1/2 parking space per dwelling unit in strategic locations. These parking areas shall
not contain more than 10 spaces in one location. All parking areas shall be so placed as not to
interfere with any recreation or service area or interfere with vehicular traffic or cartways and shall
not be less than 25 feet from any other residential zone. In no event shall parking be permitted
within the cartway. The Borough of Oceanport Police Department shall have full power of
enforceability in this matter.
Dwelling units per acre.
There shall be no more than an average of six dwelling units per gross acre. There shall be
no more than an average of seven units per developable acre. For the purpose of this
subsection, the term "developable" shall mean those areas included within the site which are
suitable for development and do not lie within any floodplain area.
No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms nor have a habitable area less than
1,250 square feet.
Height of building. No building shall exceed the height of 30 feet or two stories, exclusive of
basement, whichever is greater.
Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in
accordance with all requirements of Chapter 336, Subdivision of Land, except that, as to interior
private roadways, there shall be provided a cartway of not less than 26 feet in width. All cartway
paving shall be provided with curbing per Borough specifications. All curb radiuses shall be a
minimum of 15 feet.
Service. Areas for loading and unloading delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
refuse collection, fuel and other services shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blockage or interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking facilities.
Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public
streets and highways serving the development without undue congestion to or interference with
normal traffic flow. The Planning Board shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfare to
carry the additional traffic engendered by the development, as well as to the street frontage of the
proposed district.
Utilities. All buildings within the development shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal
system and public water supply or available public utilities. All utility lines shall be placed
underground.
Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 352/392
Q.
R.
S.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Lighting facilities shall be required where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of
residents.
Landscaped planting shall be provided around buildings, parking areas and as otherwise required
by this chapter as well as along the perimeter of land occupied by a multifamily development.
Such planting shall consist of nondeciduous material at least six feet in height and no more than
40% open.
Open space. The developer shall be required, where possible, to preserve or incorporate natural
features such as woods, streams and open space areas which add to the overall cohesive
development of the area. However, all conditions deemed hazardous by the Planning Board,
including natural feature hazards, are to be eliminated, or all precautions deemed appropriate by
the Planning Board to reduce the hazard are to be provided by the developer.
Recreation. The developer shall provide community areas, playgrounds and other facilities
suitable for the recreational convenience of the residents.
Homeowners' association. The developer shall present to the governing body of the Borough for
its approval a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions whereby the Borough will be
assured of the homeowners' association's responsibility and rights for such things as, but not
limited to, trash and garbage collection, snow removal, cartway maintenance, animal restrictions
and building modifications. Prior to said Borough approval, the developer shall be responsible for
the implementation and continuation of the items of maintenance set forth above. The
homeowners' association shall satisfy all criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and, among other
things, shall also satisfy the following criteria:
Such association shall be organized as a nonprofit corporation prior to the sale of any
dwelling unit.
The association and any property owned by it shall be free of all liens and encumbrances.
Membership in such association shall be mandatory as to all unit owners.
All restrictions pertaining to utilization of open space shall be permanent in nature.
The association shall be responsible for the payment of liability insurance and all local taxes,
as well as responsible for the maintenance of all facilities owned by it.
The association, its bylaws and rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the
governing body of the Borough of Oceanport.
Trash and garbage receptacles. All trash and garbage receptacles shall be provided below ground
and shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the waste disposal requirements of one- and
two-bedroom units.
Fire walls shall be provided between adjacent units, running to the roof.
Heating. Before construction, the developer must produce an affidavit from a heating engineer
certifying that each dwelling unit can maintain an inside temperature of 70° F. with an outside
temperature of -10° F.
Storage. The developer shall provide an additional space of a minimum of 500 usable cubic feet
within each multifamily dwelling unit, separate from the normal closet space, for the storage of
items not necessary to everyday living requirements.
Boats and trailers. No outside parking or storage is permitted.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 353/392
Z.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
An easement shall be granted to the Borough providing for access for emergency vehicles for
ingress and egress over the aforementioned roadways.
§ 390-25. Miscellaneous uses.
Trailers.
No trailer or recreational vehicle shall be parked on any street for the purpose of repair or
storage. Any such trailer or recreational vehicle undergoing major repair shall be kept within a
building and shall not during such period of repair be used by any person as a dwelling or
sleeping place.
Any vehicle equipped to be used for living or sleeping purposes, commonly known as a
"camping or travel trailer," whether or not mounted on wheels, may be located in any district,
provided that:
Such vehicle is unoccupied.
The length of such vehicle, including hitch, does not exceed 24 feet.
The storage of such vehicle will be governed by § 390-25B.
In a residential district, not more than one such vehicle shall be permitted on a lot per
dwelling unit.
Screening shall be as required in § 390-16B.
Storage of commercial and recreational vehicles. No commercial or recreational vehicle shall be
stored within the front yard nor within the side yard requirements of the particular zone in which it
is located.
Storage of commercial equipment. No outside storage of commercial equipment shall be permitted
in residential zones.
Garages. No living quarters shall be permitted in any garage building.
Carports. Carports are prohibited.
Fences.
[Amended 9-1-1988 by Ord. No. 576]
No residential fence may be more than six feet in height or constructed of materials
substantially dangerous. This interpretation is meant to include barbed wire but is not limited
thereto.
No fence shall be erected in a front yard of any lot in a residential zone or along a public rightof-
way unless the fence is less than 50% solid and is not more than four feet in height. Such
fence shall be no closer than one foot to the Borough road, street and/or right-of-way in
accordance with the definition of "streets" appearing in § 390-4B of this chapter.
[Amended 11-16-2000 by Ord. No. 738]
No fence shall be erected on any lot within 25 feet from the intersection of two or more public
rights-of-way more than 2 1/2 feet in height.
[Amended 11-16-2000 by Ord. No. 738]
All fences must be constructed with the face or finished side away from the property and the
structural side toward the interior.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 354/392
(5)
(6)
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(2)
H.
Stone and masonry walls are not considered to be fences and are prohibited.
All uses other than residential uses which abut a residential use shall provide screening in the
form of a fence or hedge at least six feet high and not more than 40% open.
Junkyards. No junkyard shall be permitted within the limits of the Borough.
Radio, television and microwave antennas.
[Amended 10-16-1986 by Ord. No. 530]
In residential zones, including the R-1 through R-5, R-M and RMO Zones, the following
antenna structures shall be permitted as accessory structures to a principal residential
structure or permitted conditional use on the same lot. No such antenna structures may serve
more than one residential lot unless the supporting structure conforms to the minimum
regulations on the lot on which it is located and no connecting cables cross property other
than that owned by the persons served by the antenna.
Two conventional television and/or radio antenna structures attached to a building,
provided that they do not exceed the height limitations for the zone by more than 15 feet.
Antenna structures operated by holders of a Federal Communications Commission
Amateur Radio License may exceed the height limitations for the zone by 35 feet. Such
antennas which exceed 20 feet above the point of attachment to the building shall be
built to withstand winds of 75 miles per hour.
Freestanding, noncommercial, mast- or pole-type radio and/or television antenna
structures and one tower-type radio and/or television antenna structure, provided that
they shall only be placed in the rear yard area, shall be located no closer than 15 feet to
any property line and may exceed the height limitations for the zone by not more than 15
feet. In the event that any rear yard area shall be contiguous with the front yard area of
an adjoining lot, such antenna structure shall be placed in a side yard subject to
compliance with the setback and screening requirements otherwise contained in this
chapter. Antenna structures operated by holders of a Federal Communications
Commission Amateur Radio License may exceed the height limitations for the zone by 35
feet. Such structures over 20 feet in height shall be built to withstand winds of 75 miles
per hour.
One satellite dish antenna structure erected on a secure ground-mounted foundation,
provided that it shall only be placed in the rear yard, shall conform to the setbacks for a
principal structure in the zone and shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 12 feet in
diameter. In the event that any rear yard area shall be contiguous with the front yard area
of an adjoining lot, such antenna structure shall be placed in a side yard subject to
compliance with the setback and screening requirements otherwise contained in this
chapter. Any wires or connecting cables shall be buried underground, unless the antenna
is located immediately adjacent to and mounted no more than seven feet from the
structure being served. Each such structure shall be screened by fencing not to exceed
six feet in height, other structures and/or nondeciduous plantings of sufficient number
and height to obstruct any clear view of the antenna from any adjacent conforming
residential property, any residential zone or any public street.
In the B-1, B-2, V-C and I Zones, the following antenna structures shall be permitted as
accessory structures to a principal use, other than a residential use, on the same lot. No such
antenna structures may serve more than one lot unless the supporting structure conforms to
the minimum regulations on the lot on which it is located and no connecting cables cross
property other than that owned by the person served by the antenna:
[Amended 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693]
Conventional television and/or radio antenna structures attached to each building,
provided that no antenna structure shall exceed the height limitations for the zone by
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 355/392
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
I.
more than 15 feet. Such structures which exceed 20 feet above the point of attachment
to the building shall be built to withstand winds of 75 miles per hour.
Freestanding, conventional, noncommercial radio and television antenna structures,
provided that such antenna structures shall only be placed in the rear yard, shall adhere
to setback and yard requirements for accessory structures in the particular zone but in no
case shall be closer than 50 feet to any residential property line or zone boundary or
closer than 15 feet to any other property line, and shall not exceed the height limitations
for the zone by more than 15 feet. Such structures over 20 feet in height shall be built to
withstand winds of 75 miles per hour.
Satellite dish antennas. Such antenna structures shall be erected on a secure groundmounted
foundation located in the rear yard or may be mounted on a flat roof, provided
that it is no higher than 15 feet above the roofline and is concealed from public view. No
antenna structure shall exceed 12 feet in diameter. Ground-mounted antenna structures
shall conform to the setbacks for a principal structure in the zone, shall not exceed 12
feet in height and shall in no case be located closer than 50 feet to a residential property
line or zone boundary. Wires or connecting cables for ground-mounted antennas shall be
buried underground. Each ground-mounted antenna shall be screened by fencing, other
structures and/or nondeciduous plantings of sufficient number and height to obstruct any
clear view of the structure from any adjacent conforming residential property, any
residential zone or any public street.
Cemeteries. Cemeteries may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a special exception permit,
in the district(s) designated, provided that compliance with the following standards are achieved:
[Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 748]
Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
Minimum lot width: 500 feet.
Minimum lot depth: 1,000 feet.
Minimum building setbacks.
Front yard setback: 80 feet.
Rear yard setback: 75 feet.
Side yard setback: 50 feet.
Distance to environmentally sensitive property: 50 feet. (NOTE: "Environmentally
sensitive property" shall be that designated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection as freshwater wetlands or land within the one-hundred-yearfloodplain
and areas having steep slopes in excess of 10%.)
Any crematory building or structure shall be located not less than 700 feet from the
nearest residential property line.
Maximum height:
Family and individual mausoleums, columbariums and other interment structures: 15
feet.
Public mausoleums, columbariums and other interment structures: 35 feet/two stories.
Caretaker's residence, offices, storage and maintenance buildings: 35 feet/two stories.
Crematory and all other permitted buildings:
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 356/392
[1]
[2]
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Flat roof: two stories/30 feet.
All other roofs: two stories/35 feet.
Maximum building and impervious cover: 35%.
Maximum building length: 100 feet (the building elevation viewed from and parallel to any
public street); provided, however, that no building shall have an area in excess of 5,000
square feet.
Building clusters:
Buildings separated by distances of less than 200 feet shall be deemed clustered, and
the maximum width of any building cluster shall be 470 feet. Such maximum width shall
be the total distance measured across the elevations of buildings within the cluster
viewed from any public street.
The minimum distance between building clusters shall be 450 feet.
The minimum distance between a building cluster and any other freestanding building
shall be 150 feet.
Private mausoleums, regardless of number, shall not be subject to the regulations
regarding building clusters.
A maximum of two identification signs may be permitted. Each sign shall be in compliance
with the requirements of § 390-27A(3).
Landscaping planting shall be provided around buildings, parking areas and as otherwise
required by this chapter. Such planting shall consist of nondeciduous material at least six feet
in height and no more than 40% open.
A minimum five-foot-wide continuous buffer shall be provided where a cemetery abuts
existing residential uses. No public or private mausoleum, grave, headstone, marker or other
building or structure shall be erected within or upon the buffer area.
The disposal or placement of cremated human remains (also known as "cremains") anywhere
within the cemetery property, other than in suitable containers in compliance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations, is expressly prohibited.
Public access and use of the facilities shall not commence before 8:00 a.m. and must
terminate by not later than 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday. The operation of a crematory shall not commence before 8:00 a.m.
and shall terminate not later than 5:00 p.m. on any day.
Ancillary structures: Any aboveground or below-ground tanks, sheds, garages, trailers or
other structures used along with or to otherwise service the special exception use shall
comply with the bulk requirements and other restrictions as set forth in § 390-25 of this
chapter.
Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will protect public roadways
and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any
kind. Lighting facilities shall be required where deemed necessary for the safety and
convenience of residents.
As a condition of site plan approval, the operator of any crematory shall be required to have
the stack emissions tested at three-month intervals to ensure that such emissions do not
exceed the applicable requirements set by the Department of Environmental Protection for
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 357/392
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(a)
(b)
(4)
K.
(1)
L.
particulate matter and by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for mercury. A
written report of such tests shall be furnished to the Municipal Clerk.
Used-car lots. No used-car lots shall be permitted within the limits of the Borough.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
Driveways.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
No driveway shall be within five feet of a side yard line or projection of side yard line or within
15 feet of a rear yard line for newly constructed or substantially reconstructed dwellings.
Residential driveways shall be limited to 24 feet wide for garages that face the street and may
transition to 36 feet wide starting at a point 24 feet from the dwelling. Driveways for side-entry
garages and rear-yard garages shall be limited in width to that for a single-car garage in the
front yard area. Residential properties with greater than 100 feet of frontage on a single street
shall be permitted up to a total of two driveways; otherwise, only a single driveway is
permitted.
A driveway apron shall be provided at the intersection of all driveways with the public
roadway. The apron shall be made of concrete when it abuts or may in the future abut a
concrete sidewalk; otherwise, asphalt or suitable paver materials maybe utilized. The apron
shall extend a minimum of six feet from the edge of the road or to the back edge of the
sidewalk, whichever is greater. Construction details are to be approved by the Borough
Engineer.
On-street parking shall only be on streets where it is permitted and then only on the paved
portion of the roadway. Parking shall not occur on unimproved surfaces such as dirt, grass,
stone, or similar surfaces.
Turnaround areas.
Properties that front on the following roads shall provide on the property a means, such
as a "K-turn" area, for vehicles to turn around within the property boundaries prior to
exiting the property:
Monmouth Road.
Eatontown Boulevard.
Monmouth Boulevard.
Branchport Avenue.
Port Au Peck Avenue (Wolf Hill Avenue to Comanche Drive).
Shrewsbury Avenue (Monmouth Boulevard to Branchport Avenue).
Monmouth Boulevard (Myrtle Avenue to Branchport Creek Bridge).
The K-turnaround shall be at least 28 feet deep, including the driveway width. The
turnaround area shall be at least five feet off of the side property line and 15 feet off the
rear property line.
Portable on-demand storage structures.
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 912]
A portable on-demand storage structure may be utilized as a temporary structure within the
Borough when in compliance with the standards of this section. Any use of such structures
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 358/392
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
A.
within the Borough not in compliance with this subsection shall be unlawful and subject to
fines and penalties as permitted under this Code.
Use of a portable on-demand storage structure shall only be permitted where a permit has
been issued by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
Applications for the permitted use of a portable on-demand storage structures may be
obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer, and the application shall be submitted when
completed by the party requesting use of a portable on-demand storage structure on that
form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer to the Code Enforcement Officer with a
sketch showing the location of the structure on the site and detailing the distance of
trailers from other buildings, fire hydrants, Fire Department connections and/or utilities.
All portable on-demand storage units shall be placed in driveways unless otherwise
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
An application fee of $20 shall accompany the form requesting such permission. Failure
to obtain permission for placement of such temporary structure shall result in the
issuance of an after-the-fact permit with a fee set at 10 times the amount of a permit
issued prior to erection of such structure $200.
Length of time structures may be on property; extensions.
A portable on-demand storage structure may be located as a temporary structure on
property within the Borough for a period not exceeding 30 days in duration from time of
delivery to time of removal in circumstances where a construction permit for the property
has not been issued. Where exceptional circumstances exist, the Code Enforcement
Office may alter the permit to extend the time where these structures may be permitted
on property.
In such circumstances where a construction permit has been issued for the property, the
portable on-demand storage structure may be located as a temporary structure on
property for a period not exceeding 90 days, with the right to three thirty-day extensions if
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Code Enforcement Office. In no event may a
portable on-demand storage structure be located on property for a period in excess of
180 days in any twelve-month period. Extensions beyond the 180 days may be granted
by the Borough Council. The property owner seeking said extension must apply to the
Council at the time that the last thirty-day extension is applied for.
No more than two portable on-demand storage structures may be located on a specific piece
of property within the Borough at one time; such structures shall be individually limited to the
duration time period established herein.
No portable on-demand storage structure located within the Borough shall contain toxic or
hazardous materials.
§ 390-26. V-C Zone development criteria.
[Added 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693; amended 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 765]
This zone encompasses the Borough's downtown area and was created to enhance the image and
vitality of the Village Center by encouraging mixed use infill development with strong pedestrian
elements. In order to ensure that the Village Center (V-C Zone) be a visually attractive area, the
following development criteria shall be applied:
General lot and building design criteria.
Any principal commercial building may contain more than one use and/or organization. Any
lot may contain more than one principal structure, provided that each principal structure is
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 359/392
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
located in a manner which will allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a manner that each
structure and resulting lot would conform to the zoning and subdivision requirements,
including frontage on a public street.
All building walls facing a street or residential district line or municipal park shall be suitably
finished for aesthetic purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block or
concrete block walls. Preferred building materials include brick, wood, stone or other natural
materials.
No merchandise, products, waste equipment or similar material or objects shall be displayed
or stored outside.
All mechanicals must be screened.
Design techniques should result in the creation of individual storefronts along the front and
sides and rear (if required) to visually appear to be a quaint, long-established, neighborhood
business district.
Roofline breaks. Rather than a uniform two- or three-story block of buildings, the roofline
should be used to waiver between one-, two- and three-story buildings, giving the feel of a
streetscape that has evolved over many years.
Architectural styles must be compatible with the "Turn of the Century Racetrack/Seaside
Village" theme. Architectural styles must not be mixed in the same building. The use of
detailing, such as window shutters on upper floors, small-paned storefront windows and
entrance door side windows or decorative framing, is recommended and encouraged where
appropriate to the architectural style. Blank walls will not be allowed.
Landscaping and lighting.
All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped
with a combination of fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, contours, existing foliage
and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either
maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation in the area and lessen the impact of the
structures and paved areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping shall
be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as well as assuring that the capacity of any
natural or man-made drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated.
Perimeter strips consisting of a landscape screen shall be provided between off-street parking
areas and adjoining properties. The perimeter strip shall be composed of plants and trees
arranged to form both a low-level and a high-level screen. The high-level screen shall consist
of trees planted with specimens of at least four feet in height and planted at intervals which
will provide an overlapping foliage screen at maturity with a minimum mature height of 15
feet. The low-level screen shall consist of shrubs or hedges planted at an initial height of not
less than two feet and spaced at intervals of not less than five feet. The low-level screen shall
be placed in alternating rows to produce a more effective barrier. All plants not surviving two
growing seasons after planting shall be replaced. Perimeter strips shall be a minimum of 10
feet wide and shall be protected by permanent curbing.
Landscaping and buffer plan should be submitted for Planning Board site plan review showing
what will remain and what will be planted, indicating names of plants and trees and
dimensions and approximate time of planting.
There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided by each building. It
shall be a totally enclosed container located in a manner to be obscured from view from
parking areas, existing residential uses or municipal parks by a masonry enclosure.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 360/392
(a)
(b)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(7)
(a)
[1]
(b)
(c)
(8)
Lighting. For all uses within the district, adequate lighting to ensure safe pedestrian and
vehicular travel shall be provided. The following standards shall apply:
Light fixtures shall be Hexagonal Lantern Series L24 luminaire, 175 MH, as
manufactured by Lumec.
Poles shall be R90 Traditional Steel Pole (black), 16 feet high, as manufactured by
Lumec. Pole shall come equipped with 120-V duplex receptacle at top and double banner
arm. Poles and light fixtures shall be spaced at one-hundred-foot intervals.
Sidewalks.
Sidewalks must be a minimum of 15 feet in width.
Concrete pavers shall be used and shall be 3 1/8 inches in thickness where used in
driveways, roadways and driveway aprons; 2 1/8 inches in thickness where used in
sidewalks having a minimum compressing strength of 8,000 psi; a water absorption
maximum of 5% and shall meet or exceed ASTM Specifications C936-82.
Subbase in sidewalk areas shall consist of crushed concrete, six inches thick, topped
with one-inch quarry dust. Subbase in driveways, roadways and driveway aprons shall
consist of concrete subbase six inches thick.
The concrete pavers shall be installed tightly together on the bedding course with joints
not exceeding 1/8 inch. Joints shall be filled with sand or quarry dust, as approved by the
Borough Engineer.
Pavers must have a border on all sides.
Granite block curb.
Granite block shall consist of rectangular paving stones, with slit faces and edges, made
from granite complying with ASTM C615, 10 inches tall by four to five inches deep by six
to eight inches wide. The Borough Engineer can supply manufacturers.
Concrete shall be air-entraining portland cement in accordance with ASTM Specification
C-94, proportioned to have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days
(AC1318).
Set block to provide six-inch curb face with five-eighths-inch mortar joint grooved.
Construction detail shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
Signs.
Permits required. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter erect, reerect, construct
or structurally alter a sign or sign structure without a permit first having been issued by
the Construction Official. If it appears that the proposed sign is in compliance with all
requirements and laws, the permit shall be issued, but should the work authorized under
the permit not be completed within a year after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void.
All nonconforming signs in effect as of the date of the adoption of this amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be replaced, remodeled or otherwise brought into conformance
or removed within three years of the effective date of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted 7-17-2003.
A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or replaced by another nonconforming sign.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 361/392
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(9)
No sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights.
All luminous signs, indirectly illuminated signs, and lighting devices shall contain only
lights emitting light of constant intensity. All bare incandescent light sources and
immediately adjacent reflecting surfaces shall be shielded from view.
Exposed neon tube in any form is prohibited.
Channel letter signs are prohibited.
Solid backlighted letters are permitted (those lighted by a source concealed by the letter,
reflecting off the surface of the letter).
Signs shall have no symbol, logo or lettering exceeding 18 inches in height.
Only one wall sign per establishment shall be permitted unless the establishment has
frontage on more than one side or two finished fronts.
The total area for wall signage on the first floor shall not exceed two square feet for each
linear foot of the building frontage attributable to the particular business or businesses
which the sign will identify or 100 square feet, whichever is less.
The total area for wall signage on the second floor shall not exceed one square foot for
each linear foot of the building frontage attributable to the particular business or
businesses which the sign will identify or 50 square feet, whichever is less.
One awning sign shall be permitted for each window or door of the facade covered by the
awning. Any sign (logo and/or lettering) on an awning shall not exceed 25% of the
exterior surface of the awning. There shall be no other specific restriction on the size or
height of the lettering or logo.
All awnings on a structure must be of the same color.
Awnings must be fastened to the facade of the building and not supported from the
ground; awnings shall not extend more than seven feet from the facade; and no portion
of the awning shall be nearer than eight feet to the ground.
An establishment may have both wall and awning signage.
No window sign shall be affixed to the exterior of the window. All exterior signs shall be
classified as wall signs.
The only window signs permitted are those permanently painted onto the glass, stating
the name of or nature of the business. Said window sign shall not exceed 30% or 100
square feet, whichever is less, of the area of the window.
No more than three colors should be used and should match either the background or
trim color of the structure the sign serves.
Freestanding signs are prohibited.
Public spaces. To add to the charm of the streetscape, public spaces (parks, greens,
commons, squares, plazas) can enhance the ambiance and add further diversity to the mix of
uses found there. The park area could be used as the focal point of the neighborhood,
providing a haven of rest and relaxation. A fountain, gazebo or clock or a kiosk that
communicates the happenings of the community could be done as a pocket park.
§ 390-27. Signs.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 362/392
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(4)
A.
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the following provisions:
Signs in residential districts. The following types of signs are permitted in all residential districts as
follows:
Nonilluminated signs bearing the name of the persons residing on the premises, provided that
the above signs shall not exceed two square feet in area and the top edge of the sign shall
not be more than five feet above grade level and, if illuminated, shall be nonflashing, and
further provided that the lighting unit shall be attached to the sign, shall contain no more than
100 watts of illumination per side and shall have a proper shield so that the rays of
illumination shall not project beyond the area of the sign.
For multiple-family dwellings and for buildings other than dwellings, a single identification sign
not exceeding 12 square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building
and the name of the management may be displayed, provided that on a corner lot two such
signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted.
Signs of schools, churches, parish houses or other institutions of a similar public or
semipublic nature may be erected and maintained, provided that:
The size of any such sign is not in excess of 24 square feet.
Not more than one such sign is placed on a property, unless such property fronts upon
more than one street, in which event two such signs may be erected, one on each
frontage.
Lease, sale or open house signs.
[Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 637; 6-5-2003 by Ord. No. 762; 4-16-2009 by Ord. No. 861]
Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the same lot or building on which it is
placed, provided that the above signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area, shall not
be illuminated and shall not project beyond the property lines. All temporary signs shall
be removed within 180 days from the date installed. In no case shall real estate signs
indicate property sold, foreclosed or bank owned.
In addition to the signs permitted under Subsection A(4)(a) of this section, there shall
also be permitted three temporary signs advertising an open house in connection with the
sale of any residential dwelling, subject to the following restrictions:
One sign only shall be placed on the lot or building being sold and two directional
signs may be placed off site. Directional signs may be placed in the public right-ofway
barring they do not block a site triangle, but shall not be placed on private
property owned by another person without the owner’s written permission.
The signs hereby authorized shall not be larger than 18 inches by 24 inches, and the
top of each such sign shall not be higher than 42 inches above the ground, which
includes anything tied to the sign such as balloons or other materials that could
obstruct views for traffic safety. If the open house is being conducted by a real estate
licensee, all signs shall contain the name, business office address and telephone
number of such real estate licensee.
The open house may be for either the public or realtors only.
The sign shall be placed only on the day of the open house and shall be removed
immediately upon the conclusion of the open house. Both signs shall contain the day
of the week on which the open house is being conducted.
No "Open House" sign shall be illuminated.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 363/392
[6]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
B.
Any violation of these restrictions shall be subject to a penalty per sign as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, and each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate and specific violation and not as a continuing offense.
Development signs.
The size of any sign shall not be in excess of 40 square feet.
Not more than two signs shall be placed upon any property, unless such property fronts
upon more than one street, in which event two such signs may be erected on each
frontage.
Any such sign shall be removed by the developer within 30 days of the final sale.
Artisans' signs. Signs of mechanics, painters and other artisans may be erected and
maintained during the period such persons are performing work on the premises on which
such signs are erected, provided that:
The size thereof is not in excess of 12 square feet.
Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work.
Signs in business and industrial districts. Business signs are permitted in B, V-C and I Districts in
accordance with the following regulations:
[Amended 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693]
Maximum size of sign (square feet or percent of wall area, whichever is less).
Type of Sign Square Feet Percent of Wall Area*
Nonilluminated 20 10
Illuminated, but
nonflashing
10 5
*Includes windows and door area on which or in which the sign or signs are displayed.
Projection of signs. No sign shall project more than 15 inches from the wall of any building.
Interference with traffic safety. No sign shall be so placed as to interfere with a highway, traffic
light, traffic vision or similar safety factors.
Number of signs. Only one sign shall be permitted on one facade of a building for each use,
business, person or activity coming within the provisions of this section; provided, however,
that in no case shall the total area of signs advertising or calling attention to a business on
any one premises exceed 30% of the wall surface, including window and door area of the
building located on the premises.
Height of sign. No part of any sign shall extend above the top or beyond the ends of the wall
surface on which it is placed; no sign, except such directional devices as may be required by
federal aeronautical authorities, shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof of any
building, and no sign shall be placed so as to interfere with the opening of an exit door or to
obstruct any window opening to a room to be used for dwelling purposes.
Freestanding signs (not including normal traffic regulation signs).
Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per establishment.
No portion of any such sign shall be less than 10 or more than 25 feet above the ground.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 364/392
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
The area of any individual freestanding sign shall not exceed six square feet.
No portion of a shopping center freestanding sign shall be less than 15 or more than 30
feet above the ground. The area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed 100
square feet. The location and orientation of such sign shall be shown on the site plan. At
no time shall there be more than two freestanding signs per shopping center.
In the case of a group of business uses other than a shopping center, on a lot held in
single and separate ownership, a single freestanding sign including individual signs
identifying different establishments may be erected on a common backing, provided that
the total area of one side of the sign does not exceed 20 square feet. The structural
backing for all such signs shall be uniform, and no sign may extend in any direction
beyond the outside edge of the backing. No portion of any such backing shall be less
than 10 feet or more than 25 feet above the ground.
Sign permits. Permits shall be required and shall be procured from the Construction Official
for all signs greater than two square feet in area. "Area," as applied to the size of any sign,
shall mean the maximum projected area of the shape which encloses the sign structure,
device or representation. A sign permit shall not be required for temporary real estate signs.
Location, relocation or arrangement of signs exceeding six square feet in area. Application for
site plan approval must be submitted to the Planning Board, and such application may consist
of six copies of a sketch plat showing specific details for the Board to make a review thereof.
Billboards. No billboard shall be permitted within the limits of the Borough.
Special design criteria for commercial signs in the V-C Zone (Village Center) have been
recommended in the Oceanport Master Plan, as revised by resolution of the Planning Board,
adopted on May 28, 1997, and should be applied whenever possible.
[Added 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 693]
§ 390-28. Raising of animals.
The raising and keeping of reptiles, poultry, swine, horses, goats, cows or other large mammals,
except as necessary to the permitted principal use in a B-2 District, is prohibited. Any building housing
said animals shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line.
§ 390-29. Recyclable materials storage.
[Added 2-15-1990 by Ord. No. 603]
Materials designated in the Borough of Oceanport Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 325, Articles II and
III, shall be separated from other solid waste by the generator, and a storage area for recyclable
material shall be provided as follows:
For each subdivision application for 50 or more single-family units, the applicant shall provide a
storage area of at least 12 square feet within each dwelling unit to accommodate a four-week
accumulation of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to newspaper, glass bottles,
aluminum cans and tin and bimetal cans. The storage area may be located in the laundry room,
garage, basement or kitchen.
For each subdivision application for 25 or more multifamily units, the applicant shall provide a
storage area of at least three square feet within each dwelling unit to accommodate a one-week
accumulation of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to newspaper, glass bottles,
aluminum cans and tin and bimetal cans. The storage area may be located in the laundry room,
garage, basement or kitchen. Unless recyclables are collected on a weekly basis from each
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 365/392
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
dwelling unit, one or more common storage areas must be provided at convenient locations within
the development.
For each site plan application for commercial and industrial developments that utilize 1,000 square
feet or more of land, the applicant shall provide the municipal agency with estimates of the
quantity of mandated recyclable materials, including but not limited to newspaper, glass bottles,
aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans, high-grade paper and corrugated cardboard, that will be
generated by the development during each week. A separated storage area must be provided to
accommodate a one- to four-week accumulation of recyclable material. The municipal agency may
require the location of one or more common storage areas at convenient locations within the
development.
§ 390-30. Swimming pools.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL
A swimming pool that is operated for profit and open to the public or to a limited number of
members and their guests, upon payment of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other
fee, or operated as a service rendered by a hotel, motel or apartment development whose
units are rented to transient or permanent residents.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE
A swimming pool located on a single-family lot with a residence on it and used as an
accessory to the residence, and said pool is utilized with no admission charges and not for
the purposes of profit.
Types of pools. The following are types of pools:
Permanent inground.
Permanent aboveground: Aboveground pools, equipped with fences, built above the top level
of the pool.
Temporary aboveground: Aboveground pools, not equipped with fences, built above the top
level of the pool.
"Wading pool" shall mean and include artificially constructed pools not designated or used for
swimming, with a maximum area not exceeding 120 square feet and a maximum water depth
not exceeding 12 inches.
Lighting. All lighting fixtures for a private swimming pool shall be installed so as to comply with all
applicable safety regulations and shall be shielded so as to prevent any direct beam of light from
shining on any adjoining property.
Electric lines. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any swimming pool or wading
area.
Permit required. It shall be unlawful to establish or construct a swimming pool without first
obtaining a permit in the manner hereinafter prescribed. No permit shall be required for a wading
pool.
Application for permit. Application for permits for the construction and maintenance of any
swimming pool, as defined, shall be made to the Construction Official by the owner of the property
upon which it is to be constructed or by the contractor who will construct the same. The application
shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans, specifications and plot plans of the property. The
plot plan shall show the location of the proposed pool on the property, together with any proposed
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 366/392
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(4)
K.
accessory buildings. The plot plan shall also show the location, type and height of fencing or
enclosure as may be required by this chapter. Such plot plan shall further indicate if the proposed
pool will be higher than the existing grade of the property and, if so, by how much. No permit will
be issued until a Borough Construction Official has inspected the premises upon which the pool
will be constructed.
Fees. Fees for the construction of a swimming pool shall be based upon the cost of the pool and
all installations, including fencing, filters, etc. The fee shall be $5 per $1,000 of cost and shall be
payable at the time of application. The minimum fee shall be $25. Additional engineering fees may
be required as hereinafter provided.
Location. An outdoor private swimming pool shall be located not less than 10 feet from the side or
rear of the residence on a building lot, nor shall such pool be located less than 10 feet from any
property line. No pool, pool fence or pool accessory shall be located in a front yard.
Drainage. If in the opinion of the Construction Official a drainage problem may be created by the
construction of a pool, a drainage plan shall be furnished by the applicant. Such plan must be
prepared by a licensed engineer and show contours at one-foot intervals. Such plan shall include
the property upon which the pool will be installed and all adjacent properties. The plan shall be
presented to the Borough Engineer for his review and approval. All engineering fees shall be
borne by the applicant.
Location of pump. The pump of a filtration or pumping station of a private swimming pool shall be
located not less than 10 feet from any side or rear property line.
Fencing.
Permanent underground pools shall be surrounded entirely by a fence, with no opening
greater than two-inch square and capable of holding a live load of 250 pounds between posts
located not more than eight feet apart; provided, however, that the side(s) of the residence
may serve as part of the enclosure. The fence shall be located not less than six feet from the
closest edge of the pool. Fences shall at least be four feet high and, if made of wire, must be
of the chain-link type. All supporting structures shall be on the inside of the fence.
Permanent aboveground pools constructed with an attached fence at least four feet in height
above ground level and capable of holding a live load of 250 pounds between posts located
not more than eight feet apart shall need no additional fencing.
Temporary aboveground pools, when not in use, must be emptied or covered with a suitable
protective covering securely fastened or locked in place, unless enclosed by a fence meeting
the requirements for a permanent underground pool.
Waterfront properties.
With regard to waterfront properties on which the swimming pool is located between the
dwelling and the waterfront, no fence shall be required to enclose that side of the
swimming pool which is parallel to the river, provided that:
The entire waterfront of the property is bulkheaded, extending from sideline to
sideline;
The height of the bulkhead for its entire length is not less than four feet measured
from the river bottom, thereby creating an effective barrier; and
Both side fences aligned perpendicular to the bulkhead extend not less than 24
inches beyond the water side of the bulkhead.
As to all other waterfront properties, the swimming pools shall be enclosed as provided in
Subsection K(1) of this section.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 367/392
L.
M.
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
O.
P.
Q.
[1]
Gates in fencing. Any opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the pool shall be
equipped with a gate similar to the fence and shall extend from not more than two inches above
the ground to the height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type, opening outwardly
only, be equipped with a lock and key or padlock and chain and shall be kept locked except when
the pool is in use. In the case of an aboveground pool where a ladder is required for entry and
exit, a method must be provided for such ladder to be locked in the up position and must be so
locked at all times when the pool is not in use.
Water supply. There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private water
supply system and a swimming pool below the maximum waterline of the pool or to a recirculating
or heating system of such pool. The piping system shall be designed to circulate the pool water
through filtering equipment. Potable water shall feed the pool with a downspout with an air gas not
less than six inches from the pool overflow level. Potable water siphons will not be permitted to
drain the pools. The installations, repair and control of plumbing facilities shall comply with the
Plumbing Code and Sanitary Code of the Borough of Oceanport. All circulating units shall have
sufficient capacity to recirculate the entire contents of the pool within eight hours or less.
Certificate of completion required. A certificate of completion must be issued by the Construction
Official before a pool may be used. No certificate will be issued until all of the foregoing
requirements have been complied with.
Operation and maintenance regulations.
Nuisance. Any nuisance which may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection
with any swimming pool shall be abated and/or removed by the owners.
Mechanical defects and supervision. Whenever any swimming pool by reason of mechanical
defects or lack of supervision is, in the opinion of the Board of Health, polluted and
detrimental to health, it shall be closed to use.
Operation and maintenance. Any accessory buildings or any other physical facility or
equipment incident to the maintenance and operation of any swimming pool shall be in
conformance with the rules and regulations of both the Board of Health and the Construction
Official of the Borough of Oceanport.
Sanitation standards. All private swimming pools shall be constructed, installed and maintained so
as to provide necessary equipment for chlorination and other disinfection and filtering to comply
with approved bacteriological standards as may be promulgated by regulations issued by the
Board of Health of the Borough of Oceanport. Such water treatment facilities shall be located
below grade or, if above grade, be enclosed by a suitable structure.
Enforcement; inspections. It shall be the duty of the Board of Health and/or the Construction
Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall also be the duty of the owner of any pool
to allow the Board of Health and/or the Construction Official access to any swimming pool or
wading pool and appurtenances thereto for the purpose of inspection and to ascertain compliance
with this chapter and all other pertinent ordinances at all reasonable times.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-31. Trailers and camp cars.
[Added 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 851]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any street in the Borough of
Oceanport or on any premises within the limits of the Borough except for the purpose of repair or
storage. Any such trailer or camp car undergoing repairs or being stored shall be kept within a building
and shall not, during such period of repairs or storage, be used by any person as a dwelling or
sleeping place.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 368/392
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
A.
§ 390-31.1. Communications towers.
[Added 8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 850]
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or
more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term shall include the
structure and any support thereof.
Applicability.
All communications towers within the Borough of Oceanport shall be subject to these
regulations, except as provided in Subsections B(2) and (3) below.
This section shall not govern any tower that is under 35 feet in height and is owned and
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
Lawful, preexisting, nonconforming towers and antennas, as hereinabove described, shall be
entitled to the protections and limitations available to lawful, preexisting, nonconforming
structures.
Locations permitted. A communication tower shall be a permitted conditional use in all zones
within the Borough of Oceanport, subject to the following conditions:
Communication towers shall only be permitted on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the Borough of Oceanport.
No communication tower shall be erected or operated within the Borough except pursuant to
a resolution of approval adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport and
a license or lease approved by same.
No communication tower shall be erected or operated on property owned or operated by the
Board of Education or in any park or other recreation facility.
No communication tower shall stand more than 100 feet for a single carrier, 125 feet for two
carriers and 130 feet for three or more carriers.
No communication tower shall be erected or operated within a fall zone, which shall be
established such that the tower is set back 150% of the height of the tower from any adjoining
lot line or nonappurtenant building.
In the event any communication tower shall be abandoned or not operated for a period of one
year, the same may be removed, at the option of the Borough of Oceanport, at the sole
expense of the operator.
§ 390-31.2. Pet shop.
[Added 8-15-2013 by Ord. No. 919]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a
pound shall apply to the Clerk or other official designated to license dogs in the municipality where
such establishment is located, for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 369/392
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to
be located, the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by
the written approval of the local municipality.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter, or pound shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year, and
be subject to revocation by the Borough on recommendation of the Department of Health or the
local board of health for failure to comply with rules and regulation of the state department or local
board governing the same, after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the state
department or local board, except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8c.
The Borough may issue a license for a pet shop that permits the pet shop to sell pet supplies for
all types of animals, including cats and dogs; however, no license shall be permitted allowing the
sale of either cats or dogs at pet shops throughout the Borough.
Preexisting pet shops, operating contrary to the provisions of this section, shall be grandfathered
as preexisting nonconforming uses.
§ 390-31.3. RMW development criteria.
[Added 2-18-2016 by Ord. No. 962]
Area of tract. The minimum tract area shall be the entirety of the RMW zone; no subdivision shall
be permitted. This shall not preclude dedication of land or easements for public right-of-way, public
access or other public purpose.
Maximum density. The maximum gross density for the tract shall be 11 dwelling units per acre.
Notwithstanding, the maximum number of dwelling units on a tract shall be 20 dwelling units.
Bulk building requirements.
Building setbacks.
Front yard setback: two-story building, 25 feet; three-story building, 35 feet.
Side yard setback: 10 feet.
Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
Mean high-water line setback: 150 feet.
Building height.
Where off-street parking is located beneath the building: the maximum building height
shall be three stories or 45 feet (parking level constitutes a story).
Where off-street parking is not located beneath the building: the maximum building height
shall be two stories or 35 feet.
Building coverage. Not more than 25% of the tract area may be occupied by buildings.
Impervious coverage. Not more than 75% of the tract may consist of impervious cover.
The front of residential buildings shall be oriented toward public or private streets or open water.
Architectural styles must be compatible with the turn of the century racetrack/seaside village
theme. Architectural styles must not be mixed in the same building. The use of detailing, such as
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 370/392
(1)
(1)
(a)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
I.
window shutters on upper floors, is recommended and encouraged where appropriate to the
architectural style. Blank walls will not be allowed.
Vinyl siding shall be prohibited.
Circulation.
Vehicle access to residential buildings shall take place at the rear of the buildings.
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of each private or public street or drive.
Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
A public walkway shall be provided along the waterfront of the Oceanport Creek.
A public easement of 20 feet in width shall be provided for the walkway.
The public walkway shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
Planting and buffer requirements.
A ten-foot planted buffer shall be provided along the side and rear yards.
Planted buffers shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees, deciduous trees and ornamental
trees and shrubs.
All parking shall be screened from adjacent residential properties and public/private streets
and drives. Screening shall consist of an evergreen hedge or shrubs at a minimum planting
height of four feet. A fence may be used in lieu of plantings.
Shade trees shall be provided in all uncovered off-street parking areas at a ratio of one tree
per three parking spaces.
Lighting.
Adequate lighting to ensure safe pedestrian and vehicle travel shall be provided.
All light fixtures shall be shielded with a ninety-percent cutoff.
Site lighting shall meet the standards in the IESNA Lighting Handbook, 9th edition or as may
be amended, for maintained illuminance values for parking lots - basic (figure 61) and
average maintained illuminance level for pedestrian ways (figure 63).
The maximum height of light fixtures shall be 16 feet.
Parking.
Surface parking and individual residential garages shall not be visible from public streets.
Parking may be provided beneath or as the first story of any structure.
Parking setback.
Side or rear yard abutting a nonresidential or mixed use: 10 feet.
Side or rear yard abutting open water: 30 feet.
Front yard where off-street parking is located beneath the building: not less than the
setback of the front facade for the principal building.
Front yard where off-street parking is not located beneath the building: 50 feet.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 371/392
(4)
(1)
(2)
J.
A.
B.
Residential parking shall be provided pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
Affordable housing contribution.
Twenty percent of the dwelling units developed shall be affordable dwelling units.
The affordable dwelling units shall meet all applicable regulations of the Council on Affordable
Housing and the Uniform Housing Affordability Control rules (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.),
including but not limited to bedroom distribution, income distribution and affordability controls.
§ 390-31.4. Marijuana-related businesses.
[Added 4-19-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
Businesses engaged in the growth or sale of medicinal or recreational marijuana or paraphernalia that
facilitates the use of marijuana shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, including R-1, which
encompasses the parcel(s) known as the former Fort Monmouth property.
§ 390-31.5. Village Center-Affordable Housing Overlay
Inclusionary Zone.
[Added 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1017]
Purpose. The Borough adopts this section to advance the following objectives: To address its
affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Borough shall implement a Village Center-
Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic opportunity for
housing in the Borough that is affordable to low- and moderate-income households. This section
establishes the Village Center-Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone, and permits the
creation of multifamily housing within the Village Center Zone, provided that such housing
complies with a required inclusionary set-aside requirement and with the requirements of this
section. The form of development shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and general design
principles of the East Main Street Urban Design and Resiliency Plan Element of the Borough
Master Plan.
Location. The Village Center-Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary District is applicable to the
following parcels:
Block 88, Lot 34
Block 88, Lot 35
Block 101, Lot 1
Block 101, Lot 2
Block 101, Lot 3
Block 101, Lot 4
Block 101, Lot 5
Block 101, Lot 6
Block 101, Lot 7
Block 101, Lot 8
Block 101, Lot 9
Block 121, Lot 3.01
Block 121, Lot 4
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 372/392
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
E.
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Village Center-Affordable Housing
Overlay Inclusionary District:
Inclusionary multifamily development, provided:
The minimum percentage of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be 15%
of the total number of dwelling units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total
number of dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
In any multifamily development having five or more residential units, at least one unit
must be established as affordable to low- and moderate-income households;
All affordable units produced must comply with the Borough's Affordable Housing
Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Affordable Housing.
Mixed-use development, provided inclusionary multifamily dwellings are provided. The
following nonresidential uses are permitted in the mixed-use development on the first floor:
Restaurant:
Bar;
Brewery;
Offices;
Retail;
Museum;
Gallery;
Houses of worship;
Recreation services, such as a health club;
Personal services, such as laundry cleaning and salons;
Uses similar to those permitted above as determined by the Planning Board.
Accessory uses permitted. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the
VC-AH District, provided they are located on the same premises as the principal use or structure
to which they are accessory and are located in the rear yard:
Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any of the above
permitted uses.
Surface parking area and garages.
Development standards.
Maximum density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
Principal building setbacks.
Front yard: 0 feet minimum; 15 feet maximum from front lot line.
Side yard: 10 feet.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 373/392
(c)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(8)
(1)
F.
Rear yard: 0 feet.
Accessory building setbacks.
Side yard: 10 feet.
Rear yard: 10 feet.
Maximum principal building height: three stories/38 feet.
Maximum accessory building height: 20 feet.
Maximum building coverage: 65%.
Maximum impervious surfaces: 80%.
Design standards.
Building design.
Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality architectural features that are
characteristic of and complementary to significant buildings reflecting the traditional
architecture within downtown centers in the region. The applicant for any
development shall demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality architecturally significant buildings.
If more than one primary structure is proposed, the architecture of each primary
structure shall be compatible but different from one another in terms of style,
materials and layout.
All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened from view.
Front-loaded townhouses are prohibited.
Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to include both interior
and exterior common areas devoted to recreational, social and similar functions for
residents and their guests, as set forth below:
At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to interior common areas,
such as but not limited to meeting rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor
recreational areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs, elevators,
entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical space or office space and similar
areas shall not count towards meeting this requirement.
At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to exterior common areas,
such as but not limited to recreational areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks,
patios, etc. Such areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on the
roof of the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not count towards meeting this
requirement unless such areas are specifically designed to be part of the
aforementioned features.
Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only.
Affordable housing. All residential development shall be required to include affordable housing as
a component. The following requirements shall apply:
The minimum percentage of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be 15% of
the total number of dwelling units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of
dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 374/392
[2]
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
C.
Very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed and rented in accordance
with the Council on Affordable Housing rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.,[2] and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including standards for
the split between very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing, provided a minimum of 13%
of the affordable units are very-low-income units at 30% of the median income and 37% of the
affordable units are low-income units with the 50% balance of units allowed at moderate
income; bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of units; affirmative
marketing; thirty-year minimum affordability controls; and construction phasing with the
market-rate units developed on the tract.
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on
10-16-2016.
The Borough-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be responsible to
affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant of each affordable unit, with all
administrative costs to be paid by the developer.
§ 390-31.6. Monmouth Park Age-Restricted Affordable Housing
Overlay Inclusionary Zone.
[Added 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1018]
Purpose. The Borough adopts this section to advance the following objectives: To address its
affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Borough shall implement a Monmouth Park Age-
Restricted Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing in the Borough that is affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
This section establishes the Monmouth Park Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary Zone, and
permits the creation of multifamily housing only upon the complete cessation of live horse racing
activity of any kind at Monmouth Park Racetrack, provided that such housing complies with a
required inclusionary set-aside requirement and with the requirements of this section.
Location. The Monmouth Park Age-Restricted Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary District is
applicable to Block 122, Lot 28.
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Monmouth Park Age-Restricted
Affordable Housing Overlay Inclusionary District:
Inclusionary multifamily development, provided:
The minimum percentage of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be 15%
of the total number of dwelling units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total
number of dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
In any multifamily development having five or more residential units, at least one unit
must be established as affordable to low- and moderate-income households;
All affordable units produced must comply with the Borough's Affordable Housing
Ordinance;[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Affordable Housing.
All residential units are age-restricted in accordance with the definition provided in the
Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance; and
Inclusionary multifamily residential development is only permitted upon the cessation of
live horse racing activity of any kind at Monmouth Park Racetrack.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 375/392
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
[a]
[b]
[3]
(c)
(4)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(d)
(5)
(6)
E.
Accessory uses permitted. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the
MPAR-AH District provided they are located on the same premises as the principal use or
structure to which they are accessory and are located in the rear yard:
Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any of the above
permitted uses.
Surface parking area and garages.
Development standards.
Maximum density: 12 dwelling units per acre.
Maximum building coverage: 65%.
Maximum impervious surfaces: 80%.
Townhouses.
Maximum height: 45 feet or three stories.
Maximum dwelling units in one building: eight.
Rear-loaded townhouses:
Minimum distances from front facade to private streets:
Building to sidewalk: 14 feet.
Building to curb: 21 feet.
Minimum distance from garage facade to curb, edge of alley pavement or edge of
sidewalk: 20 feet.
Minimum distances for side facades:
Building to building: 28 feet.
Building to private street: 15 feet.
Apartments.
Maximum height: 45 feet or three stories.
Maximum dwelling units in one building: 36.
Minimum building setbacks:
Building to building: 30 feet.
Building to private street: 16 feet.
Building to parking area or driveway: 15 feet.
For each affordable apartment, in addition to any storage areas contained within the
apartment, there shall be provided 300 cubic feet of storage in a conveniently accessible
area either within the apartment building or in a separate building where storage will not
constitute a fire hazard and where belongings can be kept locked and separated from the
belongings of other occupants.
Design standards.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 376/392
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(1)
[2]
(2)
(3)
F.
Building design.
Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality architectural features that are
characteristic of and complementary to other significant multifamily buildings
reflecting the traditional architecture within the Borough. The applicant for any
development shall demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality architecturally significant buildings.
If more than one primary structure is proposed, the architecture of each primary
structure shall be compatible but different from one another in terms of style,
materials and layout.
All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened from view.
Front-loaded townhouses are prohibited.
Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to include both interior
and exterior common areas devoted to recreational, social and similar functions for
residents and their guests, as set forth below:
At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to interior common areas,
such as but not limited to meeting rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor
recreational areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs, elevators,
entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical space or office space and similar
areas shall not count towards meeting this requirement.
At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to exterior common areas,
such as but not limited to recreational areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks,
patios, etc. Such areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on the
roof of the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not count towards meeting this
requirement unless such areas are specifically designed to be part of the
aforementioned features.
Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only.
Affordable housing. All residential development shall be required to include affordable housing as
a component. The following requirements shall apply:
The minimum percentage of very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be 15% of
the total number of dwelling units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of
dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
Very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed and rented in accordance
with the Council on Affordable Housing rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.[2] and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including standards for
the split between very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing, provided a minimum of 13%
of the affordable units are very-low-income units at 30% of the median income and 37% of the
affordable units are low-income units with the 50% balance of units allowed at moderate
income; bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of units; affirmative
marketing; thirty-year minimum affordability controls and construction phasing with the market
rate units developed on the tract.
Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994, expired on
10-16-2016.
The Borough-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be responsible to
affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant of each affordable unit, with all
administrative costs to be paid by the developer.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 377/392
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
Article VII. Performance Standards
§ 390-32. General application.
Permitted and special uses enumerated in all districts, and uses accessory thereto, are subject to the
following performance standards and procedures. Any other use, existing or proposed, which the
Construction Official has reasonable grounds to believe violates performance standards, shall also be
subject to these performance standard procedures.
§ 390-33. Performance standard procedures.
Prior to construction and operation. Any application for a building permit for a use which shall be
subject to performance standards shall be accompanied by a sworn statement by the owner of the
subject property that said use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards set
forth herein.
Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance standards is required, and
enforcement of continued compliance with these performance standards shall be by the
Construction Official or Planning Board.
Determination of violation. The Construction Official shall investigate any purported violation of
performance standards and, if there is reasonable grounds for the same, shall notify the Mayor
and Council of the occurrence or existence of a probable violation thereof. The Mayor and Council
shall consider the alleged violation. If, after public hearings on due notice, the Mayor and Council
finds that a violation occurred or exists, such violation shall be terminated as provided in
Subsection D following.
Termination of violation. All violations as ascertained in accordance with Subsection C above shall
be terminated within 30 days of the decision of the Mayor and Council or shall be deemed a
separate violation for each day following and subject to fines as set forth herein, except that
certain uses established before the effective date of this chapter and nonconforming as to
performance standards shall be given a reasonable time in which to conform therewith as
determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 390-34. Regulation of nuisance elements.
Definition of elements. No land or building in any district which shall be used or occupied for any
purpose shall be operated in such a manner as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosion or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, dirt or
other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare or other substance, condition or
element in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises, provided that
any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and maintained if it conforms to the
regulations of this subsection limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the specified point
or points of the determination of their existence.
Location where determinations are to be made for enforcement of performance standards. The
determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made:
At the point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for fire and explosion
hazards, for radioactivity and electrical disturbances and for smoke and other forms of air
pollution.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 378/392
(2)
A.
B.
C.
At or beyond the property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, vibration, glare
and odors, wherever the effect is greatest.
§ 390-35. Standards to be enforced.
Fire and explosion hazards. All activities involving and all storage of flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion
and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in this industry.
Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of state and local
laws and regulations shall also apply.
Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous
radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located
beyond the property of the creator of such disturbance. All applicable federal regulations shall be
complied with.
Noise. At the points of measurement specified in § 390-34B, the maximum sound pressure level
radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than transportation facilities or
temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several
frequency limits given in Table A after applying the corrections shown in Table B. The sound
pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer
conforming to standards prescribed by the United States of America Standards Institute.
(American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurements of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.3-
1944, United States of America Standards Institute, New York, New York, and American Standard
Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Sounds, Z24.10-1953, or
latest approved revision thereof, United States of America Standards Institute, New York, New
York, shall be used.)
Table A
Frequency Ranges Containing Standard
Octave Bands
(cycles per second)
Pressure Level*
(decibels re: 0.0002 dyne/cm)
20 to 300 60
300 to 2,400 40
Above 2,400 30
*If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the corrections shall be applied to the octave band levels given in
Table B.
Table B
Type of Location of Operation or Character of
Noise
Correction*
(decibels)
Daytime operation only 5
Noise source operating less than:
20% of any 1-hour period 5
5% of any 1-hour period 10
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) 5
*Apply one of these corrections only.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 379/392
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without instruments at the points of
measurement specified in § 390-34B.
Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be directly in a neighbor's property, whether from
floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as
to be visible at the point of measurement specified in § 390-34B. This restriction shall not apply to
signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
Smoke. No emission shall be permitted from any chimney or otherwise of visible grey smoke of a
shade equal to or darker than No. 1 on the Power's Micro Ringelmann Chart, published by
McGraw Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyrighted 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction of
a standard Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines).
Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such
quantities as to be readily detectable, at the property line of the zone lot from which they are
emitted, without instruments.
Other forms of air pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of
air pollution shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health or to animals, vegetation or
other forms of property, or which can cause excessive soiling.
Article VIII. Nonconformities
§ 390-36. Continuation of existing uses.
If at the time of the enactment of this chapter any building is being used or any building is being
constructed or altered and is completed within six months thereafter in a manner or for a purpose
which does not conform with requirements of this chapter, but which is not prohibited by any other
existing ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport, such use, manner or purpose may be continued, nor
shall any change of title or of right to possession affect such continuation of an existing use.
§ 390-37. Regulation of nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use declared to be substandard
under any building, housing or related code or authority of the Borough may be demolished and
reconstructed, provided that it shall comply with the area regulations of the district in which it is located
and reconstruction of the building is commenced within one year.
Article IX. Administration and Enforcement
§ 390-38. Authorities and duties of Construction/Zoning Official.
[Amended 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 948]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Construction/Zoning Official, who shall in no
case grant any permit(s) for the construction or alteration of any building and who shall not grant any
certificate of occupancy with respect to any building where the proposed construction, alteration or use
thereof would be in violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 390-39. Permits required.
[Amended 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 948]
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 380/392
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, extended, converted,
altered or demolished unless the owner or contractor shall first obtain a zoning permit from the
Zoning Official in accordance with the further provisions of this article.
No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, extended, converted,
altered or demolished unless the owner or contractor shall first obtain a building permit from the
Construction Official in accordance with the further provisions of this article.
§ 390-40. Design of residential units.
In order to preserve and assure the harmonious relationship of residential units to the comprehensive
neighborhood pattern and to prevent undue similarity of design which may lead to undue impairment of
the stability and value of residential units and produce neighborhood degeneration and blight with
attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants thereof and the Borough at large, no major subdivision shall be approved until the planned
construction (including front, side, and rear elevations) of residential units has been reviewed and
approved by the Construction Official in accordance with the standards enumerated below or unless a
waiver of these requirements has been granted by the Planning Board as provided for elsewhere in
this chapter.
The residential unit shall be of such character, quality or architectural design and construction
materials as will assure that:
The proposed structure will be in keeping with the general character of the area in which it is
located.
The proposed structure will have a harmonious relationship to the surrounding residential
units within 500 feet thereof.
The proposed structure will have a harmonious relationship to the community's Master Plan.
The proposed structure is not likely to produce any of the harmful effects which lead to
neighborhood degeneration and blight with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough at large.
The floor plan for each residential unit shall be sufficiently different from the existing or planned
residential unit immediately adjacent to it on either side and from the existing or planned
residential unit on a lot which is immediately across a street from any portion of its lot or of the
adjacent lots. To be deemed sufficiently different, said floor plan shall have a substantial
reorganization and relocation of the various living areas of the residential units. Mere variation on
room sizes or reversal of floor plans, whether from side to side or front to back, shall not be
construed as sufficiently different.
The front facade for each residential unit shall be substantially different from the front facade of
any existing or planned residential unit within five lots in either direction on the same side of the
street from any portion of the above-described lots and, in the case of corner lots, the side and
rear elevations of any existing or planned residential unit on any other corner lot at the same street
intersection. To be deemed substantially different, the facade or side and rear elevation thereof, as
the case may be, shall be different in at least three of the following five respects:
The relative location of a garage, if attached, a portion, if any, or any other such structural
appurtenance with respect to the residential unit itself.
The relative location or type of windows and doors.
The type or pitch of the roof.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 381/392
(4)
(5)
[1]
[1]
A.
The type of siding material.
The type of roofing material, the color thereof or the pattern.
§ 390-41. Denial of permit.
[Amended 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 948]
When an application for a proposed structure or structures does not meet the requirements of this
chapter, the Construction/Zoning Official or his duly authorized assistant shall refuse to issue a zoning
or building permit, stating the reasons for said denial, which shall be a part of the public record. The
applicant may appeal to the Planning Board.
Article X. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Development Fees, added 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 802, as amended, was
repealed 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1020. See now Ch. 108, Art. II.
§ 390-42. through § 390-51. (Reserved)
Article XI. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Provision of Affordable Housing Pursuant to Cycle Three "Growth Share
Regulations," added 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 803, was repealed 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1019. See now
Ch. 108, Art. I.
§ 390-52. through § 390-59. (Reserved)
Article XII. Penalties
§ 390-60. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, contractor or other persons
interested as lessee, tenant or otherwise in any building, premises or land where such violation has
been committed or shall exist shall for each and every violation be subject to a penalty as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-15, General penalty, at the discretion of the court or judicial officer before whom a
conviction may be had. Each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of this chapter and not as a continuing offense. In addition, the
Borough, the Construction Official or any property owner or owners shall have such other remedies
provided by law.
Article XIII. Repealer
§ 390-61. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of any ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed. The adoption of this chapter, however, shall not abate or prevent the continuance of any
proceedings instituted under the ordinance of which this chapter is a revision, nor abate or prevent
any proceedings or prosecution for offenses heretofore committed in violation of the ordinance
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 382/392
B.
known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Oceanport enacted July 7, 1955," of which this
chapter is a revision.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to change the status of the nonconforming uses heretofore
created by virtue of the prior Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereof, it being the intent that this
revision shall not supersede said ordinance or amendments thereof but that said ordinance and
amendments and this revision shall constitute a continuing body of law. The intent expressed
hereby shall apply not only to this section but to the entire ordinance as well.
Appendix
Chapter A450. Street Ordinances
Article I. Street Vacations
§ A450-1. Wardell Drive.
[Adopted 5-1-1924 by Ord. No. 23]
Vacation of street described on map entitled "Map of Property of Portaupeck Realty Co."
§ A450-2. Port-Au-Peck Avenue.
[Adopted 10-3-1940 by Ord. No. 85]
From westerly line of Myrtle Avenue westerly to the easterly line of Oceanport Avenue and also Myrtle
Avenue from the southerly line of Port-Au-Peck Avenue southerly to the boundary line of the City of
Long Branch.
§ A450-3. Unnamed Street.
[Adopted 2-3-1944 by Ord. No. 105]
A right-of-way, street or road known as "the road leading from Main Street to the steamboat dock."
§ A450-4. Myrtle Avenue.
[Adopted 1-17-1946 by Ord. No. 114]
From the southerly line of Port-Au-Peck Avenue to the boundary line of the City of Long Branch.
§ A450-5. View Point Place.
[Adopted 4-3-1947 by Ord. No. 127]
Portions described on a map entitled "Perfected and Amended Map of Property known as Portaupeck,
Monmouth County, N.J., dated June 21, 1920."
§ A450-6. Rankin Place.
[Adopted 10-2-1947 by Ord. No. 131]
Portion as shown on a map entitled "Map of Property Belonging Mrs. Rankin, Oceanport, N. J., dated
November, 1926."
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 383/392
§ A450-7. Shallow Point Place.
As shown on a map entitled "Perfected and Amended Map of Property Known as Portaupeck,
Monmouth County, N.J., dated June 21, 1920."
§ A450-8. Grove Place and Forest Place.
[Adopted 5-2-1957 by Ord. No. 197]
Shown on map entitled "Hillcrest, Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, N.J., Homesites
Development. Inc., Owner."
§ A450-9. Paper streets.
[Adopted 5-2-1957 by Ord. No. 198]
Shown on map entitled "Hillcrest, Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, N. J., Homesites
Development. Inc., Owner," which streets were never opened by the developer.
§ A450-10. Paper street.
[Adopted 6-6-1957 by Ord. No. 199]
Shown on map entitled "Map of Property at Oceanport, New Jersey belonging to Dr. H. H. Pemberton,
dated May 3, 1909," which street was never opened by the developer.
§ A450-11. Paper street.
[Adopted 9-5-1957 by Ord. No. 200]
Appears on Official Tax Map running easterly from River Street to the Shrewsbury River.
§ A450-12. Seawaneka Avenue.
[Adopted 2-6-1958 by Ord. No. 201]
A portion described in a map entitled "Perfected and Amended Map of Property known as Portaupeck,
Monmouth County, N.J., dated June 21, 1920."
§ A450-13. Seneca Place.
[Adopted 11-4-1959 by Ord. No. 212]
A portion described on a map entitled "Amended Map on Property known as Port-au-Peck, Monmouth
County, N.J., dated June 21, 1920."
§ A450-14. Elkwood Avenue.
[Adopted 5-5-1960 by Ord. No. 215]
Lying between Bridgewaters Drive on the north and Port-Au-Peck Avenue on the south, which road is
sometimes known as "Railroad Avenue."
§ A450-15. Driveway.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 384/392
[Adopted 4-6-1961 by Ord. No. 220]
A portion described on a map entitled "Amended Map of Oceanport Park on the Shrewsbury River,
Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, N.J., dated May 10, 1928."
§ A450-16. Paper streets.
[Adopted 8-6-1964 by Ord. No. 236]
Described on maps entitled "Supplemental Map Showing Subdivision of Block Two," "Map of Property
of Portaupeck Realty Company Known as Portaupeck, Monmouth County, N.J., dated September 16,
1907," which streets were never opened by the developer.
§ A450-17. Blackberry Bay Avenue.
[Adopted 10-1-1964 by Ord. No. 238]
A portion of a paper street described on a map entitled "Perfected and Amended Map of Property
Known as Portaupeck, Monmouth County, N.J., dated June 21, 1920."
§ A450-18. Paper street.
[Adopted 2-3-1966 by Ord. No. 246]
Unnamed street running westerly from River Street to the easterly line of Lot 8B, in Block 68, as shown
on the Official Tax Map.
§ A450-19. Main Street and Oceanport Avenue.
[Adopted 3-17-1977 by Ord. No. 402]
A portion of the intersection of Main Street and Oceanport Avenue containing 2,012.07 square feet and
being more particularly described in Ord. No. 402.
§ A450-20. Paper street (commonly known as "Oak Place").
[Adopted 8-3-1978 by Ord. No. 419]
Previously dedicated as a public street but never opened.
§ A450-21. East Main Street (formerly Oceanport Avenue) and
Bridgewaters Drive.
[Adopted 6-19-1980 by Ord. No. 446]
A portion of East Main Street and Bridgewaters Drive containing 2,875 square feet more or less and
being more particularly described in Ord. No. 446.
§ A450-22. Ransom Court, certain unnamed roads and portions
of Gold Street.
[Adopted 2-18-1982 by Ord. No. 458]
Located in or adjoining Block 81 on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 385/392
§ A450-23. Riddle Place.
[Adopted 5-6-1982 by Ord. No. 463]
A portion of Riddle Place, appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport, and more
particularly described in Ord. No. 463.
§ A450-24. Winhar Place.
[Adopted 9-2-1982 by Ord. No. 467]
A portion of Winhar Place, appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport, and more
particularly described in Ord. No. 467.
§ A450-25. Paper street (commonly known as "River Place").
[Adopted 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 485]
Previously dedicated as a public street but never opened, appearing on the Tax Map of the Borough of
Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord. No. 485.
§ A450-26. Maple Avenue.
[Adopted 2-7-1985 by Ord. No. 502]
A portion of Maple Avenue, appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport, which was
previously dedicated as a public street, but never opened and more particularly described in Ord. No.
502.
§ A450-27. Mohawk Avenue.
[Adopted 11-6-1986 by Ord. No. 531]
A portion of Mohawk Avenue which was previously dedicated as a public street but never opened,
appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord.
No. 531.
§ A450-28. Hiawatha Avenue and Mohawk Avenue.
[Adopted 2-5-1987 by Ord. No. 539]
Portions of Hiawatha Avenue and Mohawk Avenue which were previously dedicated as public streets
but never opened, appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more
particularly described in Ord. No. 539.
§ A450-29. Willow Court.
[Adopted 3-5-1987 by Ord. No. 541]
A portion of Willow Court which was previously dedicated as a public street but never opened,
appearing on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord.
No. 541.
§ A450-30. Riverview Place.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 386/392
[Adopted 4-14-1988 by Ord. No. 567]
Which was previously dedicated as a public street but never opened, appearing on the Official Tax
Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord. No. 567.
§ A450-31. Cayuga Avenue.
[Adopted 9-1-1988 by Ord. No. 577]
A portion of Cayuga Avenue which was previously dedicated as a public street, appearing on the
Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord. No. 577.
§ A450-32. Unnamed street running off of Riverside Avenue in
Block 105.
[Adopted 6-30-1994 by Ord. No. 654]
Described on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord.
No. 654.
§ A450-33. Unimproved street appearing on the Official Tax Map
as Malden Way.
[Adopted 10-6-1994 by Ord. No. 660]
Described on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord.
No. 660.
§ A450-34. Unimproved street appearing on the Official Tax Map
as River Street.
[Adopted 5-16-1996 by Ord. No. 678]
Described on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport and more particularly described in Ord.
No. 678.
§ A450-35. Foggia Way.
[Adopted 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 806]
The existing and currently unimproved "Maple Place" right-of-way (extending from Monmouth
Boulevard, in a southerly direction) will be known as "Foggia Way."
Chapter A451. Establishment of Parks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oceanport as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Trinity Place Park
[Adopted 6-19-1975 by Ord. No. 372 (Ch. A101 of the 1970 Code)]
§ A451-1. Establishment and naming.
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 387/392
There is hereby established and dedicated to the residents of Oceanport a park to be known as "Trinity
Place Park."
§ A451-2. Boundaries.
The boundaries of Trinity Place Park are a portion of Lot 3B in Block 83 and are more particularly
described as follows:
All that tract or parcel of land and premises situate, lying and being in the Borough of Oceanport in
the County of Monmouth and State of New Jersey, more particularly described as follows:
Description of a portion of a parcel of land known as Lot 3B, Block 83, as shown on the Tax Map of
the Borough of Oceanport and as shown on a map entitled "Sketch Plat Trinity Place Subdivision, Lot
3B, Block 83, situate in the Borough of Oceanport, Monmouth County, New Jersey, Scale 1" = 60',
February 1, 1973, revised April 3, 1973," prepared by Ackerman Ney Associates, Consulting
Engineer and Planners, 71 West Main Street, Freehold, New Jersey 07728, signed by August F.
Postel P.E. & L.S., License No. 3249, State of New Jersey:
Beginning at a point in the existing southeasterly line of Main Street where the same is intersected by
the northeasterly property line of Lot 2, Block 83, of the Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport,
thence.
(1) Along the existing southeasterly line of Main Street on a bearing of North 49° 15' East 99 feet
to a point, said point being the northwest corner of Lot 3A, Block 83, of the aforesaid Tax Map;
thence
(2) South 39° 45' East along the southwesterly property line of Lot 3A aforesaid, 167.35 feet to a
point, said point being the southerly quarter of Lot 3A aforesaid; thence
(3) North 49° 15' East along the southeasterly property line of Lot 3A aforesaid 73.76 feet to a
point in the southwesterly property line of Lot 11, Block 83, of the aforesaid Tax Map; thence
(4) South 39° 45' East along the southwesterly property line of Lot 11, Block 83, aforesaid and the
southwesterly right-of-way line of Trinity Place and the southwesterly property line of Lot 12,
Block 83, aforesaid 316.72 feet to a point, said point being the southerly corner of Lot 12, Block
83, aforesaid; thence
(5) South 49° 15' West along the northwesterly property line of Lot 27, Lot 28-73, Lot 29-72 and
Lot 30-71, 172.26 feet to a point, said point being the easterly corner of Lot 33A, Block 83,
aforesaid; thence
(6) North 39° 45' West along the northeasterly property line of Lot 33A, Lot 33, Lot 34, Lot 35, Lot
26, Lot 37 and Lot 2, Block 83, aforesaid, 484.07 feet to a point in the southeasterly line of
Main Street, the point and place of beginning.
Excepting therefrom the following premises:
Beginning at a point in the existing southeasterly line of Main Street where the same is intersected by
the northeasterly property line of Lot 2, Block 83, of the Tax Map of the Borough of Oceanport; thence
(1) Along the existing southeasterly line of Main Street on a bearing of North 49° 15' East 99 feet
to a point, said point being the northwest corner of Lot 3A, Block 83, of the aforesaid Tax Map;
thence
(2) South 39° 45' East along the southwesterly property line of Lot 3A aforesaid, 162 feet more or
less to a point; thence
(3) South 49° 15 West a distance of 99 feet to a point, said point being in the northeasterly line of
Block 37, Block 83, thence
(4) North 49° 45' West along the northeasterly line of Lots 37 and 2 in Block 83 a distance of 162
feet more or less to the point or place of beginning.
Containing 16,000 square feet, more or less.
Article II. Maria Gatta Community Park
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 388/392
[1]
[Adopted 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 807]
§ A451-3. Establishment and naming.
There is hereby established and dedicated to the residents of Oceanport a park to be known as the
"Maria Gatta Community Park."
§ A451-4. Boundaries.
The boundaries of Maria Gatta Community Park are Lot 26.02, Block 88 and are more particularly
described as follows:
All that tract or parcel of land and premises situated, lying and being the Borough of Oceanport, in the
County of Monmouth, in the State of New Jersey more particularly described on the attached
Schedule A description.[1]
Editor's Note: Said Schedule A is on file in the Borough offices.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT. Derivation Table
ATTACHMENTS
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Oceanport adopted since the
2008 republication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion.
[Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
material (NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the 2008 republication of the Code was Ord. No. 847,
adopted 7-17-2008.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
848 8-8-2008 Parks and playgrounds: general rules and
regulations amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
932
849 8-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
850 8-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
851 9-18-2008 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
852 10-16-2008 Volunteer incentives: exemption from fees
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I
854 11-6-2008 Stormwater control amendment Ch. 328
855 11-6-2008 Professional service contracts Ch. 35, Art. II
857 2-18-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 389/392
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
859 3-19-2009 Peace and good order: disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 284, Art. I
860 4-2-2009 Parks and playgrounds: use of facilities
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
932
861 4-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
865 5-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
867 7-16-2009 Police Department: establishment
amendment
Ch. 78, Art. I
871 9-17-2009 Flood damage prevention Superseded by Ord.
No. 914
872 9-17-2009 Sewers: retrofitting of storm drain inlets Ch. 306, Art. V
873 9-17-2009 Solid waste: dumpsters and refuse
containers
Ch. 325, Art. V
875 11-5-2009 Games of chance: authorization to grant
raffle and bingo licenses
Ch. 236, Art. II
876 12-23-2009 Towing and storage amendment Ch. 361
879 9-17-2009 Solid waste: recycling amendment; debris
management plan for construction permits
Ch. 325, Arts. II and VI
881 5-6-2010 Police Department: extra-duty assignments Ch. 78, Art. III
886 10-7-2010 Tax Collector fees amendment Ch. 204, Art. IV
888 12-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
889 12-1-2010 Peace and good order: disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 284, Art. I
890 12-16-2010 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 127, Art. I
891 2-17-2011 Property maintenance amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
920
892 3-3-2011 Volunteer incentives: length of service
awards program amendment
Ch. 103, Art. II
893 3-3-2011 Fees: athletic facilities and boat ramp
amendment
Ch 204, Art. VII
896 6-2-2011 Uniform construction codes amendment Ch. 170
897 6-16-2011 Police Department: extra-duty assignments
amendment
Ch. 78, Art. III
899 11-30-2011 Fire Department Ch. 50
901 4-5-2012 Recreation Committee amendment Ch. 29, Art. III
902 4-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
906 6-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
907 6-21-2012 Police Department: establishment
amendment
Ch. 78, Art. I
908 7-19-2012 Noise amendment Ch. 267
911 12-19-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
912 3-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
914 5-16-2013 Flood damage prevention Ch. 229
915 7-18-2013 Special events Ch. 326
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 390/392
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
916 7-18-2013 Fees: events; boat ramp amendment Ch. 204, Art. VII
919 8-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
920 10-3-2013 Property maintenance: adoption of
standards
Ch. 295, Art. I
921 11-7-2013 Property maintenance: snow and ice
removal
Ch. 295, Art. II
924 12-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
925 12-4-2013 Peace and good order: disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 284, Art. I
928 3-6-2014 Towing and storage amendment Ch. 361
932 8-7-2014 Parks and recreation areas Ch. 279
934 9-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
937 10-16-2014 Alcoholic beverages: licensing amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
939 12-3-2014 Public buildings: rental regulations Ch. 297, Art. I
940 12-3-2014 Fees: special events, boat ramps and
athletic facilities amendment; public
buildings
Ch. 204, Arts. VII and
VIII
941 2-5-2015 Volunteer incentives: exemption from fees Ch. 103, Art. I
943 2-19-2015 Property maintenance: invasive plants Ch. 295, Art. III
944 4-2-2015 Nursing homes: transportation services Ch. 269, Art. I
945 4-2-2015 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 336
948 4-16-2015 Fees: zoning documents amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 204, Art. VI; Ch.
390
949 5-7-2015 Fees: food handlers and mobile food
vendors; food handlers and mobile food
vendors
Ch. 204, Art. IX; Ch.
230
952 6-18-2015 Fees: special events, boat ramps, and
athletic facilities amendment; special
events amendment
Ch. 204, Art. VII; Ch.
326
955 8-20-2015 Property maintenance: adoption of
standards amendment
Ch. 295, Art. I
957 8-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 64
959 11-5-2015 Alcoholic beverages: licensing amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
961 2-18-2016 Affordable housing Repealed by Ord. No.
1019
962 2-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
963 4-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
964 4-21-2016 Exceed budget; establish cap bank NCM
968 9-15-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 390
969 11-3-2016 Alcoholic beverages: licensing amendment Ch. 115, Art. II
970 2-16-2017 Bond NCM
972 4-20-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
973 4-20-2017 Bond NCM
974 6-22-2017 Salaries NCM
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 391/392
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supplement
No.
975 6-22-2017 Uniform Construction Codes
Amendment
Ch. 170 15
976 6-22-2017 Recreation Program Fees; Parks
and Recreation Areas: Recreation
Programs; Sponsorship
Ch. 204, Art. X; Ch.
279, Art. II; Ch. 279,
Art. III
15
977 8-17-2017 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 229 15
978 9-21-2017 Uniform Construction Codes
Amendment
Ch. 170 15
979 10-19-2017 Committees and Commissions:
Green Team
Ch. 29, Art. XI 15
980 10-19-2017 Redevelopment Plan NCM 15
981 11-2-2017 Alcoholic Beverages: Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. II 15
982 11-2-2017 Streets and Sidewalks: Excavations
Amendment; Street Dedications
Amendment
Ch. 331, Art. I; Ch. 331,
Art. II
15
983 12-14-2017 Defined Contribution Retirement
Program
NCM 15
984 2-15-2018 Police Chaplain Ch. 78, Art. IV 15
985 3-15-2018 Peddlers and Solicitation: Door-to-
Door Commercial Solicitation
Ch. 286, Art. I 15
986 4-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 390 15
989 6-7-2018 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 229 15
990 6-21-2018 Alcoholic Beverages: Operation
Restrictions for Licensees
Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I 15
991 9-20-2018 Payroll Procedures: Third-Party
Payroll Disbursement
Ch. 75, Art. I 15
992 10-18-2018 Borough Historian Ch. 8 15
993 11-1-2018 Alcoholic Beverages: Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. II 15
996 3-21-2019 Property Maintenance: Adoption of
Standards Amendment
Ch. 295, Art. I 16
997 3-21-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Maintenance of Streets and Rightof-
Ways; Trees Amendment
Ch. 331, Art. III; Ch.
371
16
998 4-4-2019 Committees and Commissions:
Environmental Commission
Amendment; Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 29, Art. IV; Ch. 250 16
1002 5-21-2019 Parks and Recreation Areas:
General Provisions Amendment
Ch. 279: Art. I 16
1003 7-18-2019 Nursing Homes: Transportation
Services Amendment
Ch. 269, Art. I 17
7/6/2020 Borough of Oceanport, NJ Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/OC0304?guid=OC0304&children=true 392/392
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supplement
No.
1004 7-18-2019 Streets and Sidewalks: Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 331, Art. I 17
1005 7-18-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 204 17
1007 10-17-2019 Animals: Dogs Amendment Ch. 127, Art. I 18
1008 10-17-2019 Parks and Recreation Areas:
Blackberry Bay Park Launch
Facilities
Ch. 279, Art. IV 18
1010 10-17-2019 Property Maintenance: Adoption of
Standards Amendment
Ch. 295, Art. I 18
1011 11-7-2019 Alcoholic Beverages: Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 115, Art. II 18
1012 11-7-2019 Helistops Ch. 243 18
1013 11-7-2019 Approval of Municipal Boundary NCM 18
1014 12-19-2019 Americans With Disabilities Act
Compliance
Ch. 6 19
1015 2-20-2020 Volunteer Incentives: Exemption
From Fees Amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I 19
1016 2-20-2020 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 64 19
1017 2-20-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 390 19
1018 2-20-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 390 19
1019 2-20-2020 Affordable Housing: Fair Share
Provisions and Affordability
Controls; Zoning Amendment
Ch. 108, Art. I; Ch. 390 19
1020 2-20-2020 Affordable Housing: Development
Fees; Zoning Amendment
Ch. 108, Art. II; Ch. 390 19
1021 3-19-2020 Property Maintenance: Hazardous
Substances
Ch. 295, Art. IV 19
1022 4-23-2020 Single-Use Plastics, Regulation of Ch. 313 19
1023 4-23-2020 Fire Prevention: Establishment and
Management. Amendment
Ch. 223, Art. II 19

LAND DEVELOPMENT
390 Attachment 1
Borough of Oceanport
Schedule I
Permitted Land Uses
District Permitted Principal Uses Permitted Accessory Uses Conditional Uses
R-1 Single-Family
R-2 Single-Family
R-3 Single Family
R-4 Single-Family
Single-family detached dwelling
Park and playground and open space
Municipal building
Library
Public schools
Community facilities
Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship
Private garages for no more than 3 motor
vehicles
Private boat launching and docking facilities
for no more than 3 boats
Signs
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted
principal use
Private swimming pools and private tennis
courts
Communication tower
R-5 Single-Family and TwoFamily
Single-family detached dwelling
2-family dwelling
Park, playground and open space
Public schools
Same as Residential Districts R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4
Communication tower
R-7.5 Single-Family Single-family detached dwelling
Park, playground and open space
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted
principal use
Communication tower
R-M Multifamily Multiple-family dwelling
Public schools
Library
Community facilities
Municipal building
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted
principal use
Communication tower
RMO Multifamily Multifamily development (fee-simple owner)
Multifamily age-restricted development
Assisted living facility
Nursing home
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted
principal use
Communication tower
RMW Multifamily Multifamily dwelling units Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted
principal use
Communication tower
390 Attachment 1:1 Publication, Apr 2021
OCEANPORT CODE
District Permitted Principal Uses Permitted Accessory Uses Conditional Uses
V-C Village Center Permitted first-floor uses:
- Retail stores and service establishments,
including, but not limited to, drugstore,
stationery store, the sale of gifts, antiques,
flowers, books, jewelry, wearing apparel, craft
shops making articles for retail sale on
premises, specialty food shops
- Banks, travel, real estate, and insurance offices
- Museums, galleries and studios for dance, art,
music, photography, radio or television
- Fully enclosed restaurants and drinking
establishments with or without outdoor dining
areas
- A maximum of 25% professional and/or
medical/dental offices
- Grocery stores in excess of 5,000 square feet
(drive-in or drive-through restaurants and drivethrough drugstores are prohibited)
- Shopping center
- Age-restricted development
Permitted second-floor uses:
- General business and professional offices,
medical/dental offices, studios, or 1- and 2-
bedroom residential apartments
Permitted third-floor uses:
- Studio and 1-bedroom apartments
- No more than 25% of the footprint can contain
a third floor
General requirements:
- First-floor area: minimum 1,200 square feet,
maximum 5,000 square feet per unit
- Residential units must have a minimum of 800
square feet
Signs
Incidental storage
Parking and loading facilities
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a principal
permitted use
Communication tower
VC-AH Village Center -
Affordable Housing Overlay
V-C Village Center District permitted principal
uses, provided 4 or more affordable housing units
are provided on site
Same as V-C Village Center District above Communication tower
390 Attachment 1:2 Publication, Apr 2021
LAND DEVELOPMENT
District Permitted Principal Uses Permitted Accessory Uses Conditional Uses
B-1 Professional and Office Business or professional office buildings, including
banks and financial institutions, but not including
businesses which involve the retail sale of goods
Recreation facilities, including public open space,
public active and passive recreational uses such as
miniature golf, a golf driving range
Clubhouses, auditoriums and other places of
assembly
Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship
Age-restricted development
Utility service facility/structure
Signs
Off-street parking facilities
Communication tower
B-2 General and
Recreational Commercial
Horse racing, with or without pari-mutuel
wagering, provided that any racetrack conducted
for profit shall be licensed by the State Racing
Commission
Clubhouses, auditoriums and other places of
assembly
Motels and hotels
Eating and drinking establishments
Business and professional offices
Swimming pools
Ice-skating rinks
Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship
Utility service facility/structure
Signs
Parking and loading facilities
Within the confines of any structure or
structures designed, constructed and/or used
for horse racing, business incidental thereto
may be conducted for the convenience of the
users thereof, such as restaurants, food and
beverage stands, newspaper stands and the
like, provided that the conduct of business
should be confined to a limited area, the
access to which can only be made by paying
a general admission or other similar charge.
Accessory uses and structures customarily
appurtenant to a principal permitted use and/
or necessary to the conduct of a principal
permitted use
Communication tower
390 Attachment 1:3 Publication, Apr 2021
OCEANPORT CODE
District Permitted Principal Uses Permitted Accessory Uses Conditional Uses
I Industrial Any use permitted in the B-1 District, plus
manufacturing of small machine parts and
assemblies, such as carburetors, cash registers,
sewing machines, calculators, and other machines
Fabrication of paper products, comprising any of
the following: bags, bookbinding, boxes and
packaging material and office supplies
Laboratories comprising any of the following:
dental, electronic and pharmaceutical
The warehousing or storage of goods and products,
provided that no goods are sold on or from the
premises
Manufacturing of electronic products; switches and
controls; glass and glass products manufacturing;
jewelry manufacturing, including gem polishing;
leather goods manufacturing except curing, tanning,
and finishing hides; printing plant; sporting goods
and toy manufacturing; and thread and yarn
manufacturing
Sign
Private garage space necessary to store
vehicles owned by the occupant on the
premises
Electric light and power and other utility
company installations which may be needed
in conjunction with this Industrial Zone
Other accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a principal
permitted use
Communication tower
390 Attachment 1:4 Publication, Apr 2021

LAND DEVELOPMENT
390 Attachment 2
Borough of Oceanport
Schedule II
Bulk and Coverage Controls
R-1
Single-Family
R-2
Single-Family
R-3
Single-Family
R-4
Single-Family
R-5
Single-Family
Minimum lot area (square feet) 30,000 15,000 12,000 10,000 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 150 125 120 100 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200 120 100 100 100
Maximum height (stories / feet)
(1) Flat roof
(2) All other roofs
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
Maximum building coverage
(1) Principal build
(2) Accessory build
20%
5%
25%
5%
25%
5%
25%
5%
25%
5%
Maximum dwelling units per acre 1.5 3.0 3.7 4.5 4.5
Minimum principal building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Front2, 5
(2) Side3, 4 (one / both)
(3) Rear4
50
15 / 35
40
30
10 / 25
40
30
10 / 25
25
30
10 / 20
25
30
10 / 20
25
Minimum accessory building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Side
(2) Rear
20
10
15
10
10
5
10
5
10
5
Maximum impervious coverage 25% 32% 37% 40% 40%
390 Attachment 2:1 Publication, Apr 2021
OCEANPORT CODE
Schedule II
Bulk and Coverage Controls
R-5
Two-Family
R-7.5
Single-Family
R-M
Multifamily
RMO
MultipleFamily
Development
RMW
MultipleFamily
Waterfront
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,000 per dwelling
unit
7,500 5 acres Refer to § 390-
21.5 for bulk
and general
requirements
Refer to § 390-
21.5 for bulk
and general
requirements
Minimum lot width (feet) 70 per dwelling unit 75 350
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 100 350
Maximum height6
 (stories / feet)
(1) Flat roof
(2) All other roofs
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
Maximum building coverage
(1) Principal build
(2) Accessory build
25%
5%
25%
5%
25%
5%
Maximum dwelling units per acre 6.3 4.0 12
Minimum principal building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Front2, 5
(2) Side3, 4 (one / both)
(3) Rear4
30
15 / 20
25
30
10 / 20
25
75
30 / 60
50
Minimum accessory building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Side
(2) Rear
10
5
10
5
30
50
Maximum impervious coverage 40% 45% 45% 45%
390 Attachment 2:2 Publication, Apr 2021
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Schedule II
Bulk and Coverage Controls
V-C Village
Center
VC-AH Village
Center -
Affordable
Housing
Overlay
B-1 Professional
and Office
B-2 General and
Recreational
Commercial I Industrial
Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,0001
Same as the V-C
Village Center
District
62,500 80,000 40,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 250 250 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 250 250 200
Maximum height (stories / feet)
(1) Flat roof
(2) All other roofs
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
2 / 30
2.5 / 35
Maximum lot coverage
(1) Principal build
(2) Accessory build
25%
5%
25% 15%
5%
30%
5%
Maximum dwelling units per acre 16
Minimum principal building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Front
(2) Side (one / both)
(3) Rear
15
10 / 20
25
100
50 / 100
100
100
50 / 100
60
50
25 / 50
25
Minimum accessory building yard
setbacks (feet)
(1) Side
(2) Rear
20
10
50
50
20
10
Maximum impervious coverage 80% 60% 60% 60%
Notes:
1 Shopping centers shall have a minimum lot area of five acres, and an age-restricted residential development shall have a minimum lot area of 15,000 square
feet with a maximum number of units to not exceed 50 units.
2 Refer to § 390-17B and D for front yard setback exceptions.
3 Refer to § 390-17C for side yard setback exceptions.
4 Refer to § 390-17A for general yard exceptions.
5 Refer to § 390-17A(4) for front yard exceptions.
6 Refer to § 390-16B for additional height regulations.
390 Attachment 2:3 Publication, Apr 2021

