Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Borough Council
[Adopted 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the various chapters and Articles of the
Revised Ordinances, 1961 Code of the Borough of Oradell, and the other
ordinances of the Borough of Oradell of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 290, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Oradell," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1961 Code of the Borough
of Oradell, and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior
to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Oradell by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Oradell" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Oradell, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinance are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Oradell to be misrepresented thereby.
§ 1-10. Violations and penalties.
For violation of any provision of this article, any other chapter of this Code
or any other ordinance of the Borough where no other penalty is specifically
provided for regarding the provision violated, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Except
as other provided, each and every day in which a violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
§ 1-6 ORADELL CODE § 1-11
1:4
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 17, 1988.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:5
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance regulating vehicles and traffic and municipal parking
lots in the Borough of Oradell.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-15B, the following sections were added or amended: §§ 25-2,
25-10, 25-11, 25-12, 25-14, 27-2, 48-34, 62-4, 65-3, 65-12, 95-4, 100-5, 107-8, 115-12A,
121-10B, 137-3, 170-11D, 175-1A(28)(b), 180-3, 190-6, 190-7, 190-8, 230-6, 235-10,
235-12, 235-18A, 235-25, 235-29, 235-30, 240-6A, 245-5, 245-10A(2), 245-18, 260-2B and
C and § 285-5. In addition, the following portions of the 1961 Revised Ordinances, adopted
3-20-1961, were deleted: Sec. 11-2 of Chapter 11; Sec. 17-2 of Chapter 17; and Chapter
19. A complete description of these changes may be found in Ord. No. 837, on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 1-14 ORADELL CODE § 1-15
1:6
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
§ 2-1. Meetings of Mayor and Council.
§ 2-2. Calling of meeting to order.
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the members present shall be called
to order by the Mayor or the President of the Council, or in their absence,
by the most senior member of the Borough Council. He/she shall announce
publicly and have entered in the minutes a statement that proper notice
of the meeting was provided and the time, place and manner in which the
notice was provided. The Borough Clerk shall immediately proceed to call
the roll and note the absences.
§ 2-3. Presiding over meetings.
The Mayor or the President of the Council shall preside at all meetings or,
in their absence, the Senior Councilperson present shall preside. Seniority
shall be determined by length of service on the Council. If two or more
members have equal seniority, the determination shall be alphabetical.
A. There shall be two meetings of the Mayor and Council per month as
follows:
(1) Second Tuesday of the month: work session.
(2) Fourth Tuesday of the month: public meeting.
B. All work sessions and public meetings shall be called to order at 7:30
p.m. All meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be adjourned no later
than 10:00 p.m. The Mayor or a vote by a majority of the governing
body can extend the meeting. All work sessions, special meetings, and
public meetings shall be recorded by video recording in order to
preserve a record of the proceeding. Special meetings shall be called by
the Mayor or at the request of four Councilpersons pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-120 and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.5. Notice shall be given for all
special, work session, regular or rescheduled meetings pursuant to law.
All notices shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act.2 The Clerk
shall notify the Mayor and all Councilpersons of every meeting.
Holidays and religious observances shall be taken into consideration in
the scheduling of meetings. Closed session meetings shall be scheduled
prior to work session/public meetings or as needed, and pertinent
information germane to the closed session matter(s) shall be
distributed to the governing body at least 24 hours prior to the start of
the closed session meeting, except where emergency circumstances do
not permit.
2. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:7
§ 2-4. Duties of Mayor.
§ 2-5. Order of business.
A. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for a period of three days or,
for any reason, is unable to act, the President of the Council shall
perform all the duties of the Mayor during such absence or inability.
The Mayor, in case of her/his intended absence from the Borough for
more than three days at any one time, shall notify the President of such
intended absence, whereupon the President shall be and become Acting
Mayor from the beginning of such absence and continue to act until the
Mayor's return. The Council President, as Acting Mayor, retains the
right to vote on all matters brought before the governing body. [N.J.S.A.
40A-60-1 et seq.]
B. If the Mayor or a Councilperson resigns or leaves office for any reason,
the Borough will follow the procedure outlined by N.J.S.A. 40A:16,
which deals with vacancies in certain elected municipal offices.
A. The order of business for work sessions shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Notification of meeting.
(3) Pledge of allegiance.
(4) Roll call.
(5) Presentations.
(6) Public comment (limited to agenda items only).
(7) Response from Council.
(8) Discussion items.
(9) Administrator's report.
(10) Old business.
(11) New business.
(12) Public comment (each speaker shall have three minutes and one
turn).
(13) Governing body response to public comment.
(14) Adjournment.
B. The order of business for public meetings shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Notification of meeting.
§ 2-4 ORADELL CODE § 2-5
1:8
§ 2-6. Order and decorum.
The Mayor, or in his/her absence, the presiding officer, shall preserve order
and decorum and shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to
the Council, which shall be aided by the Borough Attorney who shall act as
Parliamentarian. The Mayor shall be the non-voting ex-officio member of all
committees established hereunder, both standing and special. The Mayor
shall vote on any and all committees to which he/she is a regular member.
§ 2-7. Mayor as presiding officer.
During any time the public is allowed to speak, the Mayor, as presiding
officer, shall have discretion to cut off any repetitive, irrelevant or excessive
public comment in the interest of allowing members of the public time to
speak and completing the public business within a reasonable period of
time.
§ 2-8. Members of Council to address Chair.
(3) Invocation.
(4) Pledge of allegiance.
(5) Roll call.
(6) Presentations.
(7) Public comments (limited to agenda items only).
(8) Governing body response to public comment.
(9) Approval of minutes.
(10) Correspondence.
(11) Consent agenda.
(12) Reports of the Mayor and Council.
(13) Introduction/adoption of ordinances.
(14) Administrator's report.
(15) Old business.
(16) New business.
(17) Public comment. (Each speaker shall have three minutes and one
turn. There shall be no debate during this portion of the meeting.)
(18) Governing body response to public comment.
(19) Adjournment.
A. Each member of the Council, while speaking, must address the Chair.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:9
§ 2-9. Permission of Mayor to retire from chamber.
No member shall retire from the Council Chamber while the Council is in
session, without permission of the Mayor or presiding officer.
§ 2-10. Members called to order.
A member called to order shall cease speaking immediately unless
permitted to explain. He/she may, if he/she wishes, appeal to the Council for
permission to continue his/her remarks. If there is no appeal, the decision
of the Chair shall stand and be final.
§ 2-11. Motion to lay on table.
A motion to lay on the table shall be decided without amendment or debate;
and such motion, until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments or
debate of the main question.
§ 2-12. Motion to adjourn.
A motion to adjourn shall be decided without debate and shall always be in
order, except when the Council is voting or when a member is addressing
the Council, or immediately after the question of adjournment has been
decided in the negative.
§ 2-13. Reconsideration of question.
Any member who has voted with the majority on any question may move for
reconsideration thereof at the same or the next meeting; but the consent of
the majority of the Council must be obtained before the same question can
be reconsidered.
§ 2-14. Voting of members.
Every member who shall be present when a question is put shall vote for or
against it unless he/she shall abstain for a stated reason.
§ 2-15. Calling of yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays may be called for by any member, in which case the
names of the members voting shall be recorded on the minutes, and also the
name of the Council member calling for yeas and nays.
B. Each Council member shall be recognized by the Chair before speaking.
When two or more members shall address the Chair at the same time,
the Mayor, or in his/her absence, the presiding officer, shall name the
member who is to speak first, recognizing them in order of their request
to speak.
C. Members of the Council shall not communicate with each other via
electronic devices during a public meeting.
§ 2-8 ORADELL CODE § 2-16
1:10
§ 2-16. Closed session meetings.
The Mayor and Council may hold a closed session meeting as set forth on
the annual notice or as may otherwise be determined in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 10:4-12 et seq. (Open Public Meetings Act) at any meeting following
a resolution authorizing to do so. No member of the Mayor and Council
shall breach the confidentiality of a meeting in which the public has been
excluded pursuant to the OPMA until such time when the minutes of these
discussions have been released. The Council is prohibited from texting,
emailing or communicating electronically while a meeting (closed or open)
is in session.
§ 2-17. Minutes.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for drafting and maintaining
minutes of Mayor and Council work sessions and public meetings. Minutes
must be prepared for draft distribution in accordance with N.J.S.A. 10:4-14.
If the Mayor or a member of the Council objects to any of the verbiage or
content of the minutes (not withstanding basic proof reading), a majority of
the Council is required to approve a rewrite to reflect the changes.
§ 2-18. Reading of ordinances; effective dates.
The Mayor and Council shall decide if a proposed ordinance shall be sent
to any committee for discussion and recommendation. The Ordinance
Committee shall submit a proposed ordinance for first reading
(introduction). After the prescribed waiting period, the ordinance will then
be listed for second reading (adoption). The effective date for a general
ordinance is 20 days after adoption. The effective date for a bond ordinance
is 20 days after the publication of the adoption notice.
§ 2-19. Procedures for introducing and adopting ordinances.
The procedures for introducing and adopting Borough Ordinances shall be:
A. Upon the passage of an ordinance, it shall be properly numbered and
recorded in its entirety by the Borough Clerk in the Ordinance Book.
The ordinance so recorded shall then be compared with the original as
passed at a regular meeting of the Council, whereupon the Mayor shall
subscribe, and the Clerk shall attest and affix the corporate seal.
B. The original ordinance shall be filed and preserved by the Clerk.
C. The titles or ordinances and references to amendments and parts
amended only shall be entered into the minutes.
D. An original ordinance shall be entitled as follows: An ordinance to
supplement (or amend) an ordinance (then add the title of the original
to which it is a supplement or amendment)
E. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be as follows: "Be It
Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 2-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:11
§ 2-20. Submission of items for agenda.
§ 2-21. Departure from order of business.
No departure from the regular order of business or suspension of any
rules shall be allowed except by vote of 2/3 of the members present. Any
amendments to the Rules of Order must be discussed at a meeting prior to
the implementation of same.
§ 2-22. Subordinate officers of Borough.
A. Any member of the Council may submit items for discussion on the
agenda pending approval by the Mayor. The Mayor will approve the
final agenda for posting and distribution. Requests shall be made by
noon the Thursday prior to each meeting. Once a matter has been
submitted to the Clerk to be placed on the agenda in accordance with
this subsection, it shall appear on the agenda and shall not be removed
except with the consent of the person who originally submitted it.
Notwithstanding, any member of the Council may identify a matter
during new business. Requests and discussion items from the public
shall be presented or delivered to the Borough Clerk no later than noon
the Thursday prior to each Council meeting, except for important or
timely matters which may be added to the agenda at any time with the
approval by the Mayor or a majority of the governing body.
B. If the matter requires further consideration, the Council may
recommend it be sent to the appropriate committee for consideration.
Once the committee makes a recommendation concerning the matter or
2/3 of the committee are in agreement on the matter, the committee
chair can then resubmit the item for full Council consideration on an
agenda.
A. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of Council,
appoint all subordinate officers of the Borough, unless the specific
terms of the general law clearly require a different appointment
procedure. He/she shall make the nomination to any such office within
30 days of that office becoming vacant. [N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5(g)]
B. The Council, whenever it fails to confirm the nomination by the Mayor
of any official to a subordinate office of the Borough within 30 days of
being presented such nomination, shall make the appointment to that
office, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required
for such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case
of a tie. [N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6(d)]
C. No appointment shall be made except by the vote of a majority of the
members of the Council present at such meeting, provided that at least
three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to
have no vote thereon except in case of a tie.
§ 2-20 ORADELL CODE § 2-22
1:12
§ 2-23. Standing committees.
D. The tenure of such committee member shall be for a term ending on
December 31 of the calendar year in which appointment was made or
until a successor is appointed.
A. The standing committees shall consist of three members each and shall
be defined as follows:
(1) Administration: The committee shall work directly with the
Borough Administrator regarding day-to-day operations of Borough
Hall, Mayor and Council and employee process and procedures and
department head evaluation. The committee is also involved in the
hiring of Borough employees.
(2) Ambulance: The committee chair shall attend all department
meetings and report back to the Council all department activities
and concerns and emergency service updates.
(3) Building Department: The committee shall work in conjunction
with personnel of the building department assisting them with
requests brought forth to the governing body. The committee will
work with the Administration committee regarding any changes to
the permit fee schedule and personnel.
(4) Communications: The committee shall be responsible for all
communications or means of communication by the Borough. This
includes but is not limited to: yearly calendar, message boards,
Borough website and Borough press releases to the public.
(5) Department of Public Works: The committee shall oversee special
and long-range projects to be conducted by the department. The
Committee shall be responsible for reporting back to the Mayor
and Council regarding: large equipment and tool malfunctions and
purchases, seasonal work progress and employee matters. The
Committee Chair will be a member of the Public Safety Committee.
(6) Economic Development: The committee shall be responsible for
maintaining an open dialogue with current and new business
owners of the Borough. The committee shall also provide materials
and welcome packets for new business owners to help them
succeed in the Borough. The committee chair will be the Borough
liaison to the Chamber of Commerce.
(7) Emergency Management: The committee shall work with the
appointed Office of Emergency Management Coordinator on
Borough plans and activities. During emergencies within the
Borough, the committee chair shall assist the Coordinator with
communication and updates on progress to the residents of the
Borough.
§ 2-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-23
1:13
(8) Finance: The committee shall be responsible for working with the
Borough's Administrator, Chief Financial Officer, and Department
Heads to create and introduce an annual budget. The committee
shall work with the CFO to maintain accurate record keeping
processes and provide quarterly updates of Borough and
department finances.
(9) Fire: The Commissioner shall attend all Fire Department meetings
and report back to the Council all department activities and
concerns and emergency service updates. The Commissioner will
be a member of the Public Safety Committee.
(10) Insurance: The committee shall be responsible for working with the
Borough's Risk Manager, and the chair shall act as Commissioner
to the Joint Insurance Fund. The committee shall also maintain and
review the Borough's policies and JIF requirements on a yearly
basis.
(11) Negotiations: The composition of this committee shall be
dependent on the collective negotiations agreement that is being
negotiated. When the PBA collective negotiations agreement is
being negotiated, the committee shall be comprised of the
members of the Public Safety Committee. When the UPSEU
collective negotiations agreement is being negotiated, committee
shall be comprised of the chairperson of the DPW Committee, the
chairperson of the Administrative Committee, and Finance Chair.
The negotiations committee shall report back to the Mayor and
Council after each negotiations session with an update as to the
status of the negotiations.
(12) Ordinance: The committee shall be responsible for considering,
drafting or reviewing all Borough ordinances. The committee chair
shall introduce any new or amended ordinances at Borough Public
Meetings.
(13) Police: The Commissioner shall work with the Police Chief and act
as liaison for the department reporting back to the Mayor and
Council. The Commissioner will be a member of the Public Safety
Committee.
(14) Public Safety. This committee will consist of three members, the
Fire Commissioner, the Police Commissioner and the Department
of Public Works committee chair. This committee shall function in
accordance with the Borough code specifically in managing the
resources of the Borough in time of emergency. The committee will
also be responsible participating in the hiring of patrol officers,
officer promotions and discipline of officers as required.
(15) Regional School Funding: The committee chair shall be responsible
for updating the Mayor and Council of any correspondence or
relevant news from the law firm handling the case.
§ 2-23 ORADELL CODE § 2-23
1:14
§ 2-24. Council members as liaisons to boards and committees.
(16) Shared Services: The committee shall be responsible for
investigating and pursuing shared service opportunities with
surrounding municipalities. The committee has permission to
initiate conversations with their counterparts in other
municipalities to find possible arrangements.
(17) Technology: The committee shall be responsible for all Borough
technology equipment and updates, including: telephones,
computer servers and software. The committee shall work with the
Borough's appointed information/technology expert for day to day
maintenance and updates.
B. The Chair of each committee has the responsibility to call meetings in
order to move forward agendas and goals set forth by the Mayor and
Council. A committee meeting shall be held at least once a month or as
deemed to be necessary by the Chair.
C. Committee meetings can only be held with a majority of committee
members present.
D. Committee meeting dates to be memorialized at the beginning of the
calendar year. Actions from committee meetings shall be reported at
public meeting to keep the full governing body apprised.
E. The purpose, authority, and duties of the standing committees are as
follows:
(1) Standing committees are appointed to expedite and facilitate the
work of the Council by supervising and overseeing the area of their
purview; however, standing are not intended to supplant the
authority of the full Council which is responsible for all operations
of the Borough government.
(2) A standing committee shall:
(a) Plan, study, direct and make recommendations for areas which
it has responsibilities.
(b) Perform such acts as may be assigned to it by the Council.
(c) Review budgetary expenditures for the committee which it has
responsibility.
(3) Any items recommended by a committee must get approval by a 2/3
majority vote of its committee members before it gets the approval
to be placed on the agenda.
(4) All standing committees shall only report to the Mayor and Council
on the principal activities and achievements of the committee at
the public meeting. Reports shall be concise and include the
progress of the committee since the previous progress.
§ 2-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:15
§ 2-25. Creation of ad hoc committees.
The Mayor and Council can create ad hoc committees as needed to address
specific needs of the community.
§ 2-26. Meeting to discuss disciplinary personnel matters.
In the event the Borough Administrator calls a meeting with a department
head or employee for the purpose of discussing personnel matters, the
committee chair/liaison shall be notified to attend the meeting. In the case
A. Members of the Council will be appointed Liaisons at the start of each
year to the following Borough boards and committees:
(1) Beautification.
(2) Boards of Education (Oradell and River Dell).
(3) Board of Health.
(4) Drug Alliance.
(5) Environmental.
(6) Historical.
(7) Library (Mayor's designee).
(8) OPTV.
(9) Planning Board.
(10) Recreation.
(11) Senior Citizens.
(12) Special Events.
(13) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. The liaison designated to each committee shall serve solely as a liaison
to each of the committees, boards and departments included therein
and may attend any meetings thereof, but shall not vote unless
otherwise provided by ordinance.
C. The liaison shall forward an annual written report prepared by its
committee to the Mayor and Council prior to the December work
session. This report shall contain, at minimum, the yearly attendance of
committee members and summary of the committee's actions during
the calendar year.
D. The liaison shall report and advise to the Mayor and Council on such
matters as the liaison shall deem appropriate and advise the council on
any matters requiring governing body action.
§ 2-24 ORADELL CODE § 2-26
1:16
of any meeting that requires discussions of termination of employment, the
Borough Attorney shall also be notified to be in attendance.
§ 2-27. Functioning of Borough Council.
§ 2-28. Rules of order.
Except as otherwise provided in these rules, Roberts Rules of Order shall
govern the deliberation of the Council.
§ 2-29. Yearly ethics and employment liability practice training.
All members of the governing body are responsible to attend yearly Ethics
and Employment Liability Practice training. Dates for training shall be
provided to the governing body by the Borough Administrator in a timely
manner.
A. Notwithstanding any committee or liaison assignments, the Borough
Council as a whole and together with the Mayor operates as a collective
entity.
B. Giving specific direction or the specific tasking to the Borough
Administrator or paid professional is the prerogative of the governing
body as a whole. The Borough Administrator reports directly to the
Mayor and Council. The governing body shall set yearly goals and
objectives for the Administrator to be measured by an annual
performance evaluation.
C. It is also recognized that the notion of a chain of command is important
for the effective and harmonious undertaking of all operations and
activity. The Mayor and Council shall therefore convey direction or
specific tasks that are to be undertaken by a department or a single
employee, through the Borough Administrator, or in her/his absence,
through those duly selected by the Mayor and Council and the Borough
Administrator to act in such capacity on such occasion except as
otherwise provided by state statute or municipal ordinance.
D. Requests by members of the governing body for common information,
such as those that would be available to the average citizen, are
reasonable and not intended to be discouraged, nor should such simple
requests have to be funneled through the Borough Administrator if she/
he is not the primary respondent. The same spirit of reason should
prevail conversely, however, if the number of the requests, or the
frequency thereof become burdensome and intrusive upon the
employee's specific and properly delegated duties.
E. If the Mayor or any member of the Council wishes to meet with any
Borough employee regarding official Borough business, they must do so
within normal business hours unless otherwise mutually agreed upon
prior to said planned meeting.
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-30
1:17
§ 2-30. Transmission of materials to governing body.
The Borough Administrator and/or Borough Clerk shall transmit all
materials needed for the work sessions/public meetings to the governing
body by the Friday prior to the meeting. In the event materials cannot be
transmitted, notification and approval must be received by the Mayor or
Council President. Upon approval, notice shall be sent to the governing
body with date the materials will be received.
§ 2-31. Responsibility for materials.
All members of the Mayor and Council shall be responsible for all Borough
materials assigned to them. This will include electronic equipment, keys,
codebooks, etc. Upon the expiration of the term of office all materials
must be returned to the Borough Administrator and/or Clerk prior to the
Borough's annually scheduled reorganization meeting. Any items lost or
stolen must be reported to the Borough Administrator as soon as possible.
§ 2-32. Borough e-mail.
All official Borough communications shall be conducted using the provided
Borough e-mail. Only the Borough Administrator, Clerk or Attorney may
send or reply to all sitting Council members or Council Elect.
§ 2-33. Use of technology for Borough business.
The use of text messaging for official Borough business is prohibited and
will not qualify as official business. Any technology issued by the Borough
will be used for the sole purpose of conducting official Borough business.
§ 2-34. Borough Seal.
Use and proper keeping of the Borough Seal:
§ 2-35. Borough Long-Range Strategic Plan.
The governing body shall meet quarterly to discuss, address, and update the
Borough's Long Range Strategic Plan.
A. The Seal of the Borough shall be the seal adopted at the time of
incorporation of the Borough, and shall be circular in form and shall
contain beside a special device the following: "The Borough of Oradell"
1894.
B. The Seal shall be in the custody of the Borough Clerk, and shall be
affixed upon instruments by her/him only, when ordered by resolution,
ordinance, legal document or as required by law.
C. Usage of the Borough Seal logo shall be only permitted through
authorization by the Mayor and, Council. This includes letterhead,
printed materials, business cards and all correspondence produced by
Borough departments, boards and committees.
§ 2-30 ORADELL CODE § 2-35
1:18
Chapter 4
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 4, Administrator, adopted 9-17-1985 by Ord. No. 738, was
repealed 12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 815.]
Chapter 11
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 11-1. Presentation and payment of claims.
Chapter 14
CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
§ 14-1. Emergency Enhanced 9-1-1 Telephone System.
A. Every claim against the Borough shall be rendered on a bill form
provided by the Borough and shall be certified to by the claimant and
delivered to the Borough Clerk or such other person as may be directed
by the Mayor and Council.
B. The Borough Clerk, upon receipt of such claim, shall forthwith present
the claim to the appropriate officer or employee, designated by the
Borough Council, for certification.
C. The Borough Clerk shall thereafter present the claim to the chairman of
the committee responsible for the claim's being incurred, who, if
satisfied with the propriety of the claim, shall approve the same and
return it to the Borough Clerk. The approval of the Mayor shall not be
required.
D. The claims shall be presented by the Borough Clerk at the next regular
meeting for the formal approval of the Mayor and Council, and, after
approval, shall be listed in the minutes and thereafter presented to the
Collector-Treasurer for payment in due course.
E. Any claim disapproved shall be referred to the chairman of the
appropriate committee.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17C-1 et seq., all municipalities of the State of
New Jersey are required to provide telephonic access to an appropriate
public safety answering point serving the municipalities; and
regionalized provision of such services is a concept specifically
endorsed by the aforementioned statutory scheme.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1
1:19
§ 14-2. Withholding public contracts and hirings from substantial
political contributors. [Added 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 06-21;
amended 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
The Borough of Oradell and certain other municipalities located in the
Bergen County area, desire to enter into an agreement with each other
to provide such services to their respective residents on a regionalized
basis and are authorized by law to do so pursuant to the provisions of
the Interlocal Services Act (N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.).3
It is the perception and belief of the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Oradell that implementation of the State-Mandated Emergency
Enhanced 9-1-1 Telephone System Program, on a regionalized, costsharing
basis, is in the best interests of the taxpayers of the Borough
of Oradell.
B. The Mayor and the Borough Clerk be, and they hereby are, authorized
to execute a contract with Northwest Bergen Central Dispatch for
enhanced 9-1-1 service and EMS dispatch pursuant to the provisions of
the Interlocal Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.4 [Amended
12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-022]
A. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to, and hiring of, certain
contributors.
(1) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Borough and any of its purchasing agents or agencies, its statutory
boards, and its independent authorities, as the case may be, shall
not hire any person nor enter into an agreement or otherwise
contract to procure services, including banking services or
insurance coverage services, from any professional business entity
if that person or entity has made any reportable contributions,
including in-kind contributions, to a campaign committee of any
Borough candidate or holder of a public office in the Borough,
whether or not that officeholder has the ultimate responsibility for
the hiring or the award of the contract, as the case may be, or to
any Borough or Bergen County party committee, or to any political
action committee (PAC) that is organized for the primary purpose
of promoting or supporting Borough candidates or Borough
officeholders, including any state party or legislative leadership
committee, if such contribution or pledge is made within one year
immediately preceding the date of the municipal decision awarding
such contract or agreement, or the decision to hire such person, as
the case may be.
(2) No professional business entity that enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof, or its statutory boards, or its
3. Editor's Note: Said act was repealed effective 11-1-2007 by L.2007, c. 63.
4. Editor's Note: Said act was repealed effective 11-1-2007 by L.2007, c. 63.
§ 14-1 ORADELL CODE § 14-2
1:20
independent authorities, for the rendition of professional, banking
or insurance services or any other no-bid consultation services,
and no person who has submitted an application for municipal
employment or otherwise communicated to the Borough an interest
in a position of employment which the Borough is seeking to fill,
shall knowingly make a reportable contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Borough candidate or holder of a public office
in the Borough, whether or not that officeholder has the ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, or the hiring of such
person, as the case may be, or to any Borough or Bergen County
party committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that
is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting
Borough candidates or Borough officeholders, including any state
party or legislative leadership committee, between the time of
first communication between that business entity or prospective
hiree, as the case may be, and the Borough regarding a specific
professional services agreement, or position of employment, as the
case may be, and the later of the termination of negotiations or the
completion of the contract or agreement with professional business
entity or hiree, as the case may be.
(3) For purposes of this section, a "professional business entity"
seeking a public contract means an individual, including the
individual's spouse, and any unemancipated child living in the
household of such person, a firm, corporation, professional
corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited-liability
company, unincorporated association or similar organization. The
definition of a "business entity" encompasses all principals and
partners who own 10% or more of the equity in the business entity,
and any officers employed by the entity, as well as any subsidiaries
directly controlled by the business entity.
(4) For purposes of this section, a "hiree" means any individual who is
employed, or who is seeking to be employed, by the Borough,
including but not limited to municipal officers such as tax
collectors, tax assessors, Borough administrators, chief financial
officers and Borough clerks.
(5) For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or the hiring
of a hiree, shall be:
(a) The governing body of the Borough, if the contract or hiring
requires approval or appropriation from the Council.
(b) The Mayor of the Borough, if the contract or hiring requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible
for the award of a contract or the hiring is appointed by the
Mayor.
§ 14-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2
1:21
(6) For purposes of this section, the term "reportable contribution"
shall be defined as any contribution of greater than $300.
B. Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution of
money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions,
made by a professional business entity or a hiree to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council, or municipal or county party committee
or PAC that is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or
supporting Borough candidates or Borough officeholders, including any
state party or legislative leadership committee, shall be deemed a
violation of this section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods or
services, of any kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that
contribution was made by the professional business entity or hiree prior
to the effective date of this section.
C. Contribution statement by professional business entity and vendor.
(1) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services
with any professional business entity, including banking or
insurance coverage services, and prior to hiring any hiree, the
Borough of Oradell or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as
the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the
professional business entity or hiree, as the case may be, made
under penalty of perjury that the professional business entity, or
hiree, has not made a contribution in violation of Subsection A of
this section.
(2) The professional business entity, or hiree, as the case may be, shall
have a continuing duty to report any violations of this section that
may occur during the negotiation or duration of a contract, or as to
the hiree, during the negotiations for employment or during the
employment of the hiree. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or
agreement with the Borough, or in the case of the hiree, prior to
the agreement of employment, and shall be in addition to any other
certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
D. Return of violative contributions. A hiree or Borough candidate or
officeholder or municipal or county party committee or PAC that is
organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting Borough
candidates or Borough officeholders may cure a violation of Subsection
A, if, within 60 days after the appointment, the hiree or professional
business entity notifies the Borough Council in writing and seeks and
receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Borough candidate
or municipal or county political party or PAC or state party or legislative
leadership committee.
E. Penalty.
(1) All Borough professional service agreements shall provide that it
shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional business entity to violate Subsection A or to knowingly
§ 14-2 ORADELL CODE § 14-2
1:22
Chapter 16
COURT
§ 16-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in accordance with and pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq. a court within the borough to be known
as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Oradell."5
§ 16-2. Fee upon application for a Public Defender. [Added
11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 1042]
conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received, or to
make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution.
(2) Any professional business entity which or who knowingly fails to
reveal a contribution made in violation of this section, or who
knowingly makes or solicits contributions through intermediaries
for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for future
Borough contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date
of the violation.
(3) Any hiree who knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in
violation of this section, or who knowingly makes or solicits
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing
or misrepresenting the source of the contribution, shall be subject
to the termination of his or her employment for cause.
F. Severability. If any sentence, paragraph or subsection of this section, or
the application thereof to any persons or circumstances, shall be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, or if by
legislative action any sentence, paragraph or section of this section
shall lose its force and effect, such judgment or action shall not affect,
impair or void the remainder of this section.
G. Repealer. All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent
with this section are repealed or otherwise modified.
H. When effective. This section shall take effect upon adoption and
publication according to law.
A. The Municipal Court Judge shall approve all applications for
appointment, on a per-case basis, of a Municipal Public Defender to
represent indigent persons as required by law.
5. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-2 of Chapter 11 of the 1961 Revised Ordinances, which
immediately followed and provided for a Court Clerk, was repealed 12-20-1988 by Ord. No.
837.
§ 14-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2
1:23
§ 16-3. Fees for discovery requests. [Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
05-01]
Chapter 18
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47. Personnel practices — See Ch. 47A.
B. Those persons applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender shall pay an application fee of $50 at the time of presentation
of an application for the Public Defender. The Municipal Court Judge
may, however, in his discretion, waive any required application fee in
whole or in part if the Judge determines, in his discretion, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of Oradell
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of
Oradell for the discovery provided:
(1) For each of the first 10 pages photocopied: $0.75 per page.
(2) For each of the next 10 pages photocopied: $0.50 per page.
(3) For each of the pages photocopied thereafter: $0.25 per page.
(4) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(5) For the envelope for any discovery sent by mail: $0.25.
(6) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
(7) Duplication of videotapes constitutes an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
(8) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Oradell, e.g., another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 16-2 ORADELL CODE § 18-1
1:24
§ 18-1. Civil actions.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Oradell, hereinafter known
as the Borough, shall, upon the request of any present or former official,
employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for the indemnification and
legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 18-2. Construal of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter except that these terms shall not mean any person who is
not a natural person; any person while providing goods or services of any
kind under any contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
any person while providing legal or engineering services for compensation
unless said person is a full-time employee of the Borough; and any person
who, as a condition of his or her appointment or contract, is required to
indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
§ 18-3. Borough to provide defense and indemnification.
The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved acted or failed
to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had an interest; acted or
failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law; and
acted or failed to take action in good faith. For purposes of this chapter, the
duty and authority of the Borough to defend and indemnify shall extend to
a cross-claim or counterclaim against said person.
§ 18-4. Defense of claims; refusal to provide defense and
indemnification.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal defense of such
claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Borough may
refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Borough Council determines that the act or
omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized or imposed
by law; the act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or the defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough
would create a conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or
persons involved.
§ 18-5. Representation in best interest of Borough.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:25
employee or appointee if the Borough Council concludes that such
representation is in the best interest of the Borough and that the person to
be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
§ 18-6. Exclusive control.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
§ 18-7. Defense by Attorney or other counsel.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its Attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended or
by employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
Chapter 19
DEPUTY MUNICIPAL CLERK
§ 19-1. Creation of position.
The position of Deputy Municipal Clerk is hereby created in and for the
Borough of Oradell, subject to the provisions of this chapter and in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
§ 19-2. Appointment; term.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council, and the term of office shall be at the pleasure of the
Borough Council.
§ 19-3. Powers and duties.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall, during the absence or disability of the
Municipal Clerk, have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk and shall
perform the functions and duties of such office.
§ 19-4. Compensation.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be
prescribed from time to time by the salary ordinances of the Borough of
Oradell.
Chapter 22
§ 18-5 ORADELL CODE § 19-4
1:26
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMITTEE
§ 22-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Environmental Committee for the Borough
of Oradell to be known as the "Environmental Committee of the Borough of
Oradell."
§ 22-2. Purpose.
The Environmental Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor
and Council concerning open space preservation, protection of wetlands,
water resources and watershed property, management, air pollution
control, solid waste management, recycling, noise control, soil and
landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources and
protection of flora and fauna.
§ 22-3. Appointment; membership. [Amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No.
08-12]
§ 22-4. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Environmental Committee shall be as follows:
A. Membership.
(1) The Environmental Committee shall consist of 11 members who
shall be residents of the Borough of Oradell. The members of the
Environmental Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Borough Council for a term of one year to serve
without salary.
(2) One of the 11 members shall be an Oradell student of River Dell
Regional High School. One of the 11 members shall be an Oradell
student of the River Dell Regional Middle School. The student
members shall be recommended by the River Dell Regional Board
of Education for appointment by the Mayor with approval by the
Borough Council.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Environmental Committee shall organize annually and from its
members elect a Chair.
A. Conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas
of the Borough.
B. Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council
concerning open space preservation, protection of wetlands, water
resources and watershed property, management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, recycling, noise control, soil and landscape
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4
1:27
§ 22-5. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of
its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor
and Council.
Chapter 25
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary — See Ch. 27. Fire prevention — See Ch. 121.
protection, environmental appearance, marine resources and
protection of flora and fauna.
C. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
D. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets as may be required, subject to funding by the Mayor and
Council for such purposes.
§ 22-4 ORADELL CODE § 22-5
1:28
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-20-1961 as Chapter 6 of the 1961 Revised Ordinances]
§ 25-1. Creation.
A Fire Department is hereby created and established for the Borough,
composed as may from time to time be determined by resolution adopted at
a regular meeting of the Mayor and Council.
§ 25-2. Organization; officers. [Amended 12-20-1998 by Ord. No.
837]
The Fire Department shall be organized and provided with officers as
follows: one Chief of the Fire Department, one Assistant Chief of the Fire
Department, one captain and three lieutenants, and such membership as
shall hereafter be determined by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 25-3. Power to adopt rules for government.
The Fire Department may adopt bylaws and rules and regulations for its
government, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, but no such
bylaws or rules and regulations shall go into effect until approved by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough.
§ 25-4. Selection of officers; determination of qualifications.
The Fire Department may choose its officers by ballot and determine the
qualifications of its members, except that no officers or members shall be
installed until after approval by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 25-5. Procedure for fire company organization.
Whenever any body of citizens shall organize a company for fire service, as
provided in this article, and shall make application in writing to the Mayor
and Council to be admitted to membership in the Fire Department created,
as provided in § 25-1 and shall furnish satisfactory evidence of having the
necessary apparatus and appliances for such service and shall deliver to
the Borough Clerk a schedule of such apparatus and appliances and shall
also file with the Borough Clerk a list giving the names of the officers and
the members of such company, with the age, place of residence and date of
admission of each, certified by the Captain of the company and attested by
the Secretary thereof, the Mayor and Council may thereupon, by resolution,
approve of such application and accept the services of such company as a
part of the Fire Department.
§ 25-6. Approval of fire company application.
When the Mayor and Council shall have, by resolution, approved a fire
company's application for admission to membership in the Fire Department
and accepted the services of such company, as provided in § 25-5, the
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:29
officers and members of such company shall become members of the Fire
Department of the Borough, have their names entered upon the register
provided for in § 25-7 and be subject to the rules and regulations adopted
for its government, and be entitled to all the privileges and benefits which
the law confers.
§ 25-7. Registration of members; issuance of certificate.
Upon the election of members by the Fire Department, as provided in
this article, the Secretary shall present to the Mayor and Council, at their
first meeting thereafter, the names of each member so elected, which,
if approved by the Council, shall be entered in a book to be kept for
that purpose and to be known as "Register of the Fire Department of the
Borough of Oradell." Such book shall contain the name of the member, his
age, date of his admission and the name of the street whereon he resides.
Upon such approval, a certificate shall be issued to the person whose
membership has been approved, signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Borough Clerk, that the person therein named is a duly qualified fireman of
the Fire Department of the Borough.
§ 25-8. Selection of Chief and Assistant Chief; term of office.
The Chief of the Fire Department and the Assistant Chief of the Fire
Department shall be chosen by the majority votes, by ballots, of the
members of the Fire Department and shall hold office for one year or until
their successors are chosen. All officers of the Fire Department shall receive
a commission, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Borough Clerk.
§ 25-9. Chief to keep informed of fire, apparatus and personnel
conditions; monthly report.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department or the officer highest
in rank in the Fire Department to keep himself informed as to the fire
conditions of the Borough and the condition of the apparatus and personnel
and to report concerning such matters, in writing, to the Mayor and Council
at their regular meeting each month.
§ 25-10. Chief to be sole command. [Amended 12-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 837]
Except as otherwise provided, the Chief of the Fire Department shall, at
fires and at all times on duty, have sole and absolute command of the
officers and men of the Fire Department present and be responsible for
their discipline and efficiency.
§ 25-11. Powers and duties of Assistant Chief. [Amended
12-20-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of the Assistant Chief of
the Fire Department to render such service and perform such duties as the
Chief of the Fire Department may at any time require and, in the absence
§ 25-6 ORADELL CODE § 25-11
1:30
of the Chief of the Fire Department, to assume his obligations, exercise his
powers and perform his duties.
§ 25-12. Determination of authority. [Amended 12-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 837]
The question of authority of the officers of the Fire Department while on
duty shall be determined by their grade. All officers and men of the Fire
Department shall be subordinate to the Chief of the Fire Department. The
first officer on duty at a fire shall exercise command until his superior
arrives. Where two officers of the same grade meet on duty, the one longest
in command shall take command. A company arriving at a fire without an
officer shall be commanded by a former chief or the senior member.
§ 25-13. Equipment; appliances.
Apparatus and appliances to be used in the Fire Department for the
extinguishment of fires and for the protection of property exposed to fire
or water used thereon shall be such as the Mayor and Council shall, from
time to time, direct and shall be purchased and owned by the Borough.
The Mayor and Council may consider the recommendations of the Chief
of the Fire Department and at any time provide the Fire Department with
apparatus and appliances, which apparatus and appliances shall remain
the property of the Borough but shall be maintained and used by the Fire
Department. The Mayor and Council may, from time to time, appropriate
sufficient funds for the proper maintenance and repair of the equipment and
apparatus of the Fire Department and of the maintenance of the firehouse.
§ 25-14. Attendance at functions outside Borough. [Amended
12-20-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
No part of the Fire Department shall attend parades or other functions or
take fire apparatus outside of the Borough, except with the consent of the
Mayor or, in his absence, by the consent of a majority of the members of
the Borough Council. In the absence of both the Mayor and of a majority of
the members of the Borough Council, such permission may be granted by
the Chairman of the Fire Committee. When such permission is granted, it
shall be with the express understanding that the Fire Department officers
shall provide a special detail of its members, which special detail shall hold
itself in readiness to render fire duty should the necessity occur while the
remainder of the Fire Department is away from the Borough; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply in the case of an appeal for help at
a fire coming from a neighboring Borough.
§ 25-15. Chairman of Fire Committee.
The Chairman of the Fire Committee, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and approved by the Council, shall be entitled to attend the regular monthly
meeting of the Fire Department and may, at the direction of the Mayor
and Council as their deputy, also at the request of the Fire Department,
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-15
1:31
act as representative of the Council at the regular meetings of the Fire
Department.
§ 25-15 ORADELL CODE § 25-15
1:32
ARTICLE II
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-24-2000 by Ord. No. 1116]
§ 25-16. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created, effective
January 1, 2001, in accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997,6 to
reward members of the Oradell Volunteer Fire Department for their loyal,
diligent, and devoted service to the residents of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 25-17. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell pursuant
to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue
Code, and this article.
§ 25-18. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions as follows to each eligible
member who attains 100 points per calendar year in accordance with the
LOSAP point system set forth below:
§ 25-19. Estimated cost.
The estimated annual cost of the program based upon a membership of 50
volunteer fire fighters has been calculated as follows:
§ 25-20. Credited points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Oradell Volunteer Fire Department in accordance
with the following schedule:
A. Annual benefit for the years 2001 and 2002: $650.
B. Annual benefit for the years 2003 and 2004: $850.
C. Annual benefit commencing 2005: $1,150.
A. For 2001 and 2002: $32,500.
B. For 2003 and 2004: $42,500.
C. For 2005 and thereafter: $57,500.
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 25-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-20
1:33
TRAINING COURSES AND CERTIFICATIONS
Type Points
Monthly Department drill and mutual
drills
2
Monthly meetings 2
Fire Fighter I State Certification 5
Fire Fighter II Certification 10
Fire Fighter III Certification 15
Officers' Training Level I 10
Officers' Training Level II 10
SCBA Instructor State Certified 5
Smokehouse State Certified 5
Live Burn Instructor State Certified 5
Qualified Driver 5
Fire Official State Certified 10
Fire Inspector State Certified 5
Certified SCUBA Diver 5
Certified EMT 5
Certified First Responder 3
Jt/Aux. Coordinator/Instructor 5
Cadets Coordinator/Instructor 5
Successful completion of each course
given by the Bergen County Fire Academy
not listed above
3
Fire fighters receiving state certifications
must maintain all state requirements (i.e.,
continuing education units) to be credited
with points
EMERGENCY RESPONSE RECORD
Record Points
Response to less than 15% of all calls 0
Response to at least 15%, but less than
20% of all calls
10
Response to more than 20%, but less than
30%, of all calls
20
Response to more than 30%, but less than
40%, of all calls
30
Response to more than 40%, but less than
50%, of all calls
40
§ 25-20 ORADELL CODE § 25-20
1:34
EMERGENCY RESPONSE RECORD
Record Points
Response to more than 50%, but less than
60%, of all calls
50
Response to 60%, or more of all calls 60
PRIOR SERVICE WITH ORADELL VOLUNTEER FIRE
DEPARTMENT
Years of Service Points
5 5
10 10
15 15
20 20
25 25
30 30
35 or more 35
ELECTED OR APPOINTED POSITIONS
(LEADERSHIP)
Position Points
Chief of the Department 30
Assistant Chief 20
Captain 20
Lieutenants 20
President of the Department 15
Vice President 10
Secretary 15
Vice President 10
Secretary 15
Financial Secretary 10
Treasurer 15
Active Ex-Chief 10
Active Ex-Officer 5
Department Engineer 5
§ 25-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-20
1:35
COMMUNITY EDUCATION
Type Points
Approved presentations and lectures 3
Fire prevention school drill and lectures
(per day)
3
Firesafety open house (each) 3
High school Op Prom. 3
OTHER DEPARTMENTAL ACTIVITIES
Activity Points
Chiefs' funeral call 1
Fire watch 1
Standby to another department 1
Department parades 1
Extra-duty cleanings 1
§ 25-21. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election to be held on November 7, 2000.7
7. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1116 was approved at said general election.
§ 25-20 ORADELL CODE § 25-21
1:36
Chapter 27
FIREMEN'S AUXILIARY, JUNIOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
§ 27-1. Establishment.
There shall be established in the Borough of Oradell a volunteer fire
company to be known as the "Junior Firemen's Auxiliary," its members to
serve with the consent of the Mayor and Council under the jurisdiction of
the Oradell Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 27-2. Age requirement. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837;
5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 846]
No person shall be eligible for membership in the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
who is less than 16 years of age.
§ 27-3. Permission for certain persons to join required. [Amended
5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 846]
It shall be a requirement that persons between the ages of 16 and 18
obtain permission to join the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary from their parents
or guardian, said permission to be in writing and acknowledged or proved
in the same manner as required by law for deeds to real estate.
§ 27-4. Insurance.
Members of the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall be provided with the same
insurance coverage in the same amounts provided for regular volunteer
firemen of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 27-5. Rules and regulations.
The Junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall be subject to rules and regulations
formulated by the Oradell Volunteer Fire Department, which rules and
regulations shall provide for the training of the Auxiliary to eventual
membership in the Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of Oradell,
and said regulations shall further provide that no member of the Junior
Firemen's Auxiliary shall be required to perform duties which would expose
him to the same degree of hazard as a regular member of the Volunteer Fire
Department.
§ 25-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-5
1:37
Chapter 34
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
For additional Board of Health legislation, see
Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of this
Code.
§ 34-1. Establishment.
A Board of Health shall be appointed and constituted within the limits of
the Borough under and by virtue of an act entitled "An Act to Establish in
this State, Boards of Health and a Bureau of Vital Statistics and to Define
Their Respective Powers and Duties," approved March 31, 1887, and the
supplements thereto, and under and by virtue of any other act authorizing
the formation of such Board of Health.
§ 34-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02]
Chapter 35
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 35, Historic Preservation Commission, adopted 5-17-1988 by
Ord. No. 821, was repealed 10-4-1988 by Ord. No. 833.]
Chapter 37
HOUSING AUTHORITY
A. The Board of Health shall consist of seven members, and two alternate
members (such alternate members to be designated as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2"), to be appointed by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough.
B. The term of appointment of each member and alternate member of the
Board of Health shall be for a period of three years, commencing on the
first day of January of the year of such member's appointment.
C. Vacancies occurring in the Board of Health for any cause shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
D. All powers and duties of members and alternate members of the Board
of Health shall be as provided for pursuant to applicable statute.
§ 27-5 ORADELL CODE § 37-1
1:38
§ 37-1. Intent; purpose.
The Borough of Oradell desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the purpose of alleviating
the shortage of safe and sanitary housing.
§ 37-2. Consent.
The Borough of Oradell does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 37-3. Approval required for new construction.
The Borough of Oradell understands that the Housing Authority of Bergen
County will not make application for new construction in the Borough of
Oradell without the approval of the governing body of the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 37-4. Clerk to file copy.
The Clerk be and he is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development and with the Secretary of the
Housing Authority of Bergen County.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 45, Land Use Procedures, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 646, 665 and 683, was repealed in
its entirety by Ord. No. 992. See Ch. 240, Land Development, for land use
procedures.]
Chapter 47
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Court — See Ch. 16. Deputy Municipal Clerk — See Ch. 19.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-4
1:39

ARTICLE I
Tax Collector
[Adopted 9-20-1988 by Ord. No. 830]
§ 47-1. Appointment.
A Municipal Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
§ 47-2. Compensation.
The Tax Collector shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed
from time to time by the salary ordinances of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-2
1:41

ARTICLE II
Insurance Consultant
[Adopted 9-20-1988 by Ord. No. 8318]
§ 47-3. Position created.
The position of Insurance Consultant is hereby created in and for the
Borough of Oradell, subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 47-4. Appointment; term of office.
The Insurance Consultant shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, and the term of office shall be at the pleasure of the
Borough Council.
§ 47-5. Powers and duties.
The Insurance Consultant shall be available at all times to advise the Mayor
and Council regarding insurance coverage, payments and responsibilities.
The Insurance Consultant shall review the present insurance coverage with
all companies and agents presently insuring the Borough of Oradell, its
property, offices and employees and advise the heads of all departments as
to their responsibilities in order to create complete cooperation within the
Borough.
§ 47-6. Compensation.
The Insurance Consultant shall be prescribed from time to time by the
salary ordinances of the Borough of Oradell.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be retroactive to 1-1-1988.
§ 47-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-6
1:43

ARTICLE III
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 829]
§ 47-7. Position created.
The position of Chief Financial Officer is hereby created in and for the
Borough of Oradell, subject to the provisions of this article and N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1.
§ 47-8. Appointment, term of office.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, and the term of office shall be at the pleasure of the
Borough Council unless and until tenure has been granted pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1.
§ 47-9. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for any and all collections
and disbursements of municipal finances and, when necessary, supervise
and advise the Office of Tax Collections in order to create complete
cooperation with the Office of Chief Financial Officer concerning finances.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for the supervision and
direction of all municipal employees in the offices of tax collection and Chief
Financial Officer.
§ 47-10. Compensation.
The Chief Financial Officer shall receive such compensation as shall be
prescribed from time to time by the salary ordinance of the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 47-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-10
1:45

ARTICLE IV
Administrator
[Adopted 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 03-169]
§ 47-11. Position established.
There is hereby created the position of Administrator of the Borough of
Oradell in accordance with the power conferred by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et
seq.
§ 47-12. Appointment; term of office; removal.
The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council with no set term, but shall serve at the pleasure of
the governing body and may be relieved of duty at any time by a 2/3 vote of
the Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A 9-136 to 40A:9-138, inclusive.
§ 47-13. Compensation; expenses.
The Administrator shall be paid a fixed salary as adopted by the Council
in the Annual Salary Ordinance. The Administrator shall be reimbursed for
all necessary expenses incurred in the performing of his office. The wages,
compensation and other benefits to the position of the Administrator shall
be set forth in the Annual or Interim Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 47-14. Duties and responsibilities.
The basic function of the Administrator shall be to:
A. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Borough, except as otherwise provided by law.
B. Keep the Mayor and Council adequately informed of Borough activities.
C. Receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the governing body
and all advisory committees, and to attend all meetings of the
governing body with the right to take part in the discussion.
D. Supervise the preparation of and recommend annually to the Mayor
and Council an operating budget, a capital budget and a five-year
capital plan. The recommended operating budget shall include
projections of revenues and expenses and a projected tax rate.
E. Prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
Borough affairs, which shall include a report from each department
head.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Borough Administrator,
adopted 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 836.
§ 47-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-14
1:47
F. Serve as liaison between the Mayor and Council and the Borough's
departments and agencies, ensuring that employees are informed of the
Mayor and Council's activities and requirements, and that the Mayor
and Council are informed of the programs, needs and achievements of
the Borough.
G. Ensure that all laws and all acts of the governing body subject to
enforcement by the Administrator or by officers and employees subject
to the Administrator's direction and supervision are executed faithfully.
H. Receive and deal with requests for, and complaints about, Borough
services that cannot be dealt with by the operating departments and
agencies. The Administrator shall keep a record of all such requests and
complaints, and their disposition, and shall report on them to the Mayor
and Council from time to time.
I. Serve as the Borough's director of human resources, with responsibility
to oversee the employment practices of the Borough's departments and
agencies. The Administrator shall recommend a comprehensive
program of policies and procedures for approval by the Mayor and
Council and, once that program is adopted, shall review it annually and
recommend any appropriate changes. In this role, the Administrator
shall develop and oversee a comprehensive training program for
Borough employees; develop a program to recognize Borough
employees for exceptional skills and achievements; oversee Borough's
labor relations activities and be included in all labor negotiations;
advise department heads on the handling of grievances; and serve as
hearing officer on all formal grievances that rise above the
departmental level. To the extent that any labor agreement prescribes
some other arrangement for a Borough hearing, the Administrator shall
serve as an advisor to the prescribed individual or group.
J. Make appointments and promotions of subordinate Borough officers,
which shall include full-time, part-time, temporary and seasonal
employees, except where the power to appoint rests with the Mayor and
Council.
(1) Appointments of department heads shall be approved by the Mayor
and Council. The Administrator shall advise the Mayor and Council
of any appointments no later than the next meeting of the
governing body. Any action under this section shall be taken only
after the Mayor and Council have declared a vacancy and
authorized its being filled.
K. Take appropriate disciplinary action against Borough employees and
recommend to the Mayor and/or Borough Council, when necessary,
suspension or removal of department heads and any other employees.
The Administrator may, for good cause, suspend a department head for
up to five working days while recommending more serious disciplinary
action to the Mayor and Council.
§ 47-14 ORADELL CODE § 47-14
1:48
§ 47-15. Directives to Administrator.
Except in an emergency, the Mayor and Council shall act officially and as a
body when issuing directives to the Administrator or to other employees of
the Borough.
L. Negotiate contracts for the Borough, other than personnel or labor
contracts or those required to be bid under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., as
authorized and directed by and subject to the approval of the governing
body, and ensure that all terms and conditions favorable to the Borough
in any statute or contract are kept faithfully and performed and, upon
knowledge of any violation, immediately make said violation known to
the governing body.
M. Establish and oversee a proper purchasing system; approve all
specifications for goods and services to be purchased by the Borough by
the public bid or formal solicitation of proposals, except for the
technical portions of the specifications prepared by any licensed
professional; authorize and approve the purchase all materials,
supplies, equipment and labor and services under contract required by
any department, office or agency of the Borough; and approve all bills
and vouchers submitted for payment prior to their submission to the
Mayor and Council for approval.
N. Authorize any transfer of supplies, materials and equipment between
departments and offices and, with the authorization of the governing
body, sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, materials and
equipment.
O. Ensure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Borough or
its inhabitants, by any law or contract, are kept faithfully and
performed. The Administrator may delegate this responsibility to
another Borough employee with respect to any particular contract.
P. Review and supervise the Borough's insurance program and policies.
Q. Advise the Mayor and Council of actions by other units of government
of importance to the Borough.
R. Represent the Borough, as directed by the Mayor and Council.
S. Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned or
required by the Mayor and Council.
T. Examine or investigate the operations of Borough departments and
officers and, to the extent permitted by law, direct corrective action of
any shortcomings. The Administrator shall recommend any changes in
policy or other corrections that require action by the Mayor and
Council.
U. May designate a qualified department head of the Borough to perform
his duties during his temporary absence.
§ 47-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-16
1:49
§ 47-16. Annual review of Administrator.
The Mayor and Council shall meet with the Administrator annually to
discuss the Administrator's performance. The Mayor and Council, together
with the Administrator, shall set specific goals for the Administrator.
§ 47-16 ORADELL CODE § 47-16
1:50
Chapter 47A
PERSONNEL PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 18. Officers and employees — See Ch. 47.
§ 47A-1. Titles and salary ranges.
The Borough Council shall, by ordinance(s), establish titles for public
employment by the Borough and salary ranges for Borough employees. Said
titles shall conform to regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State
Department of Personnel.
§ 47A-2. Policies and procedures.
The Borough Council shall, by resolution(s), adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures, including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 47A-3. Duties and responsibilities of Administrator.
A. As set forth in the Code of the Borough of Oradell, the Borough
Administrator shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments and coordinate the functions of boards and agencies of the
Borough and the Borough Administrator shall recommend the hiring of
employees and, when necessary for the good of the Borough, take
disciplinary action against, or recommend the discharge of, any
employee, advising the Borough Council of such actions as stated in the
Code. Therefore, the Borough Administrator is responsible for the
implementation and enforcement of the personnel practices adopted by
ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant to this chapter. If there is a
conflict between said personnel practices and any duly adopted and
lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or
federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law
shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall prevail.
B. The Borough Administrator is charged with conducting annual
performance evaluations for all department heads and all other staff
that reports directly to the Administrator. Said evaluations shall be
completed by the end of the first business quarter of the calendar year.
The Borough Administrator shall forward all completed evaluations to
§ 47-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47A-3
1:51
§ 47A-4. Conflict with other legislation.
If prior ordinances or resolutions contain sections that conflict with this
or future ordinances or resolutions, the more recent enactment shall be in
effect.
§ 47A-5. Mandate direct deposit for municipal employees. [Added
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-13]
P.L. 2013, c. 28,10 authorizes local governments to mandate direct deposit
for certain governmental employees effective after July 1, 2014, and P.L.
2013, c. 28, permits governing bodies to grant exemptions on such terms
and conditions as they deem necessary.
Chapter 48
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special law enforcement officers — See Ch.
55.
the Administrative Committee for review and approval. The
Administrator shall also forward a written recommendation for salary
increases to the Administrative Committee together with supporting
data. After the evaluations have been approved and salary adjustments
have been recommended by the Administrative Committee, the
Administrator shall meet with all department heads and other staff
that report directly to the Administrator to review the evaluations and
set goals by the first quarter of the next evaluation period so that
benchmarking progress is continued. [Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
14-11]
A. All full-time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Oradell are mandated to have direct
deposit of their compensation after July 1, 2014, in accordance with
Chapter 28, P.L. 2013, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
B. Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough
of Oradell are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
C. Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the
direct deposit mandate to the Borough of Oradell Chief Financial
Officer. Such requests will be presented to the Borough of Oradell
governing body within 30 days. The Borough of Oradell governing body
may grant such an exemption by resolution and only for good cause.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:14-15a.
§ 47A-3 ORADELL CODE § 47A-5
1:52
§ 48-1. Department established; membership. [Amended 8-21-2001
by Ord. No. 1129; 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 04-05; 6-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-18]
§ 48-2. Authority and responsibility; rules and regulations.
[Amended 8-21-2001 by Ord. No. 1129]
A. There is hereby created and established in and for the Borough of
Oradell a police department, which shall be known as the "Police
Department of the Borough of Oradell."
B. The Police Department shall consist of one Chief, one Captain, two
Lieutenants, five Sergeants, one Detective Sergeant, one Detective and
so many patrolman as may be authorized from time to time to
effectively operate the department. Designation of the foregoing
members shall not make appointment thereto at any time mandatory,
and vacancies therein may occur from time to time. [Amended
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-7; 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-05]
A. The rights, privileges, powers and duties of members of the Police
Department and special officers shall be those prescribed by the laws of
the State of New Jersey and the ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough.
B. Rules and regulations consistent with applicable law and this section
shall from time to time be adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council to describe:
(1) Duties of the Police Department;
(2) General rules of the Police Department;
(3) Rules of discipline;
(4) Duties of the Chief of Police consistent with § 48-4 hereof;
(5) Duties of a Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant and patrolman;
(6) Procedure of arrests;
(7) Uniform and equipment;
(8) Leave of absence;
(9) Sickness or sick leave;
(10) Vacations;
(11) Special duties; and
(12) Procedure for the proper enforcement of this section.
§ 47A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-3
1:53
§ 48-3. Designation of appropriate authority.
At the annual organization meeting of the Borough Council, the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council, shall appoint a Public Safety
Committee consisting of three members of the Borough Council, one of
whom shall be designated as Chairman. Such appointments may be revoked
at any time by the Borough Council. The Public Safety Committee shall
be designated as the appropriate authority as provided in the New Jersey
Statutes. As the appropriate authority, the Public Safety Committee shall
be responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department. The
Public Safety Committee shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members.
§ 48-4. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Borough Council, shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the Public Safety Committee for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the Public Safety
Committee, the Chief of Police shall:
§ 48-5. Discipline.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey statutes and the
Police Department's Rules and Regulations.
§ 48-6. Qualifications for appointment.
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and rules and regulations for the
Department duly adopted as provided in § 48-3 of this chapter. The Public
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the Public Safety Committee in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the Public Safety Committee.
§ 48-3 ORADELL CODE § 48-6
1:54
Safety Committee may also require that an applicant for appointment to
the Police Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental and
psychological examination, in accordance with such rules and regulations.
§ 48-7. Special law enforcement officers.11
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, may appoint from time to time
special law enforcement officers in accordance with New Jersey Statutes
for terms not exceeding one year. They shall possess and exercise all the
powers and duties provided by said statutes during their term in office,
but shall not be continued as regular members of the Police Department
and shall not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize
special law enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same powers
and authority as regular members of the Police Department including the
carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 48-8. Auxiliary police. [Added 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1078]
A. Training under Police Department. The auxiliary police are hereby
attached to the Oradell Police Department for the purpose of training.
During the period of time that the auxiliary police are attached to the
Police Department, they shall be under the direction of the Coordinator
of Emergency Management, who shall assign them to the Chief of
Police. The auxiliary police are also governed by the Standard
Operating Procedures dated January 30, 1987, and the Rules and
Regulations of the Oradell Auxiliary Police dated February 8, 1989, as
each may be amended from time to time.
B. Powers. Duly appointed regular auxiliary police shall have all the
powers of on duty regular police officers at the following times only:
(1) During any emergency as defined in N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq., as
amended and supplemented.
(2) During any practice, drill or activity in preparation for such
emergency duly authorized by the State Emergency Management
Coordinator.
(3) While actually engaged in training while attached to the Police
Department.
C. Rules and regulations. The State Coordinator of Emergency
Management shall formulate and promulgate rules and regulations
governing the appointment, discharge, training, meetings,
organization, duties and related matters concerning the auxiliary
police, subject to the approval of the Borough Council Committee. The
rules and regulations shall conform to the applicable statutes, executive
11.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 55, Special Law Enforcement Officers.
§ 48-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:55
§ 48-9. Promotional procedures. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
13-1]
proclamations, New Jersey Coordinator of Emergency Management
directives and other applicable laws and regulations.
D. Term of service. All auxiliary police, after appointment, shall serve until
the further resolution of the Borough Council.
A. Purpose. To provide all eligible candidates for promotion with fair
notice and equal access to the promotional process. Additionally, to
strive to identify the most qualified members of the Police Department
for promotion to leadership positions within the department and to set
forth the components of the promotional process that will be utilized by
the Chief of Police in carrying out the process and reporting the results
to the Mayor and Council.
B. Policy. Promotion denotes vertical movement in the organizational
hierarchy from one rank classification or position to another,
accompanied by increases in supervisory duties and responsibilities as
well as salary. The Borough desires to identify and promote the most
qualified candidates for open positions of higher rank who possess not
only thorough job knowledge but integrity and leadership ability. All
promotions shall be made on the basis of merit, experience, seniority,
education/military service, demonstrated ability and/or competitive
examinations.
C. General.
(1) Upon receiving instructions from the appropriate authority, the
Chief of Police will administer a promotional process approved by
the Mayor and Council as set forth in this section. The Chief of
Police shall report the results of the process to the appropriate
authority.
(2) All members of the department shall be notified of a promotional
process by way of a promotional announcement approved by the
appropriate authority, which shall be conspicuously posted in the
Police Department.
(a) The Chief of Police or his designee shall personally contact
eligible candidates who are on extended leave, if possible, in
order to provide the candidate with the information necessary
to comply with the requirements set forth in the promotional
announcement.
(b) Interested candidates must submit a letter and/or initial a form
of eligible candidates indicating that they wish to participate,
prior to a cutoff date set by the Chief of Police.
D. Promotion to Sergeant.
§ 48-8 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:56
(1) The Sergeant is the first supervisory rank in the chain of command.
A description of the duties and responsibilities of the Sergeant are
contained in the Department policies for promotion, which is the
basis for this section.
(2) Any officer that has served as a patrolman in the Oradell Police
Department for at least five years as of the closing date for
participation in the process will be eligible to participate for
promotion to Sergeant.
(3) Written examination.
(a) A written test shall be supplied by a professional testing
company approved by the Mayor and Council, or by a
professional law enforcement organization, such as the New
Jersey Chiefs of Police Association.
(b) Upon receipt of any written test developed by an external
source, the Chief of Police shall review the test materials for
sections that may not be applicable to the Oradell Police
Department.
(c) The written test shall be administered in the Borough Hall on
the date and time specified in the promotional announcement.
Candidates will be given a list of materials necessary to take
the written test, and sufficient time (at least 45 days) to study
the materials. The written test will commence promptly on the
date and time specified. All candidates must be present in the
testing room at the specified time or they may be excluded
from the process.
(d) Candidates achieving a minimum grade of 80% out of 100%
will be eligible to proceed to the oral exam. [Amended
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(e) After the written test is conducted, a list of the scores will be
posted in the Police Department.
(f) The written test shall account for 50% of the overall score in
the promotional process.
(4) Employment review.
(a) The Chief of Police will conduct a review of the candidates'
work records, and report to the appropriate authority.
Consideration will be given to each candidate's overall record,
including but not limited to:
[1] Borough-issued commendations and disciplinary actions.
[Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
[2] Sick time record (last four years). [Amended 9-12-2017
by Ord. No. 17-07]
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:57
[3] Available performance appraisals. [Amended 9-12-2017
by Ord. No. 17-07]
[4] Department responsibilities.
[5] Demonstrated leadership ability.
[6] Appearance and physical condition.
[7] Comments of direct supervisors.
[8] Reports and writing ability.
[9] Completed education.
[10] Seniority.
[11] Candidates that have served honorably in the military
receive a two-point credit.
(b) The Chief of Police will create a written form to use for his
review, which shall contain standards for grading each
individual category. Department averages will be used to grade
certain categories regarding patrol activity and sick time. Such
information shall be confidential and provided to the
appropriate authority. Individual candidates may request to
see their own results.
(c) The review will account for 30% of the overall score in the
promotional process.
(5) Oral exam.
(a) The oral examination shall be constructed in a manner
intended to assist the reviewing committee in assessing the
candidate's qualifications for the position sought and shall
focus on the desired skills, knowledge and abilities set forth in
the Sergeant's position description. The appropriate authority
shall have the final decision concerning relevant content for
the oral examination and must issue prior approval for any oral
examination slated for use in a promotional process.
(b) The reviewing committee shall normally be the members of the
appropriate authority, the Borough Administrator, and the
Chief of Police. The appropriate authority may appoint other
officials, at their discretion, to be members of the reviewing
committee. However, all candidates will be reviewed by the
same committee.
(c) Candidates will be asked general knowledge questions relating
to the goals, methods and conduct of supervisors. Some of the
questions may be drawn from the Police Department Policies,
others from the booklist that was studied for the written test,
and some from their own experiences with supervisors. All
§ 48-9 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:58
candidates will be asked the same questions during the oral
examination; however, individual members may ask additional
relevant questions at their discretion. The designated
reviewing committee will administer and score the oral
examination on a standard form, and scores from the individual
members will be averaged.
(d) Candidates are prohibited from any discussion or mention of
an examination question until the entire promotional process is
concluded.
(e) The oral examination shall account for 20% of the final score in
the promotional process.
(f) After all interviews are completed; the Chief of Police will make
recommendations to the appropriate authority for their
consideration.
(6) Final scores.
(a) At the conclusion of the promotional process, all scores will be
tallied by the Chief of Police, and the final results will be posted
in order of finish.
(b) The appropriate authority will convene with the Mayor and
Council with their recommendations, based on the testing, and
make the final promotional decision(s).
(c) If at least five candidates have completed the testing, then the
Mayor and Council may promote any one of the top three
candidates.
(d) If less than five candidates complete the promotional process,
then the Mayor and Council may promote either of the top two
candidates.
(e) If no promotions are immediately available, the completed list
will be maintained for up to three years. After at least one
promotion is made from the list within that period, the Mayor
and Council may choose to conduct a new promotional process,
at their discretion, for any further promotions.
E. Promotion to Lieutenant. The Lieutenant is the first administrative rank
in the Oradell Police Department chain of command. A description of
the duties and responsibilities of the Lieutenant are contained in the
Department policies for promotion, which is the basis for this section.
Any officer who has served at least one year as a Sergeant as of the
closing date for participation in the process will be eligible to
participate for promotion to Lieutenant.
(1) Written exam.
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:59
(a) A written test shall be supplied by a professional testing
company approved by the Mayor and Council, or by a
professional law enforcement organization, such as the New
Jersey Chiefs of Police Association.
(b) Upon receipt of any written test developed by an external
source, the Chief of Police shall review the test materials for
sections that may not be applicable to the Oradell Police
Department.
(c) The written test shall be administered in the Borough Hall on
the date and time specified in the promotional announcement.
Candidates will be given a list of materials necessary to take
the written test, and sufficient time (at least 45 days) to study
the materials. The written test will commence promptly on the
date and time specified. All candidates must be present in the
testing room at the specified time or they may be excluded
from the process.
(d) The written test shall account for 40% of the overall score in
the promotional process. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No.
17-07]
** [In lieu of a written examination, the appropriate authority,
at its discretion, may choose to have eligible candidates
submit to an executive performance appraisal conducted by
an outside police forensic psychology expert, or other similar
professional evaluation. The results of such testing shall be
provided to the Chief of Police and the appropriate authority;
all results will be confidential and will contain an evaluation
of each candidate's potential as a police administrator or
executive. Any costs associated with such testing will be paid
by the Borough. The appropriate authority will then assign a
numerical score based on the results, which will account for
40% of the total score].
(2) Oral exam.
(a) The oral examination shall be constructed in a manner
intended to assist the reviewing committee in assessing the
candidate's qualifications for the position sought and shall
focus on the desired skills, knowledge and abilities set forth in
the Lieutenant's position description. The appropriate
authority shall have the final decision concerning relevant
content for the oral examination and must issue prior approval
for any oral examination slated for use in a promotional
process.
(b) The reviewing committee shall normally be the members of the
appropriate authority, the Borough Administrator, and the
Chief of Police. The appropriate authority may appoint other
§ 48-9 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:60
officials, at their discretion, to be members of the reviewing
committee. However, all eligible candidates will be reviewed
by the same committee members.
(c) Candidates will be asked general knowledge questions relating
to the role of executive officers in the Police Department. Most
of the questions will relate to leadership ability and decisionmaking
skills. Candidates will be asked to assess their own
strengths and weaknesses, and what they believe are the skills
they possess that would serve them well as an administrator. A
list of questions relating to administrative duties will be
prepared by the Chief of Police and will be posed to all
candidates. Individual members of the reviewing committee
may ask additional relevant questions at their discretion. The
designated reviewing committee will administer and score the
oral examination on a standard form, and scores from the
individual members will be averaged. Scores will be based on
answers to questions, composure, appearance, communication
skills and leadership ability.
(d) Candidates are prohibited from any discussion or mention of
an examination question until the entire promotional process is
concluded.
(e) The oral examination shall account for 30% of the final score in
the promotional process. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No.
17-07]
(3) Employment review.
(a) The Chief of Police will conduct a review of the candidates'
work records, and report to the appropriate authority.
Consideration will be given to each candidate's overall record,
including but not limited to:
[1] Awards and commendations and/or department
disciplinary actions.
[2] Supervisory performance.
[3] Seniority.
[4] Time in rank.
[5] Education.
[6] Sick time record.
[7] Communication/writing ability.
[8] Military service.
(b) The Chief of Police will create a written form to use for his
review, which shall contain standards for grading each
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:61
individual category. Department averages will be used to grade
certain categories. Such information shall be confidential and
provided to the appropriate authority. Individual candidates
may request to see their own results. The employment review
shall account for 30% of the final score in the promotional
process. The reviewing committee may then also consider
recommendations made by the Chief of Police. [Amended
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(c) The appropriate authority will convene with the Mayor and
Council with their recommendations, based on the above
process, and make the final promotional decision(s).
(d) Any of the top three candidates may be chosen for promotion.
F. Promotion to Captain. The Captain serves as the Executive Officer of
the Police Department and assumes command responsibilities when the
Chief of Police is absent or otherwise unable to perform his or her
duties. A full description of the duties and responsibilities of the
Captain are contained in the Department policies for promotion, which
is the basis for this section. Any officer who has served at least one year
as a Lieutenant as of the closing date for participation in the process
will be eligible to participate for promotion to Captain. The promotional
process for Captain will consist of an oral exam, a written exam and an
employment review. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-7;
7-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-8; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(1) Written exam.
(a) A written test shall be supplied by a professional testing
company approved by the Mayor and Council, or by a
professional law enforcement organization, such as the New
Jersey Chiefs of Police Association.
(b) Upon receipt of any written test developed by an external
source, the Chief of Police shall review the test materials for
sections that may not be applicable to the Oradell Police
Department. In the absence of a Chief of Police, the New Jersey
State Chiefs of Police Association shall certify that the testing
materials do not contain sections that are not relevant to police
work in the Borough of Oradell.
(c) The written test shall be administered in the Borough Hall on
the date and time specified in the promotional announcement.
Candidates will be given a list of materials necessary to take
the written test, and sufficient time (at least 45 days) to study
the materials. The written test will commence promptly on the
date and time specified. All candidates must be present in the
testing room at the specified time or they may be excluded
from the process.
§ 48-9 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:62
(d) The written test shall account for 40% of the overall score in
the promotional process.
* [In lieu of a written examination, the appropriate authority,
at its discretion, may choose to have eligible candidates submit
to an executive performance appraisal conducted by an outside
police forensic psychology expert, or other similar professional
evaluation. The results of such testing shall be confidential and
provided to the Chief of Police and the appropriate authority;
all results will contain an evaluation of each candidate's
potential as a police administrator or executive. Any costs
associated with such testing will be paid by the Borough. The
appropriate authority will then assign a numerical score based
on the results, which will account for 40% of the total score.]
(2) Oral exam. The oral exam will be conducted by the appropriate
authority and/or any other officials they wish to appoint, at their
discretion, including but not limited to the Chief of Police or a
representative of the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association
The interview will follow a similar procedure as the oral exam for
Lieutenant. Each candidate will be scored on a standard form, and
the oral exam will account for 30% of the total score.
(3) Employment review.
(a) The Chief of Police, or in the absence of a Chief of Police, a
representative of the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police
Association, or another third party selected by the appropriate
authority, will conduct a review of the candidates' work records
and report to the appropriate authority.
[1] Education/military achieved as of the date of the written
examination (only for last degree achieved) = 10 points
maximum.
[a] Associate degree: three points.
[b] Bachelor's degree or four years of military (honorable
discharge): six points.
[c] Master's degree: nine points.
[d] Doctorate: 10 points.
[2] Borough-issued commendations = five points maximum.
[Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
[a] One point for each commendation issued up to five
points.
[b] Only commendations from those awarded in
accordance with Oradell Police Department policies
shall be counted.
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:63
[c] Commendations will be considered from those
awarded over the last five years prior to date of
review.
[3] Assignments/department responsibilities = 10 points
maximum.
[a] One point for each position held during the last five
years from the date of the review.
[b] Positions eligible for credit shall be determined by the
Chief of Police and the appropriate authority.
[4] Discipline = five points maximum.
[a] One point for each year with no disciplinary record
(written reprimand or above) during the last five years
prior to date of review.
[5] Sick time = 20 points maximum.
[a] Four points for each year with four sick days or less
over the last five years.
[6] Seniority = five points maximum.
[a] Quarter point for every year completed, as of the date
of the Captain's written examination, as an Oradell
Police Officer.
[7] Time in rank = five points maximum.
[a] One-half point for each full year completed as a
Lieutenant with the Oradell Police Department as of
the date of the Captain's written exam.
(b) If a candidate scores between 0 and 20 points on the file
review, the candidate will receive 10 points towards the total
score; if a candidate scores between 20 and 40 points on the
file review, the candidate will receive 20 points towards the
total score; and if a candidate scores over 40 points on the file
review, the candidate will receive 30 points towards the total
score.
(c) The Chief of Police, or in the absence of a Chief of Police, a
representative of the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police
Association, or other third party selected by the appropriate
authority will create a written form to use for his/her review,
which shall contain standards for grading each individual
category. Such information will be available to the appropriate
authority. Individual candidates may request to see their own
results. The employment review shall account for 30% of the
final score in the promotional process.
§ 48-9 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:64
(d) The testing process is intended to provide the appropriate
authority and Mayor and Council with information to be used
in determining which office is the best candidate for the
position. The reviewing committee may then also consider
recommendations made by the Chief of Police, or in the
absence of a Chief of Police, a representative of the New Jersey
State Chiefs of Police Association.
(e) The appropriate authority will convene with the Mayor and
Council with their recommendations, based upon the above
process, and make the final promotional decision.
G. Promotion to Chief of Police. The Chief of Police serves as the
Commanding Officer of the Police Department and is at all times
responsible for ensuring public safety, compliance with laws, rules and
regulations, safeguarding of property, and the welfare of all people
while inside the borders of the Borough of Oradell. A full description of
the duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police are contained in the
Department Policies for promotion, which is the basis for this section.
Pursuant to the authority of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Oradell to establish the position of the Chief of Police for the Oradell
Police Department, once the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Oradell have certified by resolution that the position of Chief of Police is
vacant and will be filled, a notice shall be posted on the bulletin board
of the Police Headquarters, and the Mayor and Council shall implement
the procedures contained hereinbelow:
(1) In order to be considered for the rank of Chief of Police, the Officer
must be a member of the Oradell Police Department, and hold the
rank of Lieutenant or above to be eligible to participate in the
process for promotion to Chief of Police. Any Captain or
Lieutenants who have served for a minimum of one year in such
capacities as of the closing date for participation in the process will
be eligible to participate for promotion to Chief of Police.
[Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(2) All candidates eligible for promotion to the rank of Chief of Police
must successfully complete a psychological examination conducted
by a psychiatrist or psychologist or by a professional psychological
service organization appointed by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Oradell. The ranking of the evaluation shall serve as
40% of the overall score. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No.
17-07]
(3) Psychological testing will be conducted for objective suitability
traits and attributions. Testing shall relate to motivation,
intelligence, team compatibility, endurance, social judgment, stress
tolerance, self-control and emotional stability. Candidates shall be
evaluated for supervisory potential, ability to analyze the
management role, as well as leadership and attitudes towards
directing and disciplining former peers.
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:65
(4) The test shall be scored on a pass/fail basis as to suitability of
candidates which shall be confidential and provided to the Borough
Administrator and the appropriate authority.
(5) Criteria for selection. All candidates who pass the psychological
testing shall be evaluated for promotion to the position of Chief of
Police based upon the following criteria:
(a) Evaluation criteria.
[1] Oral interview.
[a] The interview with the appropriate authority shall
focus on leadership and management skills,
knowledge of the Borough of Oradell's form of
government, knowledge of the Police Department
Ordinance, familiarity with the municipal budget
process and the Police Department budget in
particular, manpower allocations, Attorney General
Guidelines and knowledge of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et
seq. The candidate will also be ranked based upon
their demonstration of the following:
[i] Knowledge of the community.
[ii] Communication skills.
[iii] Leadership skills and ability.
[iv] Professional judgment exercised by the
candidate.
[v] Innovative ideas.
[b] The appropriate authority shall ask each candidate the
identical questions and the Clerk or Borough
Administrator will keep written records of each
candidate's response to same.
[c] The oral interview shall serve as 30% of the overall
score. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
[2] Personnel jacket review. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-07]
[a] The appropriate authority shall examine the personnel
jacket of each candidate and shall consider the
following:
[i] Performance evaluations.
[ii] Commendations.
[iii] Education.
§ 48-9 ORADELL CODE § 48-9
1:66
Chapter 53
PRICING AGREEMENT, COOPERATIVE
§ 53-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 53-2. Authorization.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor is hereby
authorized to enter in a cooperative pricing agreement with the lead agency
or any other contracting unit within the County of Bergen or adjoining
counties for the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
§ 53-3. Responsibility of lead agency.
The lead agency entering into contracts shall be responsible for complying
with the provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 54
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47. Personnel practices — See Ch. 47A.
[iv] Specialized training.
[v] Military experience.
[vi] Disciplinary action.
[vii] Years of service in the Oradell Police Department.
[b] The personnel jacket review shall serve as 30% of
overall ranking.
(b) Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to
the promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be
given to the candidate with the most seniority in service
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, or a resident over a
nonresident pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6.
(6) Seniority shall prevail over residency in the case of candidates that
are ranked equally.
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:67

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-18]
§ 54-1. Newly appointed officials.
On and after July 1, 2007, newly appointed officials in the Borough must
enroll in DCRP, not PERS, if the position requires the specific consent
and/or approval of the Mayor and Council. Borough employees appointed
to a position by elected officials, such as Mayoral appointments, or
appointments made with the advice and consent of the Council shall also be
DCRP positions.
§ 54-2. Appointed officials enrolled in PERS.
An appointed official in the Borough who is already enrolled in the PERS
prior to July 1, 2007, based on an elected and/or appointed office, will
remain a PERS member while in that office/position. If, however, on or after
July 1, 2007, there is a break of service in that office/position, or the official
is elected to a different elected office, the official will be enrolled in the
DCRP and cannot continue with PERS membership in the newly elected
office/position.
§ 54-3. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 54-4. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Borough Administrator;
B. Municipal Attorney (only if appointed as an employee);
C. Municipal Engineer (only if appointed as an employee);
D. Municipal Prosecutor (only if appointed as an employee);
E. Municipal Court Judge;
F. Court Administrator;
G. Recreation Director;
H. Any other department head appointed by the governing body.
A. Certified Health Officer;
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-4
1:69
§ 54-5. Implementation.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 54-6. Filing with state.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 54-4 ORADELL CODE § 54-6
1:70
Chapter 55
SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
§ 54-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-6
1:71

ARTICLE I
Class One
[Adopted 8-16-1988 by Ord. No. 826]
§ 55-1. Powers and duties.
Officers of this class are authorized to perform routine traffic detail,
spectator control and similar duties. They shall have the power to issue
summonses for disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be strictly
prohibited, and no Class One officer shall be assigned any duties which may
require the carrying of or use of a firearm.
§ 55-2. Hiring limit.
The Borough of Oradell shall not employ more than three special officers in
Class One.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:73
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 62
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Retail businesses — See Ch. 200.
§ 55-2 ORADELL CODE § 55-2
1:74
ARTICLE I
Limitation on Number of Licenses
[Adopted 5-1-1973 by Ord. No. 601]
§ 62-1. Plenary retail distribution license.
The number of plenary retail distribution licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in original containers for consumption off the licensed premises
is hereby limited to two such licenses.
§ 62-2. Plenary retail consumption license.
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses for the sale for
consumption on the licensed premises of any alcoholic beverage by the
glass or other open receptacle, and also the sale of alcoholic beverages
in original containers for consumption off the licensed premises, is hereby
limited to two such licenses.
§ 62-3. Club licenses.
The number of club licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages for
immediate consumption on the licensed premises and only to bona fide club
members and their guests is hereby limited to two such licenses.
§ 62-4. Fees. [Amended 9-18-1973 by Ord. No. 606; 12-20-1988 by
Ord. No. 837
Fees for the issuance of licenses shall be as indicated in Chapter 115.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-4
1:75

ARTICLE II
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 3-20-1961 as Art. II of Ch. 3 of the 1961 Revised
Ordinances]
§ 62-5. Plenary retail consumption license.
No holder of a plenary retail consumption license or a seasonal retail
consumption license shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on weekdays between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon, except Christmas and New Year's Day, each year.
§ 62-6. Plenary retail distribution license.
No holder of a plenary retail distribution license or a limited retail
distribution license shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on
weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, except Christmas and New
Year's Day, each year.
§ 62-7. Christmas Day; New Year's Day.
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on Christmas Day between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and on New Year's Day, when New Year's
Day falls on a weekday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., and
when New Year's Day falls on a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon.
§ 62-8. Eastern standard time; Eastern daylight saving time.
The hours referred to in the preceding sections of this Article shall be
Eastern standard time, except from 2:00 a.m. on the last Sunday in April
until 2:00 a.m. on the last Sunday in September, each year, when they
shall be Eastern daylight saving time, which time is one hour in advance of
Eastern standard time.
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-8
1:77
Chapter 65
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115. Retail businesses — See Ch. 200.
§ 65-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, member of a firm, partnership, member
of a partnership, corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of such
corporation.
§ 65-2. License required. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 741]
No person shall install, maintain, operate or possess in any store, building
or other place wherein the public is invited or where the public may enter
or in any building or place wherein any club or organization meetings are
held, within the Borough, any amusement game or machine of the type
commonly known and designated as electric crane machines, coin-operated
bagatelle, baseball, pin amusement games, shuffleboard, console, Skee-
Ball, bagatelle or similar machines or devices; music vending machines;
coin-operated picture or coin-operated television machines, video game
machines or similar devices without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 65-3. Fees. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
The annual license fees are as indicated in Chapter 115.
§ 65-4. Fees payable in advance.
All annual license fees payable under this chapter shall be payable in
advance for the calendar year in which issued.
§ 65-5. Limit on number of games or machines. [Amended 4-5-1983
by Ord. No. 741]
No person shall install, maintain, operate or possess in any store, building
or other place wherein the public is invited or where the public may enter
or in any building or place within the Borough more than three amusement
games or machines, which shall consist of one machine classified under
§ 115-16B and two amusement games or machines which may be classified
under either § 115-16A, C or D.
§ 62-8 ORADELL CODE § 65-6
1:78
§ 65-6. Application for license.
A separate application for a license for the business of installing,
maintaining, possessing or operating each machine, as required in § 65-2,
shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on a form which shall designate the
name and post office address of the applicant and such other information as
the Borough Clerk shall deem necessary or proper from time to time. Such
application shall be made directly to the Borough Clerk, and the fees for the
license for the business of installing, maintaining, possessing or operating
each machine shall accompany each application.
§ 65-7. Inspection of premises; approval.
Upon receipt of an application filed as provided in § 65-6, the Borough Clerk
shall refer the same to the Chief of Police, who shall make or cause to be
made an inspection of the premises described in such application. The Chief
of Police, on completion of his inspection, shall attach to such application his
report thereon, in writing, which shall also state his approval or disapproval
and the reasons therefor. Each such application shall be presented to the
Mayor and Council for approval, and upon disapproval of any application,
the fee deposited by the applicant; shall be returned to him.
§ 65-8. Posting of license.
No device or machine as specified in § 65-2 shall be placed, operated,
maintained, used or possessed in any building or place where the public is
invited or where the public may enter, or in any building or place wherein
any club or organization meetings are held within the Borough, until the
license issued by the City Clerk, upon approval of the Mayor and Council, in
reference thereto shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the immediate
vicinity of the machine so that the same shall be easily and quickly
identified. Such license shall on its face disclose the manufacturer's serial
number and the name and post office address of the licensee, and shall
disclose the amount of money required to operate the machine or device
and shall briefly state that the machine or device to which the same is
affixed is licensed for operation by the Borough.
§ 65-9. Revocation of license.
At any time after the granting of a license in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter the Council may, in the exercise of its discretion, revoke the
same for any willful false statement in the application. Such license may be
revoked in the event that the licensee shall be convicted of any crime or
shall be convicted of any violation of this chapter.12
§ 65-10. Substitution of game or machine.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the holder of the license
provided for in this chapter from substituting a game or machine at the
12.Editor's Note: For violations and penalties, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-10.
§ 65-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-10
1:79
location set forth in such license, provided that the information required
in § 65-8 is set forth in the substituted license obtained from the Borough
Clerk within 24 hours, but at no time shall more than one game or machine
be operated under one license.
§ 65-11. Applicability; transfer.
Every license issued under this chapter shall apply only to the person to
whom granted and for premises stated in the application and shall not
transferable unless the Council approves of such transfer in writing.
§ 65-12. Operation by minor prohibited. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord.
No. 741]
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play or operate
any of the games or machines described in § 115-16 unless such person
under the age of 18 years is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
§ 65-13. Use of machine for gambling purposes.
Any person who shall use, possess or permit to be used any of the machines
or devices licensed under this chapter for the purpose of gambling shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. The Council may, in its discretion, revoke the
license of the licensee if such machine is used or permitted to be used for
the purpose of gambling.
§ 65-14. Purpose. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 741]
A. This chapter is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and for the
regulation and control of amusement games or machines known and
described as electric crane machines, coin-operated bagatelle,
baseball, pin amusement games, shuffleboard, console, Skee-Ball,
bagatelle or similar machines or devices, coin-operated picture
machines, television machines, video-game machines or similar devices
and music vending machines.
B. No coin-operated picture machines, television machines, video-game
machines or similar devices shall be permitted within a radius of 300
feet of a public or private school building, public library, fire station,
hospital, church, theater, municipal building or other public gathering
place, provided that this chapter shall not apply to premises having
private coin-operated picture machines, television machines, videogame
machines or similar devices.
§ 65-10 ORADELL CODE § 65-14
1:80
Chapter 73
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190. Yard and autumn leaf waste — See Ch. 290.
§ 73-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to control the planting, cultivating or growing of
bamboo in the Borough of Oradell; and to require barriers to prevent the
spread of existing bamboo into other areas of the Borough.
§ 73-2. Planting, growing or cultivating restricted.
Subject to certain exemptions set forth in this chapter, no persons, or other
property owners or others in possession or control of real property or
tenants shall plant, cultivate or cause to grow bamboo on any lot or parcel
of land within the Borough of Oradell, subject to the following exceptions:
§ 73-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any landowner or possessor who, prior to
the effective date of this chapter, has planted or caused to grow bamboo
on any property within the Borough limits unless the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that any portion of such bamboo has been allowed to
grow upon, extend roots across, or extend branches, stalks or leaves over
any public way or any private property not owned by or in the possession of
such landowner, tenant, or any possessor of said land.
§ 73-4. Complaint notice; order for removal and compliance.
Whenever a complaint is received by the Borough regarding the
encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Borough
determines that there is an encroachment of bamboo plants or roots onto
the property of another, the Borough, through its delegated official, shall
forward a notice of violation to the alleged offending person, property
A. The root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained within an
above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such design,
material and location so as to entirely prevent the spread or growth of
the bamboo plants' root system beyond the container in which it is
planted; and
B. Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part
of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet to any property line or right-ofway.
§ 65-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-4
1:81
owner, or other in possession of such property (hereinafter the "violator"),
which notice shall be substantially as follows:
§ 73-5. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Oradell which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 73-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this chapter.
A. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also by first class
mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed served on the date of
personal delivery, or the date the certified mail is marked "refused" or
"unclaimed" or otherwise undeliverable by the United States Post
Office.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
C. The notice shall state that the violation must be cured within 30 days
from the date of the received or returned mailing.
D. The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the violator to
correct the violation.
A. Any violator determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated this chapter shall be subject to pay a fine of not less than $25
per day, nor more than $100 per day, for each day the violation exists
after the date for cure as set forth in the notice. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which an
additional fine can be levied. The per-day fine will be in addition to a
penalty for failure to comply with the Bamboo Ordinance. This fine can
be up to $1,000.
B. If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the aforesaid
notice, the Borough is hereby authorized, but not obligated, to remove
or have removed any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable
steps to eradicate the regrowth of the bamboo on the public rights-ofway,
including sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal
condition, prior to such removal and eradication.
C. The Borough's cost of the corrective action together with any civil
penalties, legal fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the
violator.
§ 73-4 ORADELL CODE § 73-8
1:82
§ 73-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon adoption and publication according to
law.
Chapter 75
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalties — See Ch. 1, Art I. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BICYCLE — A vehicle powered with muscle power only, designed to be
ridden by one or more persons. Ordinarily, a "bicycle" has two wheels but
a two-wheeled vehicle with two additional wheels in back for balance and a
vehicle with three wheels designed to be ridden by an adult shall be deemed
to be "bicycle" for the purposes of this chapter.
BIKE PATH — A pathway designed and designated by signs and/or markings
for bicycle operations; a path set aside exclusively for the use of bicycles.
It shall also mean that portion of a roadway designated by signs and/or
markings for bicycle operation.
WALKWAY — A path used primarily for hiking or walking.
§ 75-2. Vehicles prohibited on bike paths.
All vehicles, with the exception of bicycles, are prohibited from using a
designated bike path and/or walkway, except as follows:
§ 75-3. Bicyclists required to use bike paths.
Where a designated bike path has been provided, every bicyclist shall use
the path and shall not use the adjacent roadway except at intersections, in
an emergency or where necessary to.
A. To make a permissible left, right or U-turn.
B. To enter or leave a parking space.
A. Make a permissible left, right or U-turn.
B. Leave or cross the roadway.
C. Maintain the safe operation of the bicycle.
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:83
§ 75-4. Number of persons on bicycle limited.
No bicycle shall be used to convey more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed or equipped.
§ 75-5. Pedestrians to yield right-of-way on bike paths.
Except where otherwise indicated by official traffic control devices, a
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles operating on a
designated bike path and/or walkway.
§ 75-6. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by impoundment of the
violator's bicycle for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination
thereof.
Chapter 80
CAFES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 62.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
§ 80-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the B-1
Zone of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
respectively ascribed in this section:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served, or where permitted on
private property pursuant to the Land Use Ordinance.13
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Development.
§ 75-4 ORADELL CODE § 80-3
1:84
§ 80-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the
Borough of Oradell, or on private property, unless such person shall hold a
currently valid license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 80-4. Area requirements.
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the licensee shall demonstrate
that a minimum of nine feet from the curb edge will be available for
pedestrian traffic around such outdoor cafe and that such outdoor cafe be
directly in front of an eating establishment as hereinabove defined. No food
or drinks served at such outdoor cafe shall be prepared or stored other than
in the interior of the eating establishment. The term "directly in front of"
shall confine the cafe to the area represented by an extension of each side
of the store occupied by the eating establishment projected directly to the
curb line immediately in front thereof.
§ 80-5. Application for license.
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
10% or greater interest in the corporation and the chief operating
executive of the corporation and if a nondomestic corporation, the
name, residence address and telephone number of the managing officer
for service of process within the State of New Jersey and a copy of the
qualification of said nondomestic corporation to conduct business in the
State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings
prepared by a licensed professional architect or engineer clearly
illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location of all
tables, chairs, umbrellas or other furnishings or fixtures intended to be
located in the outdoor cafe. All tables and chairs must be constructed of
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:85
§ 80-6. Review by Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days after the application becomes complete. If the application
is not complete, the Construction Code Official will so notify the applicant
within 10 business days of the submission and specifically detail the areas
in which the application lacks compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
material of sufficient weight so as to not be affected by high winds.
The perimeter of the outdoor cafe shall be defined and set off by a
portable type enclosure which may include live potted plantings on
Borough property. The enclosure shall define the perimeter of the area
to be used as an outdoor cafe and shall separate it from the pedestrians
traversing the adjacent sidewalk. The enclosure shall not contain doors
or windows nor air-conditioning or heating equipment and shall be
open at all times to the air and the barrier shall not have a height of
more than three feet. Awnings or outdoor umbrellas extending over the
enclosure are permitted, provided that the lowest portion of the awning
or umbrella is not less than seven feet above the adjacent sidewalk and
does not extend more than one foot beyond the enclosure. The scaled
drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be obstructed in any manner.
(2) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around each outdoor cafe.
(3) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to be
prepared.
(4) The enclosure or protective barrier separating the eating and
serving area of each outdoor cafe from pedestrian traffic which
shall be indicated by a plan, elevation and section.
(5) The location of all bus stops, fire hydrants, utility poles, benches,
handicap ramps, street furniture, trees and any other fixtures
permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the eating
establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any side.
(6) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and fixtures
should include the following information: mounting height, lamp
type and lumens. Any open flame type fixture shall only be
permitted with the approval of the Fire Official.
(7) An application fee as set forth in § 115-17 of the Code of the
Borough of Oradell.
§ 80-5 ORADELL CODE § 80-7
1:86
§ 80-7. Issuance of license.
If the application complies with this chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 80-8. Nontransferability.
The license is personal to the applicant and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 80-9. Inspections allowed.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Borough to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 80-10. Statement of indemnity.
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the
Construction Code Official a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Oradell, its agents, servants, representatives or
employees from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses,
including attorneys fees, which they or any of them may incur or be
required to pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in any
way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the
license is issued.
§ 80-11. Insurance.
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Construction Code Official a comprehensive general liability policy
issued to such person by a public liability insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the
coverage limits set forth below in the amounts specified. Such
insurance policy shall name the Borough of Oradell, 355 Kinderkamack
Road, Oradell, New Jersey, 07649, its agents, officers, servants,
representatives and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following
amounts:
(1) Bodily injury, each person: $300,000.
(2) Bodily injury, each accident: $1,000,000.
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-11
1:87
§ 80-12. Continuing liability.
Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured shall not be affected
by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured and that until the
policy is canceled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability
on account of nonpayment of premium or of any act or omission by the
named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the
payment of any and all judgments up to the limits of such policy.
§ 80-13. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license, which
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Borough Clerk for failure
of any licensee to comply with this chapter or for violation of any other
applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation or ordinance.
Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the express understanding that
the licensee obtains no property right thereunder, nor any interest in the
continuation of said license.
§ 80-14. Unlawful operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license.
§ 80-15. Responsibility for keeping area clean.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business
(3) Property damage, each person: $300,000
(4) Property damage, each accident: $1,000,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Construction Code Official shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30
days written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not
relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any injury or
claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The
cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate affect of
suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying the provisions of this
section is filed with the Construction Code Official and a letter in
writing confirming the new effective date of the license is issued by the
Construction Code Official.
§ 80-11 ORADELL CODE § 80-15
1:88
is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00
a.m.
§ 80-16. Vending machines prohibited.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
§ 80-17. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except signs
on the awnings complying with the Sign Ordinance of the Code of the
Borough of Oradell.14 Outdoor umbrellas located in the outdoor cafe shall
be exempt from the Sign Ordinance of the Borough of Oradell. There shall
be no logos or advertising upon any umbrellas without prior approval of the
Sign Committee of the Oradell Planning Board.
§ 80-18. Right of Borough to modify, suspend or revoke license.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above, the
Borough reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on 10
days' written notice if the Borough determines that the pedestrian operation
of the outdoor cafe or because of any other safety issue within the Borough
because of such operation. The license may also be suspended or revoked
on 10 days' written notice in the event that the Borough determines that it
is necessary to utilize the area or any part thereof for the maintenance or
installation of underground utilities. In the event of an emergency, which
emergency is certified by the Borough Clerk, the license may be suspended
or revoked without notice.
§ 80-19. Alcoholic beverages license.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcohol beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 80-20. When permitted; term of license. [Amended 3-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-03]
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from March 1 to November
30 in any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one
year. If there is no change in use, a renewal license may be issued by the
Construction Code Official upon submission of a renewal application. The
applicant shall certify on the application no change in the scope or use from
the previously issued license.
§ 80-21. Equipment.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Art. XI, Signs and Awnings.
§ 80-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-21
1:89
§ 80-22. Vacation of premises.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the Borough the right to remove any property
on the sidewalk and the licensee agrees to reimburse the Borough for the
cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 80-23. Noise-making devices prohibited.
The licensee shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 80-24. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain open
for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor cafe shall
vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
§ 80-25. Table service.
Table service is required.
§ 80-26. Alcoholic beverages to be served in conjunction with
meals.
Alcoholic beverages shall only be served and consumed in connection with
a meal. Only beer and wine may be served in an outdoor dining area.
Chapter 83
A. No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb
or sidewalk or property of the Borough of Oradell within or near the
licensed area.
B. All equipment used in connection with the operation of an outdoor cafe
shall be of sufficient size and weight to avoid being blown about by the
wind. No food items shall be served upon paper, Styrofoam or with
plastic utensils.
C. All equipment, tables, chairs, umbrellas, etc., pertaining to the outdoor
seating area shall be removed at the end of each and every evening and
secured within the confines of the building. No equipment, tables,
chairs or any other material of any kind shall be permitted to remain
outdoors during hours in which the business is not open to the public
and operating.
§ 80-21 ORADELL CODE § 80-26
1:90
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 83, Cell Phones, Art. I, Use in Motor Vehicles, adopted
6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-07, is preempted by statute. See N.J.S.A.
39:4-97.3.]
Chapter 85
CERTIFICATES OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 95.
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 121.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Flood-fringe areas — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to provide, through the certification process, an
orderly and convenient method of inspection of buildings to determine:
§ 85-2. Certificate required.
A. Whether the property may continue to be used in compliance with the
local zoning ordinances of the Borough of Oradell or by virtue of the
fact that the use is a valid nonconforming use in said zone or a
permitted use by legal variance proceeding.
B. That the use does not constitute a danger to the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Oradell.
C. Whether there are any outstanding violations of law or orders of the
Construction Official pending.
A. No person shall occupy a building or portion thereof for a commercial
or industrial purpose after said building or portion thereof has been
vacated due to the sale of said industrial or commercial property or for
which there has been a change in use or change in tenancy or
occupancy until the owner of said premises has applied for and secured
a certificate of continued occupancy.
B. No person shall occupy a building or portion thereof for residential
purposes after said building or portion thereof has been vacated due to
the sale of said residential property or for which there has been a
change in use or change in tenancy or occupancy until the owner of said
§ 80-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:91
§ 85-3. Application.
§ 85-4. Time of filing of application.
The application shall be filed by the current owner of the property or his
agent no later than 21 days prior to the anticipated date of change of
ownership, tenancy, occupancy or use.
§ 85-5. Other requirements.
In the case of industrial or commercial property, as a condition to issuance
of a certificate of continued occupancy, the current owner shall supply a
certified copy of the Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act (ECRA)15
documentation relating to the premises, plus a copy of the vacating tenants
ECRA documentation, if it is determined that ECRA applies.
premises has applied for and secured a certificate of continued
occupancy.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises for which a
certificate of continued occupancy is required as provided in this
chapter to make application for such certificate on application forms
provided by the Borough and to supply all information called for on said
form. Without limiting the foregoing, in the case of premises occupied
for commercial or industrial purposes, said application shall call for all
facts related to the nature of the business, occupation or industry, the
manufacturing or other processes involved and the nature of all
materials stored on the premises as part of or pertinent to such
industrial or commercial activity.
B. Such application shall be filed with the Borough of Oradell Code
Enforcement Agency, which shall review the application and, if it is
complete, cause the premises to be inspected for the purposes specified
in this chapter, said inspection to be conducted by the Building
Inspector, the Zoning Board Administrative Official, the Health Officer
and the Fire Safety Inspector or such thereof as the Construction
Official deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
C. The Construction Official or his designee shall either issue or deny the
application within 21 calendar days from submission. The certificate of
continued occupancy shall evidence only that a general inspection of
the visible parts of the premises has been made and that it is in
compliance with the purposes of this chapter. If it is determined that a
certificate of continued occupancy may not be issued, a written notice
of denial must be issued to the owner and/or his agent, setting forth the
reasons for denial, and copies shall be provided to the Borough of
Oradell Code Enforcement Agency and to the Borough Clerk.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1K-6 et seq.
§ 85-2 ORADELL CODE § 85-6
1:92
§ 85-6. Nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use, regardless of the duration it has existed, shall not
receive a certificate of continued occupancy unless it can be demonstrated
that the use predates any law or ordinance regulating it or that a valid
certificate of occupancy was at one time issued for such use and such use
has been continuous, regardless of changes in ownership of the building or
structure.
§ 85-7. Revocation.
On the serving of notice of any violation of the provisions of this chapter
with respect to any premises or use thereof covered in the certificate of
continued occupancy, said certificate of continued occupancy for such use
shall be thereupon null and void. A new certificate of continued occupancy
shall be required for any further use of said premises.
§ 85-8. Fire detectors.
No certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued for any structure
unless an approved automatic fire-detection system is installed in such
structure. The standard for installation shall be in accordance with
NFiPA-72 or 74, as the same may be hereafter amended; provided, however,
that existing one- and two-family dwellings may utilize approved batteryoperated
smoke detectors.
§ 85-9. Fees.
Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees, and shall be payable upon
filing of an application pursuant to this chapter.
§ 85-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in an application
filed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 85-11. Notification.
To assist in the enforcement of this chapter, a notice shall be included on
all tax search and added assessment searches prepared by the tax collector
of the Borough of Oradell stating that a certificate of continued occupancy
is required for a change in the use, occupancy, tenancy or sale or the
vacation of any building or portion thereof used for residential, commercial
or industrial purposes within the Borough of Oradell; provided, however,
that the failure to affix such notice shall not constitute a defense for the
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11
1:93
failure to obtain a certificate of continued occupancy in violation of this
chapter.
§ 85-12. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining portions of this
chapter shall not be affected, and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 85-13. Effect on other provisions.
No certificate of continued occupancy issued pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a defense against any violation of any other local ordinance
or provision of this Code relating to the conduct of business or the
maintenance of property in the Borough of Oradell, including but not limited
to, Chapter 100, Contractors, Licensing of, Chapter 190, Property
Maintenance, Chapter 235, Streets and Sidewalks, and Board of Health
legislation and regulations.
Chapter 92
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Committee — See Ch. 22.
§ 85-11 ORADELL CODE § 85-13
1:94
ARTICLE I
Beautification Committee
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 92-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Beautification Committee for the Borough of
Oradell to be known as the "Beautification Committee of the Borough of
Oradell."
§ 92-2. Purpose.
The Beautification Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor
and Council concerning aesthetic and decorative aspects throughout the
Borough. The Beautification Committee shall also make recommendations
to the Mayor and Council regarding desired projects and ideas that may
exceed the Committee's budget limitations.
§ 92-3. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-4. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Beautification Committee shall be as follows:
§ 92-5. Records; annual report.
The Beautification Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of
its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor
and Council.
A. The Beautification Committee shall consist of up to, but not exceeding
13 members who shall be residents of the Borough of Oradell. The
members of the Beautification Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Borough Council for terms of one year,
to serve without salary.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Beautification Committee shall organize annually and from its
members elect a Chair.
A. Plant flowers and planting pots throughout the Borough.
B. Work with DPW regarding nurturing and maintaining the plantings.
C. Organize community events such as Adopt-a-Pot.
D. Create seasonal decorations throughout the Borough (including but not
limited to fall and holiday decorations).
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-5
1:95

ARTICLE II
Video Committee
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 92-6. Establishment. [Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-7]
There is hereby established a Video Committee for the Borough of Oradell
to be known as the "Video Committee of the Borough of Oradell." The
Committee shall also be known as "Oradell Public Television" or "OPTV."
§ 92-7. Purpose.
The Video Committee is formed in order to increase public awareness of
municipal proceedings and town events through the use of the Borough's
local access channel. The Committee's guiding principles are to produce
informative programming; to expand residents' awareness of Borough
events; to collaborate with other Borough committees and users of local
Channel 77 (RDHS) on scheduling of programs and program ideas; to
ensure the Committee's own competence; and to act as one organization.
§ 92-8. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-9. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Video Committee shall be as follows:
A. The Video Committee shall consist of at least five members but not to
exceed seven members. The members shall be residents of the Borough
of Oradell and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Borough Council for terms of one year, to serve without salary.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Video Committee shall organize annually and from its members
elect a Chair.
A. The Video Committee will provide unbiased live coverage of Mayor and
Council meetings and any other municipal meetings covered live or live
to tape. The Committee will establish broadcast guidelines regarding
televising live town meetings and review/update annually as needed.
B. Continue to operate and, when possible, maintain town-owned
equipment necessary for transmission of live and taped meetings.
C. Recruit and train Committee members as necessary.
D. At least one Committee member will be present at all live televised
events.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-10
1:97
§ 92-10. Records; annual report.
The Video Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of its
meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor and
Council.
§ 92-10 ORADELL CODE § 92-10
1:98
ARTICLE III
Historic Committee
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 92-11. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Historic Committee for the Borough of
Oradell to be known as the "Historic Committee of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 92-12. Purpose.
The purpose of the Historic Committee is to recognize, catalog and preserve
people, places, objects and events of historic interest to the Borough of
Oradell and to provide an historic context within which the Borough may
conduct its affairs.
§ 92-13. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-14. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Historic Committee shall be as follows:
A. The Historic Committee shall consist of up to, but not exceeding, nine
members, who shall be residents of the Borough of Oradell. The
members of the Historic Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Borough Council for terms of one year, to serve
without salary.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Historic Committee shall organize annually and from its members
elect a Chair.
A. To conduct historical research and provide advice to the Mayor and
Council regarding historical matters that pertain to the Borough.
B. To explore ways to assess the preservation of historic structures within
the Borough.
C. To obtain and transcribe oral histories from long-time Borough
residents and make them available through the Oradell Public Library
and other appropriate venues for use in teaching and general interest.
D. To participate in projects, events, celebrations, etc., to honor Borough
residents and/or veterans who have served their country during past
and current wars.
§ 92-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-15
1:99
§ 92-15. Records; annual report.
The Historic Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of its
meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor and
Council.
§ 92-15 ORADELL CODE § 92-15
1:100
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Drug Alliance Committee
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 92-16. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Municipal Drug Alliance Committee for the
Borough of Oradell to be known as the "Municipal Drug Alliance Committee
of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 92-17. Purpose.
The Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall make recommendations to the
Mayor and Council concerning alcohol and drug awareness programs.
§ 92-18. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-19. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall be as follows:
§ 92-20. Records; annual report.
The Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall keep complete and accurate
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the
Mayor and Council.
A. The Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall consist of up to, but not
exceeding, 11 members, who shall be residents of the Borough of
Oradell. The members of the Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Borough Council for
terms of one year, to serve without salary.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Municipal Drug Alliance Committee shall organize annually and
from its members elect a Chair.
A. Managing and accounting of monies raised from grants, donations, the
state, etc. in order to promote programs and activities aimed at raising
awareness regarding alcohol and drugs and prevention methods.
B. Fund-raising so that additional activities and programs may be
considered.
C. Support of local programs such as the CORD Foundation, Senior
Citizens Prom, and DARE Program.
§ 92-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-20
1:101

ARTICLE V
Special Events Committee
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 92-21. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Special Events Committee for the Borough of
Oradell to be known as the "Special Events Committee of the Borough of
Oradell."
§ 92-22. Purpose.
The purpose of the Special Events Committee is to organize the local
patriotic celebrations, including, but not limited to, parades and fireworks.
The Committee sponsors various events in order to bring together local
citizens, businesses and civic groups with the goal of fostering a social and
community-building atmosphere.
§ 92-23. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-24. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Special Events Committee shall be as follows:
§ 92-25. Records; annual report.
The Special Events Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of
its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor
and Council.
A. The Special Events Committee shall consist of at least 12 members, but
not to exceed 16 members, who shall be residents of the Borough of
Oradell. The members of the Special Events Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Borough Council for
terms of one year, to serve without salary.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Special Events Committee shall organize annually and from its
members elect a Chair.
A. Raising funds through various events in order to help plan, finance and
coordinate the Borough's patriotic celebrations, fireworks and other
community events.
§ 92-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-25
1:103

ARTICLE VI
Shade Tree Committee
[Added 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
§ 92-26. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Shade Tree Committee for the Borough of
Oradell to be known as the "Shade Tree Committee of the Borough of
Oradell."
§ 92-27. Purpose.
The Shade Tree Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor
and Council concerning the planting, maintenance, control, protection and
improvement of shade trees and shrubbery along public streets and roads
and public places within the Borough of Oradell.
§ 92-28. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-29. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Shade Tree Committee shall be as follows:
A. The Shade Tree Committee shall consist of a minimum of three, but not
exceed seven members, who shall be residents of the Borough of
Oradell. The members of the Shade Tree Committee shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Borough Council for a term of one
year to serve without salary. In addition to the seven members, the
Oradell Superintendent of Public Works shall serve as an ex officio,
nonvoting member of the Committee. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-10]
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Shade Tree Committee shall organize annually and from its
members elect a Chair.
A. To assess, inspect and inventory all shade trees and shrubbery located
along public streets and roads and public places within the Borough of
Oradell.
B. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council with respect to the
planting, maintenance, control, protection and improvement of such
shade trees and shrubbery.
C. To work in concert with such municipal departments and employees as
may be directed by the Mayor and Council.
D. To work in concert with such outside contractors, vendors and suppliers
as may be directed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 92-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-30
1:105
§ 92-30. Records; annual report.
The Shade Tree Committee shall keep complete and accurate records of its
meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor and
Council.
§ 92-30 ORADELL CODE § 92-30
1:106
ARTICLE VII
Senior Citizens Advisory Committee
[Added 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08]
§ 92-31. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Senior Citizens Advisory Committee for the
Borough of Oradell to be known as the "Senior Citizens Advisory Committee
of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 92-32. Purpose.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to
the Mayor and Council concerning issues having a significant impact upon
the health, welfare and safety of senior citizens residing within the Borough
of Oradell.
§ 92-33. Appointment; membership.
§ 92-34. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
A. The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall consist of up to, but not
exceed, nine members, who shall be residents of the Borough of
Oradell. The members of the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Borough Council for
a term of one year to serve without salary. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-01]
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall organize annually and
from its members elect a Chair.
A. To identify and assess issues having a significant impact upon the
health, welfare and safety of senior citizens residing within the Borough
of Oradell.
B. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council with respect to
such issues.
C. To assist the Borough of Oradell in establishing educational,
informational, recreational, or other programs established or
authorized by the Borough for the benefit of its senior citizens or the
community at large.
D. To work in concert with such municipal departments and employees, as
well as outside contractors, vendors and suppliers, as may be directed
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 92-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-35
1:107
§ 92-35. Records; annual report.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall keep complete and accurate
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the
Mayor and Council.
§ 92-35 ORADELL CODE § 92-35
1:108
Chapter 95
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
§ 95-1. Enforcing agency established. [Amended 7-18-1995 by Ord.
No. 1036]
There is hereby established in the Borough of Oradell a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Borough of Oradell
Code Enforcement Agency," consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official,
Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
§ 95-2. Qualifications for enforcing agency.
Each official position created in § 95-1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular subcode official, an onsite
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23
to hold each such position.
§ 95-3. Office location for enforcing agency.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.16
§ 95-4. Fees. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
Fees for construction permits shall be as indicated in Chapter 115.
§ 95-5. Lightweight construction identification. [Added 11-24-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to mandate the exterior
identification of all structures within the Borough of Oradell that utilize
lightweight wood, wood truss, steel truss, composite truss, laminated
wood, wood I-beams, or any other premanufactured lumber as a
16.Editor's Note: For violations and penalties, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-10.
§ 92-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-5
1:109
method to construct, renovate, or alter any section of an individual
structure or dwelling unit. The pre-incident identification of these
buildings will provide fire-suppression crews with critical strategic and
tactical information to be utilized during fire-fighting operations and
will significantly enhance the safety of fire-suppression personnel
operating at emergency incidents. This article shall apply to all
structures consisting of truss or premanufactured building components
not currently regulated for identification within the current New Jersey
Editions of the Uniform Construction Code and the International Fire
Code.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGINEERED LUMBER — Prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, truss
rafters, laminated beams and studs and any other materials that
may fit within this category.
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — An emblem made of reflective material,
in the shape and form as described by the Uniform Construction
Code (UCC), the Uniform Fire Code (UFC) and the International
Fire Code, New Jersey Edition (IFC), with the mentioned
modifications, in order to maintain continuity throughout the state
in identifying as structure as containing engineered lumber.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction
for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above
or below the surface of a parcel of land.
(2) All definitions in the current UCC, the UFC and the IFC shall be the
same for this article.
C. Determination of use; reflective symbols.
(1) The Borough Construction Official or designee shall determine if a
structure contains engineered lumber.
(2) All structures containing engineered lumber must have a reflective
symbol affixed to the following locations:
(a) The primary location will be the electrical meter.
(b) In the event the electrical meter is inside the structure, the
secondary location will be the area of the gas meter that is
plainly visible.
(c) In the event the gas meter is inside the building, the third and
final location will be the garage door.
(3) The reflective symbol shall be applied by the Oradell Volunteer Fire
Department/Construction Code Official or Fire Code Official or
designee and shall be a condition of the issuance of a certificate of
§ 95-5 ORADELL CODE § 95-5
1:110
Chapter 100
CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 95.
§ 100-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all persons, the term "persons" to mean
partnerships, corporations or other entities who shall undertake any
services in the Borough of Oradell for a fee, the purpose of which is to add
or remove rooms, dormers or other structures or to improve, modernize
or modify existing rooms or structures or to install, resurface or improve
driveways or sidewalks, perform landscape gardening or any improvements,
provided that such work shall apply to any premises in the Borough of
occupancy in new construction and the certificate of acceptance in
other than new construction.
(4) The reflective symbol shall be an emblem made of reflective
material, in the shape and form as described by the UCC. The
dimensions shall be determined by the Borough Construction Code
Official in consultation with the Fire Department. This shape and
design shall be used in order to maintain continuity throughout the
state in identifying a structure as containing engineered lumber.
(5) This reflective symbol will be supplied by the Borough at no
expense to the owner.
D. Maintenance of reflective symbol. It is the responsibility of the
homeowner to assure the integrity of the reflective symbol. In the event
it is removed, damaged or fades over time, it shall be the owner's
responsibility to contact the Building Department to have a new
reflective symbol installed.
E. Applicability. This article shall apply to all structures, whether
residential, commercial or otherwise, including structures existing at
the time of the effective date of this article. Existing structures shall be
posted according to these guidelines with the owner's consent.
F. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Construction Official,
the Zoning Officer and the Fire Official of the Borough of Oradell.
G. Violation and penalties. Any person violating this article by refusing to
use the reflective symbol or by removing or tampering with the
reflective symbol shall be subject to a fine in an amount of $100 per
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 95-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1
1:111
Oradell where persons reside, provided that the persons offering the service
shall not be otherwise licensed by the State of New Jersey.
§ 100-2. Application and registration required.
Any person to whom this chapter applies, as set forth in § 100-1 above, shall,
prior to commencing any work or service in the Borough of Oradell, make
application to the Construction Code Official to register for performing
work or services. The failure to register and have the application approved
prior to commencement of work or performance of services shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
§ 100-3. Application forms to be provided.
All applications shall be submitted, in writing, upon the forms provided by
the Construction Code Official.
§ 100-4. Expiration; annual renewal.
All registrations approved pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year
after the date of registrations; provided, however, that such registration
may be renewed annually upon payment of the fee hereinafter set forth.
§ 100-5. Fees. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 100-6. Revocation; denial of registration or renewal.
The following shall constitute the sole grounds for which the Construction
Code Official may revoke an approved registration or deny an initial
registration or the renewal thereof:
A. Failure to carry worker's compensation insurance when required;
B. Failure to comply with construction standards required by state laws or
regulations or local ordinance or codes after having been given a notice
to cure such noncompliance and after the person's having failed to
effect compliance without just cause;
C. Failure to comply with the lawful instructions of the Construction Code
Official regarding:
(1) Site safety;
(2) Altering plans submitted for the obtaining of the building permit
without first receiving the approval of the Construction Code
Official;
(3) Failure to obtain a permit where required; or
§ 100-1 ORADELL CODE § 100-6
1:112
§ 100-7. Appeals.
In the event that the Construction Code Official has revoked or denied
registration to an applicant or has refused to renew such registration upon
submission of the required fee, the aggrieved person may appeal such
denial, in writing, to the Borough Council. Upon such appeal, the following
steps shall be taken:
(4) Owner or resident complaint for unworkmanlike or unsafe services,
which complaint has been personally verified by the Construction
Code Official or his deputy; or
D. The applicant has had a license or registration revoked by any
municipality in the State of New Jersey for any cause other than failure
to pay licensing or registration fees.
A. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Borough Clerk shall set a date
for the Borough Council to hear such appeal. This date may be
adjourned for a reasonable time at the request of the Borough Council
or the person.
B. At the time, date and place set for the hearing, the Borough Council
shall conduct an inquiry into the reasons for the denial by the
Construction Code Official and shall hear the person as to why such
denial was unreasonable or improper. At the hearing, the person shall
be entitled to call witnesses and to be represented by counsel.
C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the person and the Construction Code
Official shall be dismissed from the hearing room, and the Borough
Council shall immediately determine whether or not the denial of the
registration was proper under the circumstances and, if determined to
be improper, the Council shall direct the Construction Code Official to
permit the registration. If the Council determines that the registration
denial was proper, it shall, in its discretion, take one of the following
actions:
(1) Uphold the denial without further action.
(2) If circumstances warrant, permit the registration conditioned upon
the person's adherence to steps imposed by the Borough Council
which are designed to reasonably ensure compliance by the person
with this chapter.
(3) If circumstances warrant, permit the registration by the person at
such time as any deficiencies which were the grounds for the denial
have been cured. The Council shall set forth the deficiencies in its
ruling.
D. Within 10 business days of the hearing date, the Council shall notify the
Construction Code Official and the aggrieved person, in writing, of its
determination and any conditions which have been imposed.
§ 100-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-8
1:113
§ 100-8. Duties of Construction Code Official.
In addition to the enforcement of this chapter, the Construction Code
Official shall ensure the following:
§ 100-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to register and have an application approved shall,
if work is commenced, be subject to a penalty of a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
Chapter 102
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 170.
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
BOROUGH-SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Any programs sponsored by the
Borough of Oradell or the Oradell Recreation Committee.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the State Bureau of
Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in
the computerized data bases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal
History Information System, the National Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System or other states' computerized repositories
containing criminal history record information consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal
charges, and any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions,
dismissals, correctional supervision and release.
A. That the information contained in the application for registration is
current.
B. That the applications are available for inspection and copying by any
interested person.
C. That notification is made to the owner or resident of the property on
which work is to be done of the failure of the person to comply with this
chapter.
§ 100-8 ORADELL CODE § 102-1
1:114
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Oradell Police Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by this chapter,
to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION OR ORGANIZATION —
Any corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to
Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or
other law of this state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and
which provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities
or services for persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from
federal income taxes.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et seq.),
a bureau within the Division of State Police.
§ 102-2. Request for criminal background checks; costs.
§ 102-3. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
A. The Borough requires that all employees and volunteers, 18 years of
age and older, of a nonprofit youth-serving organization request
through the Recreation Committee, that the State Bureau of
Identification conduct a criminal history record background check on
each prospective and current employee or volunteer of the
organization.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in § 102-4 of this chapter.
C. The Recreation Committee shall conduct a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check
from the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
D. The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting the
criminal history record background checks.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of nonprofit youthserving
organizations and/or employees and volunteers of Boroughsponsored
programs involving minors shall submit their name, address,
fingerprints, other required information and written consent to the
Recreation Committee for the criminal history record background
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:115
§ 102-4. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service.
check to be performed. The Recreation Committee shall submit this
documentation to the State Bureau of Identification.
B. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Recreation Committee may, in their discretion, engage the services
of a third-party independent agency or a volunteer group authorized by
the Chief of Police to conduct the criminal history record background
checks authorized under this chapter.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 20:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes:
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons' offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth-serving organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Borough-sponsored programs
involving minors, the Borough shall presume that the employee or
volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions on the record.
C. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record is sufficient to disqualify an employee or volunteer shall
be made by the State Police.
§ 102-3 ORADELL CODE § 102-5
1:116
§ 102-5. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
background checks.
§ 102-6. Employee or volunteer may challenge accuracy of report.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant or existing
employee or volunteer for any purpose, the disqualified person shall have
an opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record or request an exception. The
disqualified person shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to correct
and complete this record. A person is not presumed guilty of any charges or
arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on the record.
Chapter 103
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 103-1. Curfew established for October 30 and 31 of each year.
No person under the age of 18 years of age shall remain in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds,
public places or public buildings between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and onehalf
hour after sunrise at the prevailing local time on October 30 and
31 of each year. Failure to leave after warning by a police officer of the
Borough of Oradell shall constitute violation of this chapter in accordance
with punishment set forth at length herein.
§ 103-2. Exceptions.
A person shall not be considered in violation of this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Police Department on a need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or
state statute, rule or regulation, executive order, administrative code,
local ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of
criminal history record information obtained under this chapter.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
§ 102-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-2
1:117
§ 103-3. Temporary curfew during state of emergency.
In the event of an outbreak of, or threat of an imminent outbreak of, violence
or acts of vandalism or injury, damage, danger to persons or property
committed by persons under the age of 18 years, the Mayor may declare
a state of emergency and impose a curfew for persons under the age of
18 years of age. Such curfew shall not exceed a consecutive period of 72
hours and shall be subject to the exceptions set forth in § 103-2 hereof. Such
curfew shall be applicable to all places set forth in § 103-1 hereof. Failure
to leave after warning by a Police Officer of the Borough of Oradell shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties provided.
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to treatment as a juvenile delinquent in need of supervision pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:4-52 et seq.17 and the rules of the court pertaining thereto.
Any juvenile who reaches the age of 18 years, while an offense under
this chapter is pending, shall be subject to prosecution hereunder in the
Municipal Court and, upon conviction, by punishment as provided by the
Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the Code of the Borough of Oradell.
Chapter 104
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115. Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 170.
A. When accompanied by a parent, guardian or adult having legal care and
custody of such minor.
B. When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult having legal care and custody of such
minor.
C. When the minor is en route to or returning directly home from school, a
meeting, entertainment, recreational activity, dance, employment,
religious ceremony or any other lawful activity.
17.Editor's Note: Said statute was repealed by L.1982, c. 77, effective 12-31-1983.
§ 103-2 ORADELL CODE § 103-4
1:118
ARTICLE I
Recreation Participation Permit
[Adopted 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-14]
§ 104-1. Recreation participation permit; purpose.
§ 104-2. Recreation participation permit fee.
A. The Borough of Oradell's Recreation Department maintains and
administers athletic facilities including basketball, handball and tennis
courts, baseball, softball, soccer, football and lacrosse fields and an ice
skating pond. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that participants
in athletic programs which use the Borough's facilities are registered
with the Borough. This fee is separate from any facility usage fee or
summer recreation program fee charged by the Borough. Funds raised
by this permit fee are intended to support the Borough's Recreation
Department.
A. Each participant in an athletic league or team that is a Priority 1, 2 or 3
user, as defined by § 170-1 of this Code, using Oradell recreation
facilities shall register for a recreation participation permit with the
Borough of Oradell. A permit shall be valid for a calendar year,
regardless of when purchased. Each team or league applying for use of
the Borough's facilities must present a roster of all participants and
participants' addresses of residence. No team or league will be issued a
permit to use a facility unless all participants on the submitted roster
are registered with the Borough pursuant to this chapter. Individuals
who participate in multiple teams or leagues need only register with the
Borough once in a calendar year. A separate permit fee is charged for
use of the tennis courts as set forth in § 115-21.1 of this Code.
(1) Oradell residents: $5.
(2) Nonresidents: $75.
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-2
1:119
Chapter 105
PUBLIC ADVOCATE FOR ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47. Land development — See Ch. 240.
§ 105-1. Position established; qualifications.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell may appoint one or more
Public Advocates to the Zoning Board of Adjustment who shall be attorneys
at law admitted to practice law in the State of New Jersey.
§ 105-2. Appointment.
The Public Advocate for the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council and shall
report administratively to the Borough Attorney. The Public Advocate will be
appointed to represent the public on a specific application pending before
the Board.
§ 105-3. Powers and duties; payment vouchers.
A. The Public Advocate to the Board of Adjustment may appear before
such Board, and before such federal, state, county and municipal
agencies and/or courts, as the circumstances warrant, in order to
represent and advocate the public interest, not individual interests, in
proceedings of substantial importance which he or she shall determine,
in his or her sole discretion, warrant representation and advocacy,
subject to this chapter.
B. Such advocate shall review applications initially determined by
objective criteria to potentially involve the Public Advocate; review and
prepare documents and inspections of developments under
construction to the extent that this chapter determines it to be beyond
the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the
municipality, or as may otherwise be provided for by law. To the extent
that such Public Advocate is required to review applications, prepare
documents or otherwise perform services, it shall be at the cost and
expense of the applicant. The rate for municipal work set by the
Borough Council from time to time shall apply and be payable by
voucher.
C. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review
and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be
pursuant to a voucher from the professional, which voucher shall
identify the personnel performing the service, and for each date the
services are performed, the hours spent, to one-tenth-hour increments,
§ 104-2 ORADELL CODE § 105-3
1:120
§ 105-4. Substantial public importance.
Substantial public importance shall be defined, or limited to, applications
where the applicant is seeking relief in any one of the following areas:
§ 105-5. Participation required.
The Public Advocate shall fully participate in any matter before the Board
when a majority of the Council so directs.
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professionals shall
submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality on a
monthly basis in accordance with schedules and procedures established
by the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality.
A. The applicant is seeking a use variance.
B. The applicant is seeking a major subdivision.
C. The applicant seeks three or more variances.
D. The applicant seeks a variance for parking.
E. Application of any nature involving property which is contiguous to, or
proximate to, land located in any district adjoining parkland, wetlands
or a facility owned by the municipality or the Board of Education.
F. Any application in which the applicant seeks to vacate a street, road,
right-of-way or similarly defined thoroughfare.
G. Any application in which the applicant seeks to create a street, road,
right-of-way or similarly defined thoroughfare, even if on private
property not then to be made a Borough street or road.
H. Application where a variance for density is being sought.
I. Application that has been bifurcated and where one part of the
bifurcated application seeks relief set forth in these subsections.
J. The applicant's parcel is within 200 feet of a state highway or county
road.
K. A developer's agreement is either contemplated by the respective
Board or its counsel, or is likely to result on the basis of the past
practice of the Board or the nature of the application, as the Public
Advocate shall determine from time to time, provided the application
also affects the health, safety or general welfare of the Borough of
Oradell or its population, as the Public Advocate, or as provided by
ordinance, so determines.
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-6
1:121
§ 105-6. Intent.
It is the intent of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell that
the resources of the Public Advocate be devoted, to the maximum extent
possible, to ensuring adequate representation of the interests of those
residents whose interests would otherwise be inadequately represented in
matters within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and to
representing those interests or rights arising from the Constitution of the
United States, decisions of court, common law or other laws of the United
States or of this state, inhering in the citizens of this state or in a broad
class of such citizens.
§ 105-7. Purpose.
§ 105-8. Priority of representation.
A. The Public Advocate shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council, but shall not operate in any
manner under the direction or control of the Mayor and Borough
Council, except as to its financing and as otherwise stated herein.
B. The Public Advocate shall exercise his or her discretion as to the
importance and the extent of the public interest and whether that
interest would be adequately represented and advocated without his or
her action.
C. It is intended that the creation of the position of Public Advocate shall
be to ensure that a full, fair and balanced record be made in such
matters of substantial public importance, with all of the competent
evidence bearing upon the issues being presented to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, tested as to its relevancy, competency, materiality and
credibility, so that such Board and such other federal, state, county and
municipal agencies, the Borough Mayor and Council (as applicable) and
the courts (whether trial or appellate) will have the benefit of a fully
developed record of the proceedings containing all of the testimony,
and evidence, of a fair, unbiased and impartial decision in accordance
with all of the applicable laws and rules and to insure that the public
interest, and not individual interests, will be adequately represented
and better served.
A. When the interests of consumers differ, the Public Advocate shall give
priority to representing the interests of consumers in the following
order:
(1) Residential homeowners and tenants;
(2) Small business owners; and
(3) Other landowners and tenants whose interests the Public Advocate
finds to be inadequately represented.
§ 105-6 ORADELL CODE § 105-8
1:122
§ 105-9. Employment of experts.
The Public Advocate may employ expert witnesses only upon approval of
such expenditures by the Borough Administrator.
§ 105-10. Appearances restricted.
The Public Advocate shall not appear before the Borough's Zoning Board of
Adjustment on any application other than those specifically authorized by
the Mayor and Council.
§ 105-11. Compensation.
Compensation to the Public Advocate shall be paid as provided for in
the municipal budget under the Legal Department and as approved by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 105-12. Attendance at public meetings; documents and
paperwork.
The Public Advocate may attend each public meeting of the Board of
Adjustment, as permitted by law, during which the application for which
he or she was appointed is to be discussed. The Public Advocate shall be
entitled to speak, but not vote, at any such meeting that he or she attends.
The Public Advocate may enter items into the permanent record of the
Board upon application and approval of the Chair, and if not approved by
the Chair or a majority of the Board, he or she shall be entitled to make an
offer of proof for the record and/or fully describe that for which inclusion
is sought. The Public Advocate shall be provided with the completed file
of the application for which he or she was appointed, including a copy of
the survey and/or plans, and copies of all exhibits used, or to be used in
connection with any application, subject to the rules of the Board. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to provide the Public Advocate with a
duplicate original application, together with all supporting documents, and
copies of the exhibits used or to be used.
§ 105-13. Adjournments at request of Public Advocate; time and
costs to be charged to applicant.
If the Public Advocate is not timely provided with the documentation
required by this chapter to be provided by the applicant, the Public
Advocate may request, in writing or on oral application, that the matter
be carried to the next meeting of the applicable Board, the time therefor
to be charged against the applicant. Any additional cost therefor, including
review fees by other Borough professionals or appointees, shall be
chargeable to the applicant's escrow deposit and shall be paid by the
B. This subsection does not require the Public Advocate to represent the
interests of a consumer or group of consumers if the Public Advocate
determines that such representation is adverse to the overall interests
of the using and consuming public.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-13
1:123
applicant prior to memorialization of any determination by the Board and/
or the granting of any permit authorized by law.
Chapter 107
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 107, Dogs and Other Animals, comprised of Art. I, Licensing
and Other Regulations, adopted 6-20-1978 by Ord. No. 675, as amended,
and Art. II, Pet Solid Waste Disposal, adopted 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11,
was removed from Part II of the Code and adopted by the Board of Health
as Ch. 301, Dogs and Other Animals, 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1.]
Chapter 112
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 112, Drug Paraphernalia, adopted 10-7-1980 by Ord. No. 704,
was superseded by N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1 et seq., which was effective 7-9-1987.]
Chapter 113
DUMPSTERS, UNATTENDED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 113-1. Roll-off dumpsters and containers; consent to park or leave
unattended along Borough street or property.
A. No person shall park or leave unattended any waste or refuse container
commonly known as a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container, on or along
any Borough street or Borough public property, without obtaining a
permit from the Borough of Oradell. The permit shall be issued by the
Construction Code Official, provided that the applicant for the permit
has first obtained the approval of the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Oradell, who shall determine that the location of the roll-off dumpster
or roll-off container does not create a traffic hazard. The application for
the permit shall be prepared by the Police Department and require
information regarding the identification of the contractor and property
owner or party hiring the contractor. The dumpster shall comply with
the display markings required under N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1(a).
B. Upon approval, the permit shall be valid for a period of seven days and
may be renewed for an additional seven-day period.
C. The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 115, entitled
"Fees," of the Municipal Code of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 105-13 ORADELL CODE § 113-1
1:124
Chapter 115
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 62.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 65.
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 95.
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 100.
Garage sales — See Ch. 137.
Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch.
180.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
Television filming — See Ch. 260.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 115-1. Construction fees.
A. Fees established.
(1) The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode
fees listed hereafter and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
Any items not listed in the fee schedule shall be calculated as per
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
(2) Minimum fee.
(a) The minimum fee for a basic construction permit covering any
or all of building, electrical, plumbing, fire protection or
mechanical work shall be $65, for Use Groups R-3 and R-5. The
minimum fee for all other use groups shall be $85 per subcode.
All fees shall be rounded up to the nearest dollar amount.
(3) For the purpose of determining estimated costs, the applicant shall
submit to the enforcing agency, if available, the cost data produced
by the architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized
estimating firm or by the contractor, or bona fide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The enforcing agency will make the
final decision regarding estimated costs.
(4) Training fee. In order to provide training, certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction
Code Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder, the
enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified
above, a surcharge fee as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b). Said surcharge
fee shall be remitted to the Construction Code Element, Division of
Housing and Development, Department of Community Affairs, on a
regular quarterly basis.
B. The building subcode fees shall be as follows:
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-1
1:125
(1) For new construction: $0.08 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume for Use Groups R-3 and R-5; $0.09 per cubic foot of building
or structure volume for all other use groups; use group
classification shall be according to the building subcode as adopted
by N.J.A.C. 5:23-3, provided that the fee for the first 5,000 cubic
feet or less shall be a minimum fee of $100.
(2) The nonrefundable fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount
to be charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before
the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit.
(3) For renovations and alterations: $22 per $1,000 or fraction thereof
of the estimated cost of the work, provided that the fee for the first
$2,000 of estimated cost shall be $65.
(4) For additions: $0.08 per cubic foot of building or structure volume
for the added portion for all use groups, provided that the fee for
the first 5,000 cubic feet or less shall be $150.
(5) For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and additions.
(6) Fees for minor construction work shall be based upon the
estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount of $20
per $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof, provided that the
minimum fee for any project shall be $65.
(7) The fee for a demolition permit shall be $300 for the principal
structure of a one- or two-family residence (Use Group R-3/R-5 of
the Building Subcode) and $150 for an accessory structure.
(a) All other use groups shall be $700 for the principal structure
and $300 for an accessory structure.
(8) The fee for a permit for removal of one building from one lot to
another or to another location on the same lot shall be in the
amount of $25 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of moving plus $20
per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the estimated cost of the new
foundations and all work necessary to place the building in its
completed condition in the new location.
(9) The fee for reinstatement of a lapsed permit shall be at the rate of
20% of the original fee.
(10) The permit fee for swimming pools shall be:
(a) Aboveground: $100.
(b) In-ground: For the first $2,000 or fraction thereof of the
estimated cost of construction (includes Borough Engineers
§ 115-1 ORADELL CODE § 115-1
1:126
inspection of elevations and plan review fees): $500. Each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof: $55.
(11) The fee for a mechanical inspection in Use Group R-3 and R-4
structures by mechanical inspectors shall be $85 for the first device
and $65 for each additional device. No separate fee shall be
charged for gas, fuel oil or water piping connections associated
with the mechanical equipment inspected.
C. The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $25 per fixture for all fixtures,
except as listed in Subsection C(2). For the purpose of computing
this fee, fixtures shall include, but not be limited to, lavatories,
kitchen sinks, slop sinks, sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs,
shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains, drinking fountains,
dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers or similar
devices.
(2) The fee for special devices shall be in the amount of $125 per for
grease traps, oil separators and water softeners, underground
sprinkling systems, etc.
(3) The fee for each stack terminating above the roof shall be in the
amount of $20.
(4) The fee for a sanitary sewer connection shall be in the amount of
$150.
(5) The fee for replacing an existing sanitary sewer shall be in the
amount of $85.
(6) The permit fee for gas installation shall be as follows:
(a) Permit for installation of gas piping:
[1] Single-family dwelling: $45.
[2] Multifamily dwelling, per dwelling unit: $45.
[3] Buildings, other than dwellings, per gas meter: $125.
(b) For installation of a residential gas range, residential gas
dryer, gas grill or hot water heater: $75 for each appliance. All
other use groups $100.
(c) For installation or replacement of gas space or wall heaters, or
a gas refrigerator, or gas-fired furnace or boiler, or gas-fired
unit heater, or gas-fired conversion burner, or gas air
conditioner, or gas-fired commercial dryer, or gas enginedriven
generator, or commercial gas incinerator, or swimming
pool gas heater, or gas water heater: R-3 and R-5: $75; all other
use groups $100.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-1
1:127
(d) Gas appliances not listed shall have a fee as determined by the
Plumbing Subcode Official.
(7) The permit fee for water service connection shall be:
(a) For pipes 3/4 to 1 1/4 inches: $75.
(b) Pipes 1 1/2 to three inches: $85.
(c) For pipes three inches and up: $100.
(8) The fee for each roof storm drain shall be $40 per drain and $50
per drain connection.
D. The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Receptacles and fixtures (lighting fixtures, receptacles, switches,
detectors, light poles, motors: fractional horsepower, emergency
and exit lights, communication points and alarm devices/fire alarm
control panel):
(a) One to 25 units: $65.
(b) Each additional 25 or fraction thereof: $25.
(2) Motors and electrical devices over one HP up to:
(a) One horsepower to 10 horsepower: $45.
(b) From 11 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $100.
(c) From 51 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $200.
(d) Greater than 101 horsepower: $450.
(3) Transformers and generators over one KW up to (equipment and
appliances, including electrical range oven, dishwasher, dryer,
water heater, boiler, furnace, baseboard heat, space heaters,
transfer switches, or any other fixed or plug-in appliance), each:
(a) One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $30.
(b) Over 10 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $65.
(c) Over 46 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $129.
(d) Over 112.5 kilowatts: $640.
(4) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
(a) Less than or equal to 150 amps: $60.
(b) 151 amps or equal to 200 amps: $70.
(c) 201 amps or equal to 400 amps: $200.
(d) 401 amps or equal to 1,200 amps: $450.
§ 115-1 ORADELL CODE § 115-1
1:128
(e) Over 1,201 amps: $750.
(f) Additional meters included in service: $35.
(5) Air-conditioning units (disconnect compress/condenser and air
handler):
(a) Each: $60.
(b) Replacement of any system part: $35.
(c) Burglar alarm system (complete): $60.
(d) Hydro massage tub (interior whirlpool tub/spa): $45.
(6) Swimming pools (includes receptacle, switch, trench, bonding and
equipotential bonding matt):
(a) Aboveground: $85.
(b) Semi-in-ground: $90.
(c) In-ground: $150.
(d) Light, each: $45.
(7) Hot tub or spa (exterior): $145.
(8) Certificate of compliance (annual inspection for public swimming
pools, spas and hot tubs): $150.
E. Fire protection subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Sprinkler systems:
Number of Heads or Nozzles Fee
Up to 20 $100
21 to 100 $200
101 to 200 $300
201 to 400 $500
401 to 1,000 $825
(2) Standpipe systems between 2 1/2 inches and six inches, for each
standpipe: $200.
(3) Standpipe systems over six inches, for each standpipe: $200.
(4) Detectors (110v & Battery):
Number of Detectors Fee
1 to 20 $155
16 to 100 $250
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-1
1:129
(5) All pre-engineered systems: $200.
(6) For alteration of an existing system: $50 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of the work.
(7) Central control station: $100.
(8) Automatic fire alarm system: $150.
Total Number of Devices
(Alarm, Supervisory,
Signaling, etc.) Fee
1 to 5 $65
6 to 15 $125
16 to 100 $225
101 to 200 $350
201 to 400 $475
401 to 1,000 $600
(9) For installation of fuel fired appliances or fuel storage equipment,
as follows:
(a) Residential oil-fired boiler: $150.
(b) All other oil-fired boilers: $175.
(c) Replacement of burner only: $65.
(d) Fuel storage tanks.
[1] Tanks under 1,001 gal.: $150.
[2] Tanks over 1,001 gal.: $300.
(10) Other systems:
(a) Kitchen hood exhaust system: $150.
(b) Smoke control system: $150.
(c) Fireplace venting/metal chimney: $75.
F. The elevator subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Installation, all uses:
(a) Construction elevator, each: $400.
(b) Elevators (four landings or less), each: $400.
(c) Elevators (five landings or over), each: $400.
(d) Dumbwaiters, each: $200.
§ 115-1 ORADELL CODE § 115-1
1:130
§ 115-2. Certificates of occupancy.
(e) Escalators, each: $400.
(f) Man lifts, each: $200.
(g) Moving walks, each: $200.
(h) Chair lifts, each: $100.
(i) No inspection fee for R-4, R-3 and R-2 structures not accessible
to the general public.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) The fee for the one-year periodic inspection and witnesses of tests
of elevator devices, shall be as follows:
(a) All elevators regardless of height, each: $350.
(b) Escalators, each: $575.
(c) Chair lifts, each: $300.
(d) Moving walks, each: $300.
(e) Man lifts, each: $300.
(f) Dumbwaiters, each: $300.
(4) Three-year hydraulic test, all uses:
(a) All hydraulic elevators, each: $225.
(5) Five-year test, all uses:
(a) All elevators, each: $475.
(6) For renovations or alteration, per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the
estimated cost of the work: $30.
(7) Plan review, per device: $350.
(8) If a violation occurs, it shall be repaired within 60 days. If not
repaired within 60 days a $100 violation shall be issued.
(9) Reinspection fee shall be $100.
A. Certificate of occupancy. The fee for new construction shall be in the
amount of 10% of the new construction permit fee that would be
charged by the Department. The minimum fee shall be $100, except
that a certificate of occupancy for additions under Use Group R-5
structures shall require a fee of $75.
(1) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $50.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:131
§ 115-3. Contractor's registration.
Registration of contractors performing services in the Borough of Oradell in
and about residences and other structures, except R-5 structures, electric
and plumbing contractors or general contractors licensed by the State of
New Jersey for erection of one- or two-family homes, shall be as follows:
§ 115-4. Miscellaneous construction fees.
(2) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be collected at the time
of issuance of a building permit. However, the certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued until all final inspections have been
made and approvals furnished to the Construction Official.
B. Certificate of continued occupancy. The fee shall be as follows:
(1) R-2 (apartments in multifamily dwellings): $75.
(2) R-3 and R-5 (one- and two-family dwellings) uses: $85 for the first
inspection and $55 for any other inspection thereafter.
(3) B and M (mercantile and office) uses: $200.
(4) Other uses: $200.
A. For original registration: $75.
B. Renewal of registration (yearly) within 30 days after expiration of
original or renewal registration: $25. The renewal date shall be on a
yearly basis from the date of original registration.
C. Renewal of registration more than 30 days after expiration of previous
registration shall require an original registration and fee.
A. Miscellaneous construction fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fee for not obtaining a Borough permit prior to the start of
work shall be double the permit fee.
(2) The fee for a permit to construct a sign other than a freestanding
sign shall be a flat fee of $150 for each sign. For freestanding signs,
the flat fee shall be $225 for each sign, except that the fee for a real
estate sign shall be $50.
(3) The fees for the right-of-way opening permit shall be as follows (per
square yard or per linear foot), minimum permit fee of $250
applies.
Type Fee
Asphalt $30 per square yard
Curb $23 per linear foot
Unimproved $15 per square yard
§ 115-2 ORADELL CODE § 115-4
1:132
§ 115-5. Fees for taxicab licenses.
Fees for taxicab licenses shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Sidewalk $32 per square yard
Tunneling, special permit $20 each
Public utility corporation, bond $10,000
Curb cut or sidewalk removal and
replacement
$45
New driveway and/or paving, 1 or 2
family
$50
New driveway and/or paving, all
others
$150
(4) The fee for a permit for construction contracted for or conducted
by the Borough of Oradell shall be waived.
(5) All fees for permits provided for hereunder shall be nonrefundable.
B. The fee to accompany an application for a dumpster permit under shall
be $50 per dumpster on private property and $100 per dumpster on any
public street, avenue, highway, lane, alley or right-of-way pursuant to
Chapter 113. A private property dumpster permit is valid for a thirtyday
period. A public property dumpster permit is valid for a seven-day
period. Up to three private property permits for a total of 90 days may
be issued. The Construction Official may grant additional thirty-day
private property permits at his discretion at the same fee set forth
above. A public property permit extension may be obtained pursuant to
Chapter 113. During the period covered by the permit, a dumpster may
be removed for emptying and replaced without requiring an additional
permit.
C. The fee to accompany each application for a temporary storage
container (e.g. PODS) shall be $100 per container for every thirty-day
period. No more than a maximum of three permits for a total of 90 days.
The Construction Official may grant additional thirty-day extension
permits at his discretion at the same fee set forth above.
D. The fee to accompany each application for a temporary toilet shall be
$50 per toilet for each three-month period.
A. The annual fee for a taxi owner's license shall be $150 per taxicab.
B. The annual fee for taxi drivers license shall be $150.
§ 115-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-6
1:133
§ 115-6. Miscellaneous code enforcement.
The Borough of Oradell Code Enforcement Agency shall also be responsible
for the collection of the following fees, as well as for the inspection thereof
if required:
§ 115-7. Limousine licenses.
Fees for limousine licenses shall be as follows:
§ 115-8. Fire Prevention Bureau.
A. Written replies for certificate of occupancy, for each request: $20.
B. The annual fee for an outdoor cafe license shall be $100.
A. The annual fee for a limousine owners license shall be $150 per
limousine.
B. The annual fee for a limousine driver's license shall be $150.
A. Fees for life-hazardous activity or storage shall be those contained in
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (New Jersey Administrative Code, Title
5, Chapters 18 and 18B), adopted February 18, 1985.
B. The inspection fees for non-life-hazardous activity or storage shall be as
follows:
(1) Type 1, zero feet to 1,000 square feet: $20.
(2) Type 2, 1,001 feet to 5,000 square feet: $30.
(3) Type 3, 5,001 feet to 10,000 square feet: $60.
(4) Type 4, more than 10,000 square feet: $80.
C. Annual registration fee shall be as follows:
Use Type Description Fee
A-1 Assembly Occupancy with occupancy
load between 1 and 50
$100
B-1 All buildings and/or occupancies of
business use which do not exceed
2,500 square feet
$100
B-2 All buildings and/or occupancies of
business use which are greater than
2,500 square feet but less than
10,000 square feet
$175
B-3 All buildings and/or occupancies of a
business use which are 10,000 square
feet or greater but less than 50,000
square feet
$325
§ 115-6 ORADELL CODE § 115-8
1:134
Use Type Description Fee
B-4 All buildings and/or occupancies of a
business use which are 50,000 square
feet or greater
$625
F-1 All buildings and/or occupancies of a
factory use which do not exceed
5,000 square feet
$225
F-2 All buildings and/or occupancies of
factory use which are greater than
5,000 square feet but less than
10,000 square feet
$425
F-3 All buildings and/or occupancies of
factory use which are 10,000 square
feet or greater
$625
M-1 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which do not exceed
2,500 square feet
$100
M-2 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which are greater
than 2,500 square feet but less than
4,000 square feet
$150
M-3 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which are greater
than 4,000 square feet but less than
6,000 square feet
$200
M-4 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which are greater
than 6,000 square feet but less than
8,000 square feet
$250
M-5 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which are greater
than 8,000 square feet but less than
10,000 square feet
$300
M-6 All buildings and/or occupancies of
mercantile use which are greater
than 10,000 square feet but less than
12,001 square feet
$350
R-1 Residential 1 & 2 family non-owneroccupied
dwellings
$100
R-2 Residential 3 to 10 units $150
R-3 Residential 11 to 20 units $200
R-4 Residential 21 to 30 units $250
R-5 Residential 31 to 40 units $300
§ 115-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-8
1:135
Use Type Description Fee
R-6 Residential 41 to 50 units $350
R-7 Residential, 51 and up, plus $15 per
every dwelling unit above 50 units
$350
S-1 All buildings and/or occupancies of
storage use which do not exceed
5,000 square feet
$225
S-2 All buildings and/or occupancies of
storage use which are greater than
5,000 square feet but less than
10,000 square feet
$425
S-3 All buildings and/or occupancies of
storage use which are 10,000 square
feet or greater
$625
D. Registration fees shall be paid on an annual basis within 30 days of
notification. Any fee not paid within 60 days of the notification shall
incur a late penalty charge equal to the amount of the original fee. An
additional penalty charge equal to the original fee shall be incurred for
each 30 days past the first 60 days. Failure to pay penalty and/or
register may result in court summons and additional penalties.
E. Miscellaneous fees.
(1) Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance:
(a) Requests made more than 10 business days prior to inspection:
$50.
(b) Requests made four to 10 business days prior to inspection:
$75.
(c) Requests made fewer than four business days prior to
inspection: $125.
(d) Reinspection fee, per occurrence: $50.
(2) Penalty for failure to obtain a certificate of smoke detector and
carbon monoxide alarm compliance: $150.
(3) Smoke detector compliance inspection for one- and two-family
dwellings: $50.
(4) Reinspection fee for smoke detector compliance: $40.
(5) Certificate of fire code status: $40.
(6) Seasonal nursery stocks and sales: $50.
§ 115-8 ORADELL CODE § 115-8
1:136
§ 115-9. Police Department.
F. Fire watch and/or protective standby fees. The following fees are
established for the use of any personnel or equipment from the Borough
of Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau or Oradell Volunteer Fire
Department being utilized to perform a fire watch and/or protective
standby:
Personnel/Equipment Fee
Personnel, per hour $25 (2 hour minimum fee)
Fire apparatus, per hour $150
G. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the Borough
of Oradell treasury and shall thereafter be appropriated to the Fire
Prevention Bureau for the enforcement of the Uniform Fire
Enforcement Act.
A. The fees for police investigation reports shall be:
(1) Per page: $1.
(2) Minimum: $10.
B. The fees for a motor vehicle accident report shall be as determined by a
third party vendor.
C. The fees for photographs shall be $10 per photo.
D. The fees for parking permits shall be as follows:
(1) Resident permit: none.
(2) Nonresident employee permit: $75 per calendar year.
(3) Overnight parking permit: none.
(4) Borough employee permit: none.
(5) Nonresident student parking permit: $75 September 1 through
August 30.
E. The fee for an audio tape of radio and/or telephone police
communications shall be $100 per tape.
F. The fees for fingerprinting for all noncriminal fingerprint cards for
submission to Federal Bureau of Investigation (i.e., employment
application checks, license application, firearms permits, etc.) shall be
$40.66 per card, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. Checks shall be
made payable to the Division of State Police, S.B.I.
G. The fee for purchase of a copy of a video tape of alleged drunken drivers
shall be $100.
§ 115-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-9
1:137
§ 115-10. Land use.
Every application for the review of a site plan, major or minor subdivision or
request for a variance, approval or interpretation by the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by payment(s) to the
Borough of Oradell of the amounts computed under the guidelines below:
H. Special duty assignments such as private security and traffic safety for
utility maintenance shall be billed at a rate of $135 per hour per officer,
inclusive of administrative fees.
I. The fee for a peddling or soliciting permit shall be $75.
J. The fee for a canvassing/handbill permit shall be $5.
K. The fees for security alarm systems shall be as follows:
(1) An annual registration fee of $25 payable at the time of initial
application and at the inception of each subsequent service year.
(2) The fees set forth in § 115-9K(1) above shall not be refundable in
whole or in part for any reason.
A. Zoning permit review application for initial review of construction plans
or for municipal codes: $50. Rereview of amended plan review: $35.
B. Any application involving commercial/business site plan, subdivision,
variance(s) or interpretation(s) at a commercial/business property and/
or residential "D" variances at a residential property:
(1) A nonrefundable application fee: $500.
(2) An escrow deposit fee in the amount of $2,500 to cover the costs of
professional services by the Board Attorney, Borough/Board
Engineer, Borough Planner and any other professional whose
services are deemed necessary by the Board, including, without
limitation, review of plans and documents, preparation or related
work, reports, studies or resolutions and/or costs/fees associated
with other nonBorough agencies [such as, but not limited to, the
Bergen County Planning Board, Soil Conservation District,
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Environmental
Protection Agency (EAP), Department of Transportation (DOT),
Bergen County and/or State of New Jersey], with respect to
processing an application by the approving authority in order to
assure compliance with provisions of Borough/county/state/federal
codes. Actual charged fees shall be in accordance with such
established and/or contracted hourly rates as the Borough and/or
the Board may have with such professionals who provide the
service(s).
C. Any other application not covered in Subsection A, including, but not
limited to, Residential "C-1" and "C-2" variances, residential code
interpretations and conditional use compliance reviews/approvals:
§ 115-9 ORADELL CODE § 115-10
1:138
(1) A nonrefundable application fee of $200.
(2) An escrow deposit fee in the amount of $1,500 to cover the costs of
professional services by the Board Attorney, Borough/Board
Engineer, Borough Planner and any other professional whose
services are deemed necessary by the Board, including, without
limitation, review of plans and documents, preparation or related
work, reports, studies or resolutions and/or costs/fees associated
with other non-Borough agencies [such as, but not limited to, the
Bergen County Planning Board, Soil Conservation District,
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Environmental
Protection Agency (EAP), Department of Transportation (DOT),
Bergen County and/or State of New Jersey], with respect to
processing an application by the approving authority in order to
assure compliance with provisions of Borough/county/state/federal
codes. Actual charged fees shall be in accordance with such
established and/or contracted hourly rates as the Borough and/or
the Board may have with such professionals who provide the
service(s).
D. If an applicant requests that a special meeting(s) of the Board be
conducted (including, without limitation, advance meetings, added
meetings and meetings scheduled on other than regular meeting dates
of the Board), all expenses incurred by the Board or Borough
(including, without limitation, employee, contractor and building
facility costs) and costs for professional services shall be borne by the
applicant. In such instance, the applicant shall pay an additional escrow
fee of $2,500 per special meeting, which fee shall be paid by the
applicant at the time of the request for the additional meeting, in order
for the application to be deemed complete. A minimum fee of $500 shall
be charged for each special meeting.
E. Applications requiring additional professional services. If, upon or after
acceptance of an application, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment finds that professional, expert or special services or studies
are required in order to evaluate, process or decide a pending
application, including the services of a planner or those of other
professionals to provide studies on drainage, the environment, traffic or
other relevant issues, and the deposit for costs initially provided does
not cover such services or will be adequate to meet such costs, then the
Planning Board and/or Zoning Board is empowered to require the
applicant to pay for such costs and to deposit with the municipality such
additional sums as the appropriate Board estimates will be necessary to
pay the costs of such services or studies. If the applicant does not
deposit the additional funds to the escrow account prior to the next
meeting of the Board, the application will be deemed incomplete and
the statutory time requirement will be considered "tolled," (suspended)
until the escrow account is funded, as required.
F. Payment of the application fee and escrow fee(s) must be provided by
the applicant at the time of filing for the application to be deemed
§ 115-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-10
1:139
complete. In addition, the applicant must maintain the escrow account
balance at 50% of the initial balance. If at noon on any day the
application is to be heard by the/a Board the escrow fee level falls below
50% of the initial balance, the application shall be deemed incomplete,
and the application will be postponed until the account is restored
to its initial level. In addition, any failure by the applicant to restore
the escrow account balance, as aforesaid, will be deemed consent by
the applicant to extend the statutory time limit allowed to the Board.
The clock shall be restarted on the date of the next meeting of the
Board at which the escrow fee balance has been restored to its initial
level. In addition, any failure by the applicant to restore the escrow
account balance, as aforesaid, will be deemed consent by the applicant
to extend the statutory time limit allowed to the Board. The clock shall
be started on the date of the next meeting of the Board at which the
escrow fee balance has been restored to its initial level. In addition,
no final action on any application shall be taken by the Board until the
deposits/escrow fees are in compliance with this section.
(1) If, upon passage of three meeting dates the escrow fee balance has
not been restored to its initial level, the Board shall consider such
failure to be a request by applicant to withdraw the application and
shall so advise the applicant in writing.
G. Responsibility of applicant and/or owner. In the event that the amount
of costs for processing any application for development shall exceed the
deposits for said costs and/or if the applicant withdraws his application
or fails to pay the amount of such excesses, the payment for such
excesses shall immediately become the responsibility of the owner(s)
and the applicant of the subject property and the amount of such
excesses shall constitute a lien thereon.
H. Escrow fees not used by the Board(s)/Borough shall be returned to the
applicant in the third calendar month after the appeal period for any
variance decision(s)/resolution(s) has lapsed or the case is deemed by
the Zoning Official to be completed and closed.
I. Miscellaneous fees:
(1) Copy of meeting transcripts or part thereof shall be the actual costs
to produce the transcript. An escrow fee deposit of $700 shall
accompany requests.
(2) Certified copy of the written minutes of the Zoning Board or
Planning Board: $10 per meeting.
(3) Certified copy of the written resolutions of the Zoning Board or
Planning Board: $10 per resolution.
(4) Copy of Land Development Ordinance: $25 per copy.
(5) Copy of Zoning Map: $5 per map.
§ 115-10 ORADELL CODE § 115-10
1:140
§ 115-11. Television; commercial filming.
Television and commercial filming fees shall be as follows:
§ 115-12. Garage sales.
Garage sale fees shall be as follows:
(6) Providing initial/original copy of names and addresses of property
owners to be notified regarding public meetings: $10. Additional
copies: $5 per copy.
(7) Requests by anyone for special efforts, reports, studies,
consultation, etc., requiring the use of professional services shall
be the incurred costs in accordance with the fee schedules
established by the Borough/Boards and its providers. An escrow fee
deposit of $500 per request shall accompany requests.
(8) Requests by anyone for efforts by the Borough staff which are
deemed by the Zoning Official to be special and in excess of normal
application administrative activities or Building Office/official
investigative operations shall be charged at $50 per hour or part
thereof, with an escrow fee deposit of $200 per request.
(9) Planning Board Sign Committee compliance reviews/approvals,
included in fees reflected in § 115-4.
(10) Requests for Zoning Board of Adjustment concept plan review(s)
shall include an advance nonrefundable fee of $300. This fee shall
allow an appearance at up to two Board meetings. The applicant
shall also be fully responsible for any and all professional services
fees that may be generated by the Board as a result of the review.
J. Soil moving fees.
(1) The permit fee for soil removal shall be $0.30 per cubic yard to be
moved, provided that in no event shall such fee be less than $100,
and a $1,000 escrow fee to cover the final cost of this cubic
yardage.
(2) Accompanying the application for the said soil permit shall be a
cash bond or performance guaranty, provided by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey pursuant to
the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Act, in the sum of $750 cash
bond, to be returned upon the full and faithful performance of the
soil being moved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Permit fee: $5,000. Said permit fee shall be nonrefundable.
B. Cash bond (amount to be refunded will be less any expenses incurred
by the Borough due to filming): $2,500.
§ 115-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-12
1:141
§ 115-13. Department of Public Works.
§ 115-14. Alcoholic beverages.
Liquor licenses for the year shall be as follows:
A. Permit fee: $15, plus any costs incurred by the Borough for the signs
provided for in § 137-6.
B. Signs: $1 per sign, total of four signs. Only Borough signs are
permitted. Shall not be displayed on telephone poles or Borough trees.
A. The following fees are to be assessed for emergency use of Department
of Public Works personnel and equipment to protect the health and
safety of the public. The fee shall be assessed against the contractor
and/or property owner who contracted to have the work performed:
Personnel/Equipment Fee
Truck, per hour $75
Heavy equipment, per hour $175
Department of Public Works employee,
per hour
At current contract hourly
rate
Department of Public Works foreman,
per hour
At current contract hourly
rate
Department of Public Works
Superintendent, per hour
At current contract hourly
rate
Damage or loss of lights, each $25
Damage or loss of barricade, each $110
B. Failure of the contractor and/or property owner to pay the fee assessed,
after being served with proper notice by the Construction Official, shall
forthwith become a lien upon the lands abutting or bordering such
public street or public place and shall be added to and become and form
a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands and
shall bear interest at the same rate as such taxes from the date of
emergency service by the Department of Public Works.
C. The following parking lot fees shall apply:
(1) Designated small spots: $1,200 for residents, $1,800 for nonresidents,
per year.
(2) Designated large spots: $1,500 for residents, $2,000 for nonresidents,
per year.
(3) Replacement key: $10.
(4) Replacement sticker: $5.
A. Plenary retail consumption: $2,500.
§ 115-12 ORADELL CODE § 115-14
1:142
§ 115-15. Selling, trading or exchanging motor vehicles.
Fees for selling, trading or exchanging motor vehicles on open lots and
service stations shall be as follows:
§ 115-16. Coin-operated and other amusement devices.
Fees for coin-operated and other amusement devices shall be as follows:
§ 115-17. Health standards.
The fee for the several licenses, permits or certificates referred to are
hereby fixed as follows.
B. Plenary retail distribution: $2,500.
C. Club license: $188.
A. For each open lot having an area of 5,000 square feet or less: $500.
B. For each open lot having an area in excess of 5,000 square feet, per
1,000 square feet or fraction thereof: $50.
C. For each service station: $500.
A. Electric crane, bagatelle, baseball, pin amusement games or similar
devices, each machine, per year: $100.
B. Music vending machines or similar machine, each machine, per year:
$100.
C. Coin-operated picture machine, television machine, video game
machine or similar devices, each device or machine, per year: $200.
D. Shuffleboard, ski-ball or similar games, each device or game, per year:
$100.
A. Food and beverages:
(1) Including restaurant, buffet, lunchroom, grill room, lunch counter,
dining room, road stand, candy store, snack bar and soda fountain
and ice cream parlor, for each establishment, minimum fee per
year: $100.
(2) Restaurants:
Seating Fee
1 to 25 $125
26 to 50 $175
51 to 99 $275
Over 100 $325
§ 115-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-17
1:143
§ 115-18. Dogs and other animals.
Fees for dogs and other animals shall be as follows.
B. The following businesses shall pay an annual fee per establishment of
$100:
(1) Bakeries.
(2) Boarding and/or lodging homes.
(3) Butcher and/or fish.
(4) Deli and/or specialty-food establishments.
(5) Caterers.
(6) Fruits and vegetables.
(7) Mobile food trucks.
(8) Milk, cream and/or other dairy products (including ice cream),
each license.
(9) Milk, cream and/or other dairy products (including ice cream), for
each vehicle.
(10) Retailing, processing and wholesaling frozen foods, each
establishment and one vehicle.
(11) Retailing and wholesaling frozen foods, each additional vehicle.
(12) Soda fountain, snack bars, grill rooms, ice cream parlors and lunch
counters, for each establishment (up to 25 seats).
(13) Nail salons, tanning salons, beauty salons and massage
establishments.
(14) Card, gift, florist, pharmacy with prepackaged food and candy,
fruits and dairy products.
C. The following businesses shall pay an annual fee per establishment of
$50:
(1) Any store selling cards, gifts, pharmacy, closed containers of food
or beverages, prepackaged food and candy but no fruit or dairy
products.
D. Temporary food handler permit.
(1) Any entity, including food trucks, selling food at special events shall
pay a fee of $75 which shall cover up to three events per year. A fee
of $25 shall be charged for a permit for each additional event.
A. Dogs and cats:
§ 115-17 ORADELL CODE § 115-18
1:144
§ 115-19. (Reserved)
§ 115-20. Collection and removal of garbage and refuse.
§ 115-21. Vending machines.
Fees for vending machines shall be as follows:
§ 115-22. Miscellaneous office fees.
Miscellaneous office fees shall be as follows:
(1) For each dog or cat over seven months, spayed or neutered, per
year: $10.
(2) For each dog or cat over seven months, not spayed or neutered, per
year: $15.
B. Kennels, for each premises, per year: $100.
C. Pet shop, for each premises, per year: $100.
D. Fee for replacement dog or cat license/tag: $5.
A. Fees for the collection and removal of garbage and refuse shall be as
follows:
B. Collection and removal of garbage:
(1) For each license and one vehicle, per year: $100.
(2) Each additional vehicle, per year: $100.
A. For each license and one machine, per year: $25.
B. For each additional machine at the same location, per year: $15.
A. A fee shall be charged for copies of public records for which a charge is
not otherwise set forth in this chapter. The maximum amount to be
charged for copies is as follows: first to 10th page, $0.75 per page; 11th
page to 20th page, $0.50 per page; all pages over 20, $0.25 per page.
B. (Reserved)
C. A fee of $10 for the first copy and $5 for each additional copy of the
same shall be charged for a transcript or certified copy of any Board of
Health record.
D. The maximum charge for an individual, mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization requesting a
duplicate copy of a tax bill is $5. Subsequent copies of the tax bill for
the same tax year requested by the same person or organization shall
be a maximum of $25.
§ 115-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-22
1:145
§ 115-23. Biannual report; surcharge fee.
§ 115-24. Violations and penalties.
§ 115-25. Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
E. A service charge fee of $25 for every check made payable to the
Borough of Oradell or one of its agencies or officers which is returned
for insufficient funds shall be charged to the person or entity submitting
the check. Any service charge authorized by this subsection shall be
collected in the same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the
account for which the check or other written instrument was tendered.
Whenever an account owing to the Borough is for a tax or special
assessment, the service charge authorized by this section shall be
included on whatever list of delinquent accounts is prepared for the
enforcement of the lien. The service charge shall then become part of
the lien. Any future payments to be tendered by the entity which has
submitted a check or written instrument returned for insufficient funds
shall be made in cash or by certified or cashier's check.
F. The fee for a printout containing information as to municipal liens shall
be $5.
G. Municipal search $10; Continuation of existing search $2.
H. Corrected copy of Board of Health record: $10.
A. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
B. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations thereunder established by the Department of Community
Affairs, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee per cubic foot of volume of new
construction at such rate as shall be fixed from time to time by
§ S:23-4.19(b) of the New Jersey Administrative Code, as amended. Said
surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the calendar
quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31,
and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due.
A. Violation by any person of any section of this chapter not covered by
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.31 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 115-22 ORADELL CODE § 115-25
1:146
§ 115-26. (Reserved)
A. The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to approve the granting of
raffle and bingo licenses to be held in the Borough.
B. Fees for legalized games of chance are as follows:
(1) Bingo: $20 for each occasion on which bingo is held.
(2) Raffles:
(a) On-premises draw raffle for cash (50/50) or merchandise
(exceeding $400 total prize value): $20 for each day on which a
drawing is to be conducted under license.
(b) On-premises draw raffle for cash (50/50) or merchandise (not
exceeding $400 total prize value): no licensing fee. If the raffle
should exceed $400, then submit $20 at the time of filing
report of operations.
(c) Off-premises draw raffle awarding merchandise as a prize (for
each $1,000 or part thereof): $20.
(d) Carnival games or wheel: $20 for each game or wheel held on
any one day, or any series of consecutive days not exceeding six
at one location.
(e) Off-premises cash (50/50) raffle: a $20 fee at application. If
more than $1,000 in awarded prizes, $20 per $1,000 in
awarded prizes or part thereof.
(f) Special door prize raffle: no fee and no license, provided the
merchandise is wholly donated and has a retail value of less
than $50. NOTE: cannot be conducted when other games of
chance are being conducted, held or operated.
(g) Calendar raffle: $20 (for each $1,000 or part thereof of the
retail value of the prize).
(h) Instant raffle:
[1] For each day on which instant raffle tickets are sold or
offered for sale: $20; or
[2] For a one-year license: $750.
(i) Golf hole-in-one: $20 (for each $1,000 or part thereof of retail
value of ancillary prizes).
(j) Armchair race: $50 per licensed day of operation.
(k) Casino nights: $100 per occasion.
§ 115-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-27
1:147
§ 115-27. Recreation fees.
The Summer Recreation Program shall be available to Oradell residents at a
cost of $150 for one child, $225 for two children and $300 for three or more
children. There shall be a fee of $10 per day for a guest participant who is
accompanied by an Oradell resident.
A. Field use fees.
(1) Both nonprofit and for-profit unaffiliated organizations are subject
to the field use fee schedule. Upon the recommendation of the
Recreation Committee, the Mayor and Council reserve the right to
waive the fee on a case-by-case basis.
Field
Description 1 hour
Half Day
(4 Hours)
Whole Day
(8 Hours)
2 Hours -
Lights
DPAC (North
Side)
$100 $250 $450 $200
DPAC (South
Side)
$100 $250 $450 $200
DPAC
(Baseball
Field 90')
$200 NA NA $200
DPAC
(Softball
Field 60')
$100 NA NA $200
DPAC
(Whole
Complex)
$100 $400 $800 $400
Muehleck
Little League
60'
$75 $300 $500 NA
Memorial
Field
Softball 60'
$60 $200 $400 NA
Caruso
Baseball
Field 90'
$60 $200 $400 NA
Park Avenue
Field
$60 $200 $400 NA
Prospect
Avenue
$60 $200 $400 NA
Grant Field-
East 60'
$40 $100 $200 NA
Grant Field-
West 60'
$40 $100 $200 NA
§ 115-27 ORADELL CODE § 115-27
1:148
Chapter 118
Field
Description 1 hour
Half Day
(4 Hours)
Whole Day
(8 Hours)
2 Hours -
Lights
Grant Fieldwhole
$100 $200 $400 NA
Hoffman
Field 60'
$50 $100 $200 NA
(2) The fee is nonrefundable except in the case of extreme inclement
weather or any unforeseen circumstances that cause a Borough
Official to close the facilities.
(3) Deposit required for special events hosted on DPAC is $500. The
deposit for all other locations is $200. In the event that damage to
any facility exceeds the deposit collected, the Borough of Oradell
reserves the right to assess additional damage repair fees.
B. Mandatory contribution to DPAC fund.
(1) All Oradell recreation-sponsored and affiliated leagues must make
a mandatory contribution to the DPAC fund.
(2) The fee paid will be based on the hourly usage of the facility. For
every 100 hours of use, the payment will be $1,100. Partial blocks
of time will be paid on a fractional basis: 25 hours, $250, etc. Each
field is considered separate usage. For example, if both DPAC
North and South Fields are used for three hours together, it is
considered six hours of usage.
(3) The full fee owed for the season will be paid prior to first practice.
Any adjustment to the fee will be made by the Borough at the end of
the season.
(4) These fees will be used to defray the replacement and maintenance
costs of the turf.
C. Facility Fee Ordinance. TO BE INSERTED.
D. Tennis permits. Fees for yearly tennis permits shall be as follows:
E. Residents:
(1) Family: $50.
(2) Individual: $25.
(3) Senior: $20.
F. Replacement fee: $10.
G. Guest passes, per day: $20.
§ 115-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-27
1:149
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Fire prevention - See Ch. 121.
Fireworks — See Ch. 125.
§ 118-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person, except peace officers in the line of duty, shall fire or discharge or
cause to be fired or discharged any pistol, shotgun, rifle, revolver, cannon,
hand grenade or other firearm or other contrivance in which bullets,
cartridges or any explosive is used, except upon a range provided therefor,
which range has been approved by the Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police.
§ 118-2. Carrying concealed firearm prohibited.
No person shall carry, within the borough without lawful authority, any
firearm or other dangerous instrument or explosive concealed in or about
his clothes or person or in any vehicle.18
Chapter 121
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 18.
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Fireworks — See Ch. 125.
18.Editor's Note: For violations and penalties, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-10.
§ 115-27 ORADELL CODE § 118-2
1:150
ARTICLE I
Adoption of BOCA Standards
[Adopted 3-17-1981 by Ord. No. 714]
§ 121-1. Adoption; copies on file.
There is hereby adopted for the Borough of Oradell, under the authority
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, for the purpose of providing rules and regulations
governing fire prevention, a certain code entitled the "BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code, Fifth Edition, 1981," which is published and promulgated
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., of
which code three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and will remain on file there until final action is taken on said
ordinance, for the use and examination of the public, and the same is hereby
adopted and made part of this article as fully as if set forth at length therein.
The terms of said code are adopted in full except as additional sections,
deletions or amendments are hereinafter set forth.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-1
1:151

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement of State Standards19
[Adopted 9-17-1985 by Ord. No. 778; amended in its entirety
1-2-2014 by Ord. No. 13-12]
§ 121-2. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Borough of Oradell.
§ 121-3. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau,
which is hereby created in the Borough of Oradell.
§ 121-4. Duties.
The Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures, and premises within the established boundaries of Oradell, other
than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings used exclusively for
dwelling purposes, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Safety Code, and this article.
§ 121-5. Life hazard occupancies.
The Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau shall carry out annual inspections of
life hazard uses as required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 121-6. Organization.
The Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau shall be an office within the Borough
of Oradell and shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
Fire Marshal. All employees of this office shall report to the Borough
Administrator in accordance with Borough of Oradell Code § 47-14.
§ 121-7. Appointments and removals.
A. Appointment of the Fire Marshal. The Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau
shall be under the supervision of the Fire Marshal, who shall be
appointed by the governing body of the Borough of Oradell according to
all applicable state laws and statutes contained in Subchapter 5:71 of
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. The term of appointment shall be
for one year from January 1 through December 31. Should any vacancy
occur, the vacant position shall be filled for the unexpired term. (See
Subsection C, Removal from office.)
19.Editor's Note: For violations and penalties, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-10.
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-7
1:153
§ 121-8. Duties of Fire Marshal.
§ 121-9. Duties of fire inspectors.
B. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as the
Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau may recommend as necessary to
properly carry out its responsibilities may be appointed by the
governing body in consultation with the Fire Marshal. Appointment
shall be made in accordance with all applicable state laws and statutes
contained in Subchapter 5:71 of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. The
term of appointment shall be for one year from January 1 through
December 31. Should any vacancy occur, the vacant position shall be
filled for the unexpired term. (See Subsection C, Removal from office.)
C. Removal from office. Any employee of the Oradell Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be subject to removal by the governing body of the
Borough of Oradell for inefficiency or misconduct. Each employee shall
be afforded a hearing subsequent to his suspension/removal and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of
Community Affairs, all applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey,
and all personnel policies of the Borough of Oradell. During a
suspension, the governing body shall make arrangements with a duly
certified fire official to carry out the terms and enforcement of the fire
code in the Borough of Oradell.
A. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the operation and
administration of the Fire Prevention Bureau.
B. The Fire Marshal shall conduct the operations of the local enforcing
agency in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local statutes.
C. The Fire Marshal shall prepare an annual audit report for the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety as required under N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.6(a)2(i)
detailing the annual activities of the Fire Prevention Bureau; copies of
this report shall be provided to the Borough Administrator. The
Borough Administrator shall then distribute copies of the report to the
local governing body.
D. The Fire Marshal shall ensure all required annual inspections of
designated life hazard uses within the Borough of Oradell are
completed.
E. The Fire Marshal shall attend enhancement seminars as necessary to
maintain their certification valid and to stay informed on changing
codes and processes.
F. The Fire Marshal shall implement, promote and support community
based fire safety education within the Borough of Oradell.
A. Appointed Fire Inspectors shall conduct firesafety inspections,
investigate complaints, conduct fire investigations as assigned by the
§ 121-7 ORADELL CODE § 121-9
1:154
§ 121-10. Employee work schedule.
All employees of the Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau shall work a schedule
established by the Fire Marshal and approved by the Borough
Administrator.
§ 121-11. Required registrations.
§ 121-12. Required inspections and fees. [Amended 5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-4]
Fire Marshal and support all functions of the Oradell Fire Prevention
Bureau.
B. Fire Inspectors shall possess and maintain certification as a Fire
Official in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:71 of the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code.
C. Fire Inspectors shall promptly prepare written reports of any
inspections and forward such to all involved parties including the
prompt submission of all reports to the Fire Marshal.
D. Fire Inspectors may be required to be on call at the direction of the Fire
Marshal within the guidelines established by the Oradell Fire
Prevention Bureau
E. Fire Inspectors shall attend enhancement seminars as needed to
maintain their certifications current and to stay informed of code
changes.
F. Fire Inspectors shall assist in the implementation, promotion and
support of community-based firesafety education within the Borough of
Oradell.
A. All owners of all commercial, mixed occupancy, multiple-family and nonowner-
occupied one- and two-family dwellings shall register with the
Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau within 30 days of taking ownership of
the property. Any property owner failing to register shall be subject to a
penalty of $150.
B. All new tenants, lessees, or occupants of any commercial occupancy
shall register with the Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau within 30 days of
obtaining a certificate of occupancy or certificate of continuing
occupancy from the Oradell Building Department. Any tenant, lessees
or occupant failing to register shall be subject to a penalty of $150.
A. The Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau shall perform inspections and
complaint investigations of all occupancies within the Borough of
Oradell with the exception of owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and apply the
regulations of this article and the Uniform Fire Code to the
aforementioned facilities.
§ 121-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-12
1:155
§ 121-13. Firesafety permits and fees. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-4]
§ 121-14. Knox-Box entry system.
The key vault shall be installed in compliance with the following
requirements for installation criteria:
§ 121-15. Technical amendments.
The current edition of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, as amended and
supplemented, is hereby adopted, subject to the following modifications in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.8:
B. In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the Department of Community
Affairs, see Chapter 115, Fees, § 115-8.
A. All permit application fees shall be set in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.9(c). See Chapter 115, Fees, § 115-8, for exceptions. Permit fees
may be waived at the discretion of the Fire Marshal provided that the
permit applicant is an approved 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
B. Failure to obtain any required permit shall result in a penalty equal to
the amount of the original fee.
C. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the Borough
of Oradell treasury and shall thereafter be appropriated to the Fire
Prevention Bureau for the enforcement of the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
A. Installation cost shall be the sole responsibility of the building owner.
B. The key vault shall be installed in a prominent and viewable location
near the main entrance of the building approved by the Oradell Fire
Prevention Bureau.
C. The key vault, when practical, shall be installed approximately six feet
above grade and no more than eight feet above grade.
D. The building owner shall be responsible for installation of the key vault
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and specifications.
E. Buildings which (either due to size, design or occupancy) have multiple
public entrances shall install the key vault at a location specified by the
Oradell Fire Prevention Bureau and shall place an approved reflective
sticker on all remaining doors, indicating that the premises are
equipped with a rapid-entry system.
A. No person or persons shall erect, construct, place or maintain any
bumps, humps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses
or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the
boundaries of the municipality. The word "street," as used in this
article, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular
§ 121-12 ORADELL CODE § 121-15
1:156
traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as
well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the
municipality.
B. Decorative material may not obstruct, obscure, or in any manner
diminish the effectiveness of any fire protection system, equipment, or
device. Decorative material may not cover any fire exit access door or
corridor and shall not breach the threshold of a smoke or fire barrier.
C. The sale of seasonal nursery stocks, trees, wreaths and related articles
must be accompanied by a firesafety permit.
D. No nursery stocks, trees, wreaths or related articles shall be displayed
or stored within 25 feet of a gasoline tank or other combustible storage
tanks. Such displays shall be restrained or held in place by ropes or
cable.
E. If the possibility of unauthorized use after being sealed exists, the Fire
Marshal may affix lockout devices or seals onto the device and/or power
source to prevent such use. It shall be a violation of this article for any
person(s), agent, or employee to remove, destroy, or otherwise defeat
the protective device except for the purpose of conducting authorized
repairs. Before the appliance is placed back into service, suitable
reinspection, including performance demonstration, will be required by
the Fire Marshal. Any expenses associated with such demonstration
shall be the responsibility of the appliance owner.
F. When, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, a kitchen hood suppression
system does not conform to current standards for life and property
protection, he may order additional devices to increase surface
protection, remote manual pull stations, or automatic fuel-shutoff
valves installed.
G. Any person smoking in a building or area posted with a conspicuous no
smoking sign may receive a summons immediately without previous
verbal or written warning. A penalty of no less than $100 shall be
issued.
H. All doors providing access to the rear of any occupancy shall be
marked, at the discretion of the Fire Marshal, with the name of the
occupancy and street name and number.
I. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life, nor conduct a salvage operation with the use of open burning
except for the limited purpose of outdoor cooking where done with
equipment or fireplace designed for such purpose and in a manner not
offensive to persons in the vicinity thereof. A penalty of no less than
$100 may be issued without previous verbal or written warning if such
action described above occurs.
J. It shall be the responsibility of any contractor, maintainer, or building
representative to notify all tenants, occupants, staff, Oradell Police
§ 121-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-15
1:157
Department, the Fire Department communications center and the Fire
Prevention Bureau prior to performing any tests, repairs, or other work
that could cause the activation of, or render any component of any fire
protection system out of service. A penalty of no less than $250 may be
issued without previous verbal or written warning for failure to make
all notifications described above.
K. All new and existing fire alarm systems requiring a code to access
system functions, such as reset and silence, shall utilize the Borough of
Oradell Fire Department identification number "0244." Any system
which requires a code in excess of four digits shall utilize a code
approved by the Fire Marshal.
L. It shall be a violation for any person, owner, tenant, employee, or agent
to reset, deactivate, or reduce the effectiveness of any fire alarm or
suppression device prior to the arrival of the Oradell Fire Department.
A penalty of no less than $250 may be issued without previous verbal or
written warning if such action described above occurs.
M. All new and existing buildings that contain a Fire Department sprinkler/
standpipe connection shall be equipped with a vandal-resistant cap as
approved by the Fire Marshal. Such caps shall be installed at the
expense of the building owner after receiving written notice of
compliance requirement. It shall be a violation of this code for any
person or agency to remove, defeat, vandalize, or steal such protective
cap.
N. All partial area sprinkler systems with a Fire Department connection
shall have a sign located at the Fire Department connection stating the
area of protection for that premises.
O. All Fire Department sprinkler and stand pipe connections shall have a
red light located a minimum of five feet above the connection and be
visible from the main street side of the building. The red light shall
remain illuminated 24 hours per day. The fixture shall be a pendant
style and design approved by the Fire Marshal and shall consist of a red
globe illuminated by a long-life white bulb with an average life greater
than 3,000 hours and providing no less than 800 lumens.
P. No person shall operate any fire hydrant without the express written
permission of the Fire Marshal and the water company having
jurisdiction. Exception: use by any person employed by the Borough of
Oradell or United Water or authorized by the United Water for such use.
No use shall hinder or reduce the firefighting capability of a fire
hydrant. A penalty of no less than $250 may be issued without previous
verbal or written warning if such action described above occurs.
Q. The Fire Marshal may require a commercial business to provide a
written emergency response plan that details the procedures that will
be used to ensure maximum public safety in the event of an emergency.
§ 121-15 ORADELL CODE § 121-15
1:158
§ 121-16. Basic fire control and enforcement authority.
R. All building owners and commercial occupants shall complete and
submit an emergency contact form approved by the Oradell Fire
Prevention Bureau.
S. Where, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, a potential for repeated
violations of aisle or storage requirements exists the person responsible
for such storage may be required to maintain permanent durable
markings on the floors or walls of such areas to delineate aisles and
passageways.
A. Authority of the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal, or his duly authorized
representative, as may be present at the scene of a fire or other
emergency endangering life and/or property loss, is empowered to
direct such fire prevention and investigation operations as may be
necessary to ensure prompt and unhindered intervention and operation
of the fire department at the scene. The Fire Marshal may prohibit any
person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene and may remove
or cause to be removed any person, vehicle, or object that may impede
or interfere with the operations of the fire department or a fire scene
investigation.
B. Fire watch and protective standby. Whenever a determination is made
by the Fire Marshal that an increased potential of fire, life, or property
loss is present at any building, there may be ordered a protective watch
to be performed by trained personnel from the ranks of the Fire
Prevention Bureau and/or the Oradell Volunteer Fire Department. The
requirement for such watch shall consider the status of occupancy and
use, fire protection equipment, structural damage from fire or accident,
and the potential for fire from all sources. The cost for this watch shall
be borne by the owner of the involved property or the person
responsible for creating such hazard and shall be paid within 30 days of
receiving written proof of cost and man-hours. Uncollected monies are
subject to collection through the municipal court and the Penalty
Collection Act (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1). The decision of the Fire Marshal shall
be final in matters of immediate life safety or property loss.
C. Compliance with orders. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Marshal during
fire prevention enforcement, investigations or interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual.
D. Relief from personal responsibility. The Fire Marshal or employee
charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accrued to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code
§ 121-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-16
1:159
§ 121-17. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals.
shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until
the final termination of the proceedings. The Fire Marshal or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding
that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any
agent acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability
for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act
or omission in connection with the performance of official duties. Any
additional provisions included within the Borough of Oradell's Local
Indemnification Ordinance20 shall apply to this subsection.
E. Jurisdictional liability. The jurisdiction shall not be liable under this
code for any damage to persons or property, by reason of the inspection
or reinspection of structures or equipment authorized herein, or failure
to inspect or reinspect such structures or equipment or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any structure or equipment authorized
herein.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Defense and Indemnification.
§ 121-16 ORADELL CODE § 121-17
1:160
Chapter 125
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25. Fire prevention — See Ch. 121.
§ 125-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 125-2. Use prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, light or fire any squib,
rocket, cracker, torpedo or grenade or to explode any blank cartridge, toy
pistol or cannon in which explosives are used or any other fireworks of like
construction.
§ 125-3. Sale and display prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or have in possession with
intent to give away or sell or offer for sale within the Borough of Oradell
any of the articles set forth in § 125-2 or other combustible firecrackers or
fireworks of any kind.
§ 125-4. Exceptions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Oradell.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular and vice
versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. The prohibition of § 125-3 shall not apply to the sale of any such article
or articles by wholesalers to each other or to merchants conducting
business entirely without the Borough of Oradell or to the sale by
wholesalers for public demonstrations as herein provided.
B. The aforesaid prohibitions shall not apply to the sale, storage or use of
railroad track torpedoes or other signaling devices or to the sale,
storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or to prevent
any public demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if
§ 121-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:161
§ 125-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or be both so fined and
imprisoned.
Chapter 130
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood-fringe areas — See Ch. 132.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 130-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Oradell, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 130-2. Findings of fact.
§ 130-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
conducted under proper police supervision after application is made
and permission is issued by the Chief of Police for such demonstration.
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Oradell are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
§ 125-4 ORADELL CODE § 130-3
1:162
§ 130-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 130-5. Definitions.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property, due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 130-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-5
1:163
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Planning Board's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to
three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials within the area of
special flood hazard.[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated
building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means
of breakaway walls.[Added 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 800]
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 130-5 ORADELL CODE § 130-5
1:164
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Boundary - Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.[Added 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 2/10 of a foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs. [Added 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
(b)
(4)
§ 130-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-5
1:165
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — (For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act,
P.L. No. 97-34821) Includes substantial improvements and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does
it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.[Amended 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 800; 9-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1039]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home,
or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground.[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 9-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 1039]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
21.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 130-5 ORADELL CODE § 130-5
1:166
§ 130-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 130-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-27
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Flood Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood
Insurance Study of Bergen County, New Jersey" with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Map Panels 0181G, 0182G, 0183G, 0184G, and 0186G,
dated September 30, 2005, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file in the office of
the Municipal Clerk at the Borough Hall.
§ 130-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $200 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Oradell
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 130-9. Abrogations; greater restrictions to apply.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 130-10. Interpretation of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure." [Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
(2)
§ 130-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-10
1:167
§ 130-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Borough of Oradell, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 130-12. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction of development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 130-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Planning Board and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 130-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Planning Board is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordances with its provisions.
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. A certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 130-18B.
D. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 130-10 ORADELL CODE § 130-14
1:168
§ 130-14. Duties of local administrator.
The duties of the Planning Board shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review. It shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state of local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 130-19A are met.
B. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 130-7, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonable
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer § 130-18, Specific
standards for flood hazard reduction. [Amended 4-21-1987 by Ord.
No. 800]
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. It shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 130-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. It shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
§ 130-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-14
1:169
§ 130-15. Board of Appeals.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. It shall make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §§ 130-15 and
130-16.
A. The Board of Adjustment as established by the Borough of Oradell shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Planning Board in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as provided in
the law.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
§ 130-14 ORADELL CODE § 130-15
1:170
§ 130-16. Conditions for variance.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 130-15D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The Planning Board shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that § 130-15D(1)
through (11) has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure. [Amended
9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 130-15D; or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
§ 130-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-16
1:171
§ 130-17. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal system shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. [Added
9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039]
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
§ 130-16 ORADELL CODE § 130-17
1:172
§ 130-18. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 130-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 130-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
E. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: [Added 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 800]
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be floodproofed so that, below the base flood level, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
§ 130-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-18
1:173
§ 130-19. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 130-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
Chapter 132
FLOOD-FRINGE AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130. Land development — See Ch. 240.
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Flood-Fringe
Ordinance of the Borough of Oradell."
§ 132-2. Purpose.
It is hereby determined that the flood-fringe areas of delineated stream
within the Borough of Oradell are subjected to flooding and that such
flooding is a danger to the lives and properties of the public; that such
flooding is also a danger to the natural resources of the Borough of Oradell,
the official as set forth in § 130-14C. [Amended 4-21-1987 by
Ord. No. 800]
A. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development shall be prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If § 130-19A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of §§ 130-17, 130-18 and 130-19.
C. (Reserved)22
D. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C was repealed 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1039.
§ 130-18 ORADELL CODE § 132-2
1:174
county and state; and that unregulated development, the placement of fill
or construction within these flood-fringe areas results in increased flood
damages, erosion damages and adverse impacts on the ecological resources
within and downstream of the Borough of Oradell. It is, therefore,
determined that it is in the public's interest to regulate the development of
real property within the flood-fringe areas of delineated streams pursuant to
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and related
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and to establish standards to regulate construction and
the placement of fill within these areas. The Borough of Oradell hereby
accepts the responsibility empowered to it by the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act to regulate stream encroachments within the flood-fringe areas
of delineated streams.
§ 132-3. Definitions.
A. Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given to
them in the state flood hazard area regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-1.2.
B. The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT — The Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
APPLICANT — The owner of the property on which the permit is
applied for or his legal agent.
APPLICATION — The Board's application form.
BOARD — That entity that has been given the authority to enforce this
chapter by the municipal governing body.
DAM — Any artificial dike, levee or other barrier, together with
appurtenant works, which is constructed for the primary purpose of
impounding water on a permanent or temporary basis, that raises the
water level five feet or more above its usual mean low-water height
to the emergency spillway crest or, in the absence of an emergency
spillway, the top of dam.
DELINEATED STREAM — A stream that has a delineated floodway that
has been officially adopted by NJDEP and published in the New Jersey
Register.
ENCROACHMENT LINE — A line encompassing the channel of a
natural stream and portions of the one-hundred-year floodplain
adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream. It is
approximately equal to the floodway line along delineated streams.
Methods for determining this line are set out in N.J.A.C. 7:13-1.8 and in
the manual.
EXCEPTIONAL AND UNDUE HARDSHIP — Situations in which strict
compliance with this chapter would result in peculiar and substantial
burdens upon the applicant or owner and where such compliance would
§ 132-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:175
not be necessary to avoid substantial detriment to the public health,
safety and general welfare.
FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — The susceptibility at a particular site
to damage by potential floods at that site, as well as increased off-site
flooding or flood-related damages caused by such use.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the flood hazard area not designated
as the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and the flood-fringe area of a
delineated stream.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGN FLOOD — The one-hundred-year
storm in nondelineated areas and the one-hundred-year storm, plus
25% in delineated areas.
FLOOD HAZARD DESIGN ELEVATION — The elevation of the flood
hazard area design flood.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a
natural stream which has been or may be hereafter covered by
floodwater.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
design features, additions, changes or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the flood
hazard area adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any waste or combination of waste which
poses a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms
or the environment. It shall include:
MAJOR PROJECT — That class of project defined as "major" in the
ninety-day rules, N.J.A.C. 7:1C-1.
MANUAL — The Technical Manual on Stream Encroachment published
by the Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) in draft form
in December 1981 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Waste material that is toxic, carcinogenic, genetically harmful,
corrosive, irritating or sensitizing, radioactive, biologically
infectious, explosive or flammable.
(1)
But need not be limited to those materials and concentrations of
materials that are determined to be toxic by the Federal Secretary
of Health and Human Services pursuant to Section 20(6) of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596,
OSHA) and those materials listed in the current Part 1972, Title
49, of the Code of Federal Regulations issued by the Federal
Department of Transportation.
(2)
§ 132-3 ORADELL CODE § 132-3
1:176
MINOR PROJECT — That class of project defined as "minor" in the
ninety-day rules.
MLUL — The Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NET FILL — Additional earth or other fill beyond the total quantity
already present above the low-water level of the stream or ground
water level, whichever is higher, in that portion of the project site which
is in the flood hazard area or one-hundred-year floodplain.
NINETY-DAY RULES — N.J.A.C. 7:1C (ninety-day construction permits).
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NONREGULATED USE — Any use set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:13-3.2 and 4.5.
NON-TROUT WATERS — The non-trout waters identified in the
NJDEP's surface water quality standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9-4.1 et seq.).
PROHIBITED USE — A use which shall not be allowed under any
circumstances.
PROJECTS OF SPECIAL CONCERN — Stream encroachment projects
which must be permitted by the NJDEP and which, because of their
potentially serious adverse effects, will be subject to the special
conditions described in N.J.A.C. 7:13.
REGULATED USE — Any use which is subject to the provisions of the
sections of this chapter dealing with regulated uses.
STREAM ENCROACHMENT — Any structure, alteration, filling,
construction or other activity within the area which would be inundated
by the one-hundred-year flood of any nondelineated stream or within
the flood hazard area of a delineated stream.
STREAM ENCROACHMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department, delegated agency or municipality under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:13.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface
of land or water, including but not limited to buildings, fences, except
as provided in this chapter, dams, fills, levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties,
embankments, causeways, culverts, roads, railroads, bridges and the
facilities of any utility or governmental agency. Trees or other
vegetation shall not be considered to be "structures."
TROUT-ASSOCIATED STREAMS — Streams that are:
(1) Trout production waters;
(2) Trout maintenance waters;
Non-trout waters upstream from trout production waters (with or
without intervening trout maintenance waters); or
(3)
Non-trout waters less than one mile upstream from trout
maintenance waters that are not upstream from trout production
waters.
(4)
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:177
§ 132-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all regulated uses within the flood fringe of
delineated streams. Regulated uses within the delineated streams require
the approval of NJDEP. Regulated uses are defined in N.J.A.C. 7:13-4.7 and
below:
§ 132-5. Prohibited uses.
The disposal of pesticides, industrial wastes, radioactive materials,
petroleum products or other hazardous materials shall not be permitted
within the flood-fringe area. Wastewater and water treatment plants may be
permitted and shall comply with this chapter.
§ 132-6. Nonregulated uses.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATERS — The trout maintenance waters
identified in the NJDEP's surface water quality standards (N.J.A.C.
7:9-4).
TROUT PRODUCTION WATERS — The trout production waters
identified in the NJDEP's surface water quality standards (N.J.A.C.
7:9-4).
TROUT-STOCKED WATERS — Waters that are stocked with trout by the
NJDEP's Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife, as listed in the Fish Code
adopted by the New Jersey Fish and Game Council.
A. Regulated uses are all land uses within the flood-fringe area of
delineated streams except for nonregulated uses and prohibited uses as
defined herein and N.J.A.C. 7:13-4.5 and 4.6.
B. No person shall engage in a regulated use within a delineated floodfringe
area or until he has received a stream encroachment permit from
the Board or NJDEP.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, nonregulated uses are land uses within
flood-fringe areas which:
(1) Do not require the construction of structures with an area of more
than 100 square feet or major regrading; and
(2) Do not require modification or relocation of any channel.
B. Nonregulated uses must satisfy the conditions of Subsection A above
and may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Residential. Improvements, such as lawns, play areas, gardens,
landscaping, fences, anchored dog houses and auxiliary utility
buildings, driveways, barbecues and additions of no more than 200
square feet to existing residential structures.
§ 132-3 ORADELL CODE § 132-6
1:178
§ 132-7. Information required on applications.
Required information for all applications submitted to the Borough Planning
Board shall be as follows:
(2) Private and public recreation. Playing fields, bike paths, picnic
grounds, fences, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, hunting and fishing areas, shooting
preserves, hiking and horseback riding trails, tennis courts,
basketball courts, driving ranges, fish hatcheries and anchored
auxiliary utility buildings.
(3) Agriculture. General cultivation, pasture, grazing, fences,
irrigation, outdoor plants, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
(4) Additionally, specific soil conservation practices, such as terracing,
construction of diversions, subsurface drainage and the
construction of grassed waterways and dug ponds, will be
considered nonregulated uses, but only when designed and
constructed under the supervision of the appropriate Soil
Conservation District.
(5) Anchored, plastic-covered greenhouses and other anchored
auxiliary utility buildings constructed without permanent
foundations, and fences associated with agricultural uses, are
nonregulated.
(6) Utility poles and towers.
A. The application form must be completed by the applicant or his agent,
including all signatures and seals. Notarization is not necessary.
B. The engineering data sheet must be completed and all required
information required by the engineering data sheet for the type of
project must be supplied.
C. The fee as required by the § 132-28.
D. A certification of notification required by § 132-8 for major projects and
projects of special concern must be included with the application.
E. Five sets of plans prepared in accordance with requirements outlined
on the engineering data sheet.
F. Hydrologic and hydraulic computations (for major projects only) must
be supplied as outlined in the engineering data sheet.
G. Except for applications by government agencies, easements or other
property rights must be obtained before the Board will approve an
application where any work is outside of the applicant's property or
physically affects other properties.
§ 132-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:179
§ 132-8. Notice.
§ 132-9. Preapplication conference.
§ 132-10. Application forms; procedures.
A. The applicant shall provide proof of notice with an application for a
stream encroachment constituting a major project or with a request for
a hardship exemption or with an appeal from the decision of the Board.
The notice shall include a description of the nature and location of the
proposed project, data on the application and a request for written
comment. It shall be sent to the following:
(1) The Municipal Planning Board, Engineer, Environmental
Commission and Clerk's office where the project is located. The
Clerk of any municipality, directly across the stream, if any, and the
municipality next downstream on both sides of the waterway, if
within one mile of the project, must notified.
(2) All abutting property owners.
(3) The County Planning Board, engineer and Mosquito Control
Commission.
(4) The Soil Conservation District.
(5) Any other agencies or bodies as requested by the Board or the
county.
B. Notice sent pursuant to the ninety-day rules or the MLUL to the abovelisted
parties will satisfy the requirements of this section.
A. A preapplication conference is suggested and may be requested by the
applicant, his agent or his engineer to meet with one of the
representatives of the Board (or Municipal Engineer) to discuss the
requirements for preparation of a specific application. Minutes of the
conferences will be kept by the Board or Engineer.
B. A preapplication conference may also be used to deliver an application
to the Board to be checked for completeness and accepted for review.
C. A preapplication conference will be scheduled by appointment only.
A. The Board will provide standard forms and procedures for all
applications and a docket number to identify each application. This
docket number shall be clearly marked on all correspondence and
submissions related to the application.
B. The Board will retain at least one copy of the application, including
detailed drawings of the project showing the floodway line and flood
fringe line and of any additional information required, on file for public
review.
§ 132-8 ORADELL CODE § 132-10
1:180
§ 132-11. Appeals; hearings.
C. Upon receipt of the application, the Board will, within 90 days, either.
(1) Declare the application complete for the purpose of making a
review for determination and decision;
(2) Return the application as unacceptable for further review; the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such action;
or
(3) Request in writing that the applicant submit, within a specific
period of time, additional information to assist in its review.
D. When the application is deemed complete, the Board shall provide for
public notice and review. One copy of the application and other
submitted information and a fact sheet stating the following shall be
made available for public review:
(1) The docket number.
(2) The applicant.
(3) The date the application was declared complete by the Board.
(4) The date by which interested parties may submit comments
concerning the application. Such date shall be 30 days from the
date the application is declared complete.
(5) The date by which the Board shall approve, condition or disapprove
the application.
(6) A description of the proposed project.
E. The Board shall render its decision and notify the applicant in writing,
within 90 days, as follows:
(1) Approval: by issuance of a stream encroachment permit.
(2) Conditional approval: by issuance of a stream encroachment permit
with conditions.
(3) Disapproval: by issuance of a letter citing the reasons for
disapproval.
F. The Board shall notify all persons who have submitted comments
concerning the application of the decision within five working days
after the decision.
G. To give persons who may object to the issuance of the permit time to
appeal, the permit shall not be valid until 15 days following issuance of
the permit.
A. The municipality shall establish appeal procedures for application in
the flood-fringe area which shall provide a fair hearing for persons
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:181
§ 132-12. Standards for regulated use.
The standards outlined in this chapter shall apply to all regulated uses in the
flood-fringe area of delineated streams. For the purposes of development
subject to the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance,23 the standards in
that ordinance shall apply wherever stricter than those described below.
Additionally, uses considered by this chapter to be nonregulated may be
regulated under the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
§ 132-13. Structures under regulated use; preexisting structures.
adversely affected by the municipality's decision, including hardship
waiver, as described in § 132-27, concerning an applicant's stream
encroachment application.
B. Persons adversely affected shall file an appeal with the appropriate
body within 15 days of the issuance of the permit.
C. A verbatim record must be made of any appellate hearing held pursuant
to Subsection A above.
D. No project may commence construction pending the completion of all
appeal processes.
A. Requirements for structures under regulated use shall be as follows:
(1) Within the flood-fringe area of delineated streams, all proposed
structures must be designed and anchored to prevent collapse,
lateral movement and buoyancy.
(2) All proposed hospitals, nursing homes, schools, day-care centers,
residences and similar noncommercial structures shall be elevated
so the lowest floor, including any basement, is at or above the flood
hazard design elevation along delineated streams.
(3) At least one driveway and access route to any hospital, school,
nursing home, day-care center or other similar noncommercial
structure, except for individual residences, shall be elevated to
comply with the requirements of Subsection A(2) above.
(4) Recreation areas may be allowed to be inundated in low areas
where it is determined that there is acceptable flood damage
potential.
(5) All proposed commercial and industrial structures, including water
supply and wastewater treatment facilities, shall be elevated so
that the lowest floor, including any basement, is at or above the
flood hazard design elevation along delineated streams.
(a) An exception to this may be allowed if said structures are
floodproofed in a manner which reflects flood velocities,
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 132-11 ORADELL CODE § 132-13
1:182
durations, rates of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces,
probable evacuation time available after flood warning and
other similar factors.
(b) The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
licensed professional engineer that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the design elevation and associates flood
factors.
(c) All or any of the following floodproofing measures may be
required so as to result in a dry floodproofed structure:
[1] Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or
similar devices.
[2] Reinforced walls to resist water pressures.
[3] Use of membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
[4] Installation of pumps to remove water from the structures.
[5] Construction of water supply and wastewater treatment
systems in a manner which prevents the entrance of
floodwaters.
[6] Pumping facilities, or comparable measures, for the
subsurface drainage systems of buildings to relieve
external foundation wall and basement flood pressures.
[7] Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
[8] Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm
drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent
backup of sewage or stormwaters into the structure.
Gravity drainage of basements may be eliminated by
mechanical devices.
[9] Location or floodproofing of all electrical equipment, in a
manner which will ensure that it is not subject to flooding.
[10] Adequate emergency electrical power supplies.
(6) Parking lots and recreation areas may be allowed to be inundated
where it is determined by the Board that the risk is acceptable.
B. Lawful preexisting prohibited structures.
(1) Lawful preexisting prohibited structures damaged by any means
other than flooding may be restored, provided that:
(a) Any expansion or enlargement will not increase the flood
damage potential.
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:183
§ 132-14. Requirements for fill.
(b) Efforts are made to provide floodproofing or other similar
techniques to minimize future flood damage to the structure.
(2) Lawful preexisting prohibited structures damaged by flooding may
be restored, provided that:
(a) Any expansion or enlargement will not increase the flood
damage potential.
(b) The owner submits an application together with drawings of
the proposed reconstruction and the application is approved by
the Board and Building Subcode Official.
(c) Efforts are made to provide floodproofing or other similar
techniques to minimize flood damage to the structures.
A. Within the flood-fringe area of delineated streams, the volume of net fill
and structures to be placed on an applicant's site shall be limited to
occupying 20% of the total volume of net fill which:
(1) Is from within the flood-fringe area of delineated streams or within
the one-hundred-year floodplain, but outside of encroachment
lines, of nondelineated streams; and
(2) Is also from between the natural or existing ground surface,
whichever is lower, and the level of the flood hazard design
elevation along delineated streams or the one-hundred-year storm
elevation along nondelineated streams.
B. It will have to be shown adequately on submitted plans and in
calculations that this limit of 20% is not being exceeded. There shall be
no net fill in the floodway or within stream encroachment lines, except
where a permit has been obtained from NJDEP.
C. All fill shall be graded in a manner so as not to adversely affect overland
drainage flows.
D. Fill shall be placed so that slopes are not steeper than a ratio of two
horizontal to one vertical.
E. Fill shall be compacted and stabilized in accordance with the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey or latest
amendment thereto, adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.
F. When a stream encroachment permit has been granted allowing the
placement of fill, under the provisions of this chapter, any subsequent
subdivision of the property shall not have the effect of increasing the
total amount of fill allowed to be placed upon the property covered by
the previous permit. Additional fill may be placed on the newly divided
property only to the extent that the total amount of fill allowed under
these rules for the original defined property has not been exceeded.
§ 132-13 ORADELL CODE § 132-14
1:184
§ 132-15. Soil erosion and sediment control.
G. A variance from the requirements of this section may be granted by the
NJDEP, on a case-by-case basis, for federal, state, county or municipal
highway or road construction projects, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:13-5.4(b).
H. The requirements of this section are not applicable to flood control
projects approved as flood control projects by the NJDEP.
I. Where dikes, levees, floodwalls or other structures, not approved as
flood control projects, impede the entry of floodwaters into an enclosed
space, the enclosed space shall be considered as solid fill for the
purposes of this section.
A. Soil erosion and sediment control measures are required on all
submissions under this section, if such submissions require disturbance
of more than 5,000 square feet of the surface area of land within the
flood hazard area along delineated streams.
B. The latest revised version of the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, promulgated by the New Jersey State
Soil Conservation Committee pursuant to the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act of 1975, as amended (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.),
and N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3 shall be used in the preparation and submission of
stream encroachment applications.
C. The following additional soil erosion and sediment control requirements
shall also be met:
(1) The area of soil disturbance shall be no larger than that which is
necessary for the conduct of the project.
(2) Soil disturbance schedules shall be formulated to provide minimum
practicable exposure of soils to erosion.
(3) If erosion and sediment control measures, such as diversions,
sediment basins or sediment barriers, whose purpose is to divert
surface runoff before it reaches exposed soil or to intercept
sediment eroded from exposed soil, are part of the erosion and
sediment control plan, such measures shall be installed prior to any
major soil disturbance or in their proper sequence to minimize
sediment delivery to waterways. All soil erosion and sediment
control practices shall be left in place until the soil is stabilized by
vegetation or engineering measures.
(4) In areas where vegetative methods, including mulch only, are relied
on for erosion and sediment control (without downslope controls to
intercept sediment, such as sediment basins or sediment barriers),
seeding, mulching or placement of sod shall be performed within
48 hours of soil exposure in accordance with the standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control. Seeding shall, in such areas, always
be accompanied by mulching.
§ 132-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-15
1:185
§ 132-16. Excavation.
§ 132-17. Disposal of soil.
(5) If weather conditions are unfavorable for seeding, sod placement
or the subsequent establishment of such vegetation, the area shall
be mulched within 48 hours of soil exposure in accordance with the
Standards for Stabilization with Mulch Only in the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
(6) Slopes exceeding 15%, in areas without downslope sediment
controls, shall be protected within 48 hours of soil exposure by
special treatment, such as water diversion berms, sodding or
approved mulch netting, in accordance with the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control.
(7) Pumping of sediment-laden water from the dewatering of trenches
or other excavations directly into waterways is prohibited.
(a) Pump intakes shall be placed near the water surface to
minimize the sediment content of pumpage.
(b) Wherever possible, pumpage shall be piped to sediment basins
or sediment barriers that meet the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control, or mechanical filtration or
sedimentation devices shall be used to minimize the discharge
into waterways of sediment in pumpage.
(c) As a last resort, special approval may be granted for the
pumpage to be spread onto land as far from the stream bank as
possible, provided that care is taken to avoid damaging trees
not slated for removal.
A. All projects involving permanent excavation within the flood fringe,
except as related to the installation of underground utilities or
foundation for structures, shall not have cut faces at slopes steeper
than a ratio of one vertical to two horizontal.
B. Excavation projects shall not be so deep as to affect any wells in the
surrounding areas or to cause any groundwater pollution.
A. Material being disposed of within the flood-fringe area shall be spread
evenly and should not inhibit the drainage of the area. Such soil
material shall be stabilized within 48 hours according to the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. Details of the methods of
stabilization shall be included on the plan.
B. The Board may require information and set conditions concerning
excavation methods, contents and disposal sites of any excavated
materials, except material recovered from stream cleaning.
§ 132-15 ORADELL CODE § 132-18
1:186
§ 132-18. Retention and detention basins.
Retention and detention basins for stormwater management within the
flood-fringe area along delineated streams shall be constructed in
accordance with criteria of the state stormwater management regulations
(N.J.A.C. 7:8). Stormwater impoundments, including berms, may be
required to obtain a dam permit from NJDEP where appropriate.
§ 132-19. Manhole requirements.
If manhole areas to be located within the flood-fringe area along delineated
streams, they shall be flush with ground level and provided with watertight
manhole covers.
§ 132-20. Minimization of environmental damage.
§ 132-21. Sewage disposal requirements.
Individual sewage disposal systems within the flood-fringe area shall be
constructed in accordance with the New Jersey state standards for the
construction of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems, N.J.A.C.
7:9-2.
§ 132-22. Procedures and standards for special cases.
§ 132-23. Projects of special concern.
A. Consideration shall be given to short- and long-term primary
environmental effects of any stream encroachment, whether or not it is
classified or handled as a project of special concern.
B. Stream encroachment projects shall be carried out in such a manner
that the pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment, as
related to the flood hazard area, is minimized to the extent practicable.
Federal, state and local statutes, regulations and ordinances designed
to minimize or prevent such damage shall be complied with.
A. To help assure adequate protection of the aquatic life and water
resources from the adverse impacts of some kinds of stream
encroachment, special procedures and standards have been prepared
to supplement the general standards. These special requirements
include the following:
(1) The classification of some kinds of stream encroachments as a
project of special concern and must be reviewed and approved by
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Any project which appears to be a project of special concern, as defined
in N.J.A.C. 7:13-5.2 and below in § 132-23, must be reviewed by the
Department. If the Department agrees with the classification, the
applicant must apply directly to the Department for a stream
encroachment permit.
§ 132-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-23
1:187
§ 132-24. Tidal waters.
Activities otherwise regulated by this chapter that are located along tidal
water bodies and segments of tidal water bodies shall be exempt from
requirements of § 132-14, provided that the computed flood hazard area
elevation at that point is not higher than the level of the one-hundred-year
tidal surge at the mouth of the water body.
§ 132-25. Dams.
All dams, as defined by the New Jersey Safe Dam Act24 and in this chapter,
must be submitted to NJDEP for a dam permit.
§ 132-26. Bridges.
A. A project of special concern shall be any stream encroachment project
in perennial streams with over 50 acres of drainage area, which
involves either or both of the following:
(1) Channelization or relocation of a stream for a distance over 100
feet (except for low-flow channels constructed as part of a
detention basin) or for a distance over 300 feet on either side of a
bridge or culvert.
(2) Loss of more than 6,000 square feet of the existing woodland within
25 feet of the banks.
(a) Construction of low dams across perennial, trout-associated
streams, except for the reconstruction or repair of existing
dams.
(b) Stream encroachment projects causing exposure of acidproducing
deposits along more than 50 feet of stream channel,
if the drainage area of the stream is over 50 acres. However,
this applies to smaller streams if the stream is trout-associated
and if the stream is perennial.
B. Project for construction of federal, state, county or municipal highways
or roads, where a variance is requested under N.J.A.C. 7:13-4.7(d)7,
(e)3 or § 132-14 of this chapter, shall be considered projects of special
concern.
C. All regulated uses within the floodway of delineated streams or within
the one-hundred-year floodplain of nondelineated streams require a
NJDEP review and permit.
A. Bridge approaches within the flood fringe of delineated streams for
bridges that traverse the floodway shall be considered as part of the
permit application for the bridge and must be submitted to NJDEP for
review and approval.
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:4-8.1 et seq.
§ 132-23 ORADELL CODE § 132-26
1:188
§ 132-27. Hardship waivers.
B. Where a project is performed in phases and two or more applications
are submitted, the total length of the affected stream segment shall be
used in applying the criteria.
C. In addition, stream encroachment projects are projects of special
concern, if the Board or NJDEP determines that they would be likely to
produce serious adverse effects, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Potential serious adverse effects on the biota of the stream, the
adjoining wetlands or on the sites where dredge spoils are to be
disposed of, including but not limited to rare or endangered
species.
(2) Potential serious degradation of water quality below the NJDEP's
surface water quality standards or groundwater quality standards.
(3) Potential serious adverse effects on water resources, including but
not limited to adverse effects on potable water supplies, flooding,
drainage, channel stability, navigation, energy production,
municipal, industrial or agricultural water supplies, fisheries or
recreation. Such adverse effects include damage to potential as
well as existing water uses.
D. Projects affecting the following are always projects of special concern
in the indicated geographic areas:
(1) Trout-associated streams: streams encroachment applications
requiring loss of more than 6,000 square feet of the existing
woodland within 50 feet of the banks of perennial trout-associated
streams.
A. A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter
may be granted by the Board for any of the following reasons:
(1) Cases in which the Board determines that there is no feasible and
prudent alternative to the proposed project, including the no-action
alternative, which would avoid or substantially reduce any
anticipated adverse effects and where the waiver is consistent with
the reasonable requirements of the public health, safety and
welfare;
(2) Cases in which the Board determines that the costs of strict
compliance are unreasonably high in relationship to the benefits
achieved by strict compliance; or
(3) Cases in which the Board and applicant agree to alternative
requirements that, in the judgment of the Board, provide equal or
better protection to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 132-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-27
1:189
B. No such waiver shall be granted without advance public notice and,
where requested or needed, a fact-finding meeting. These requirements
may be waived in emergency situations, as determined by the Board.
C. Where granted, such waivers are subject to the appeal procedures in
§ 132-11 of this chapter. Decisions to grant a hardship waiver may also
be appealed to NJDEP under N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.11.
D. In order for the Board to consider a hardship waiver, the applicant must
demonstrate the following:
(1) That, by reason of the extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of the property, the strict enforcement of this section
would result in exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant
in question;
(2) That the waiver will not substantially impair the appropriate use of
development of adjacent property and will not pose a threat to the
public health, safety and general welfare;
(3) That the hardship is unique or peculiar to the applicant; and
(4) That the exceptional or undue hardship claimed as grounds for the
waiver has not been created by the applicant.
E. The applicant shall submit to the Board with an application for a
hardship waiver as much of the following information as is relevant to
the projects:
(1) A plan for floodproofing, the implementation of which shall be a
condition of the waiver.
(2) Proof that appropriate steps shall be taken to anchor materials in
order to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(3) The relationship of the proposed project to the comprehensive land
use plan and floodplain program for the area.
(4) Proposed routes to and from the property during flood times.
(5) The projected height, velocity and duration of the floodwaters
expected at the site during the design flood.
(6) The type of soil located at the proposed site.
(7) A statement concerning the land use and value absent the granting
of the hardship waiver.
(8) Information regarding the existing development of the area and the
impact of the additional work.
(9) Evidence that the project will not distort the stream's floodcarrying
capacity so as to cause substantial problems along the
stream.
§ 132-27 ORADELL CODE § 132-27
1:190
§ 132-28. Fees.
In addition to any fee due to the municipality as a result of the applicant's
underlying application for a municipal approval, there shall be due to
the municipality at the time of submission of materials in support of this
application a fee as follows.
(10) An analysis of the extent to which the sediment regimen and water
quality of the stream will be affected by the proposed exemption.
(11) A description of the potential effects of the project upon the
environment.
F. The applicant shall also submit proof of required public notice for
consideration of a hardship waiver as required by § 132-8.
G. The applicant shall submit the request for a waiver along with the
appropriate documentation to the Board.
(1) The Board shall notify the applicant of the results of its review
within 90 days.
(2) Before making a decision, the Board may request that additional
information and/or documentation be supplied. When additional
information is not provided by the applicant as requested, the
waiver will be denied.
H. If the material submitted to the Board by the applicant in support of the
petition for a hardship waiver does not satisfactorily demonstrate that a
hardship waiver is warranted, the Board shall so notify the applicant by
letter advising the applicant that the petition for a hardship waiver has
been denied by the Board and shall also state the reasons for this
denial.
I. The denial of a waiver shall be treated as the denial of the application
without prejudice.
J. A hardship waiver granted pursuant to this section does not relieve the
applicant from obtaining any other approvals, certifications or permits
required by law. A copy of the notification granting the hardship waiver
shall be forwarded to the Bureau of Floodplain Management.
§ 132-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-28
1:191
Fee Schedule For Stream Encroachment Projects
Type of Project Limits and Descriptions Fees
Minor headwalls,
utility, crossings,
cleaning ponds, etc.
Project with drainage area more
than 320 acres and/or project with
drainage area less than 320 acres
but not approved by the appropriate
Municipal or County Engineer
$100
Projects within the one-hundredyear
flood hazard area that do not
require the establishment of an
encroachment line and all property
is outside the floodway, or those
projects requiring the establishment
or an encroachment line along a
delineated floodway
$100
*Project with drainage area less
than 320 acres and approved by the
appropriate Municipal and/or
County Engineer
None
Major, all projects Projects with drainage area more
than 150 acres and/or a project with
a drainage area less than 150 acres
but not approved by the appropriate
Municipal or County Engineer
$1,000
Major bridge,
culvert, channel
relocation and other
projects
Each project in or along the
channel, or portion of the channel
thereof up 1,000 feet
$1,000;
including
channel work
for a distance
of 300 feet
upstream and
downstream
for projects,
such as
bridges and
culverts
Each succeeding 1,000 feet segment
or part thereof
$1,000
Major projects, such
as fill, structures
and subdivisions
Each project or portion thereof up to
1,000 feet outside the channel
within one-hundred-year flood
hazard area and requiring the
establishment of an encroachment
line
$1,000 for
each 1,000
feet
Each succeeding 1,000 feet or
portion thereof
$1,000
§ 132-28 ORADELL CODE § 132-28
1:192
Fee Schedule For Stream Encroachment Projects
Type of Project Limits and Descriptions Fees
*Project with drainage area less
than 150 acres and approved by the
appropriate municipal and/or
County Engineer
None
Extension of time for
an approved project
Each project $50
Modification-indetail
of project
Each project 50% of the
total permit
fee charged
project to be
modified
*NOTE: Should be designed to the safe passage of the one-hundred-year
flood.
§ 132-29. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
determined by the municipalities in accordance within applicable provisions
of the MLUL.
Chapter 134
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 134, Food-Handling Establishments, adopted 10-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 1086, as amended, was removed from Part II of the Code and
adopted by the Board of Health as Ch. 302, Food Establishments, Retail,
3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1.]
Chapter 137
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 240, Art. XI.
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any similar casual sale of
§ 132-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-1
1:193
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of such sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or any other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Any corporation, business entity or an individual and members
of his or her household.
§ 137-2. Permit required.
No person shall conduct a garage sale in the Borough of Oradell without
first filing with the Office of Code Enforcement Agency of the Borough of
Oradell the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from said office
a permit, which shall be known as a "garage sale permit."
§ 137-3. Fees. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 137-4. Issuance of permits; display.
§ 137-5. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
§ 137-6. Signs.
A. The permit shall be issued to any one person four times only within a
twelve-month period, and no such permit shall be issued for more than
three consecutive calendar days. Charitable, religious or civic
organizations may be allowed more than three days with the approval of
the Mayor and Council.
B. Each permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be
prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is
conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. Four temporary signs provided by the Borough of Oradell shall be
permitted for the period of the sale, 48 hours prior to the sale and 24
hours thereafter. Planning Board approval will not be needed.
B. No signs shall be affixed to curbside trees, telephone poles or street
signs. No sign shall be posted, located or displayed on a right-of-way,
street or alley without obtaining the consent of the abutting private
property owner, if any, prior to the posting, locating or displaying of the
sign. No sign shall be located, posted or displayed on private property
without the consent of the private property owner.
C. The signs shall have a space allotted thereon upon which the person
holding the sale shall place the name and address of the person running
§ 137-1 ORADELL CODE § 137-6
1:194
§ 137-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 150
HUNTING AND TRAPPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fishing — See Ch. 151.
§ 150-1. Interference with wild fowl prohibited.
No person shall feed, hunt, molest, injure, capture or in anyway interfere
with the freedom of any wild fowl nor permit the same to be done.
§ 150-2. Hunting prohibited. [Added 2-3-1969 by Ord. No. 534]
No person shall at any time hunt for, take, kill or pursue with a gun, bow
and arrow or other weapon or device of any kind or character a wild bird,
animal or fowl within the corporate limits of the Borough of Oradell.
Chapter 151
FISHING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 150.
the sale; and the permit number. No sign shall be posted, located or
displayed without this information.
A. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Office of Code
Enforcement Agency and the Police Department of the Borough of
Oradell. It shall be their duty to investigate any violation of this chapter.
If a violation is found to exist, they shall prosecute a complaint before
the local Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
without a public hearing by the Chief of Police and/or Construction
Official when, in his opinion, it is reasonably necessary to do so for the
public welfare and safety of the community.
C. The penalty for this violation shall be a fine of not less than $15 and not
more than $200.
§ 137-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-1
1:195
§ 151-1. Areas where prohibited.
All fishing activity of any kind shall be prohibited at the following locations:
§ 151-2. Map showing areas.
The areas where fishing is prohibited on Borough property shall also be
delineated and more precisely set forth upon a map made by the Borough
Engineer and kept on file at Borough Hall.
§ 151-3. Signs.
The areas described in § 151-2 and marked on the map on file at the
Borough Hall shall be prominently marked with signs reading "Fishing
Prohibited" pursuant to Chapter 151.
§ 151-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine up to $100 for
each violation or imprisonment for up to 30 days in the discretion of the
Municipal Court and Judge.
Chapter 165
PARKING LOTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
DPW parking spaces — See Ch. 166.
Parking on public and private property — See
Ch. 195, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 165-1. General restrictions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the parking of
any vehicles, commercial or noncommercial, owned by residents or
nonresidents of the Borough of Oradell is hereby limited to a maximum
period of three hours, and no parking shall be permitted in any municipal
parking lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 am.
A. On north and south sides of the Oradell Avenue Bridge which spans the
Hackensack River; and
B. On the east and west sides of the Elm Street Bridge which spans the
Hackensack River.
§ 151-1 ORADELL CODE § 165-2
1:196
§ 165-2. Authorization to designate parking spaces.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to have lines or markings
painted in the municipal parking lots for the purpose of designating the
parking space to be used by each parked vehicle.
§ 165-3. Parking within lines.
Each vehicle parked in a municipal parking lot shall be parked only within
the lines or markings designating parking spaces as provided in § 165-2. It
shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or
marking or to park the vehicle in such position that the same shall not be
entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 165-4. Handicapped parking.
A. In each municipal parking lot serving a building or buildings in the
Borough of Oradell, there shall be a minimum of 1% of the total number
of parking spaces, but not less than two parking spaces, for use by
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards by
the Division of Motor Vehicles, said parking spaces to be located in an
area of the parking lot which is nearest to the building or facility which
the parking lot serves.
B. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign mounted off the ground and displaying the symbol for the
handicapped pursuant to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways and containing appropriate wording,
e.g., "reserved parking."
C. Private property. [Added 5-16-2000 by Ord. No. 1109]
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to establish certain areas that are
private property that are open to the public or in which the public is
invited in which parking in areas designated as handicapped
parking spaces shall be prohibited except by those persons who
have been issued special identification cards by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
(2) This subsection is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46,
which does confer upon the Borough of Oradell the right to
establish handicapped parking spaces in order to preserve and
safeguard the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
(3) Parking spaces on either public or private property which are
designated as handicapped parking spaces shall be for the sole use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards by the
Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces, and said spaces shall be so marked by signs
indicating "HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES." [Amended
2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
§ 165-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-4
1:197
§ 165-5. Parking permits.
The following types of parking permits may be issued for noncommercial
vehicles only:
§ 165-6. Application for parking permit; issuance of permit.
Application for all parking permits shall be made at police headquarters
upon forms supplied by the Police Department. The applicant shall exhibit
the registration for the vehicle for which the permit is to be issued and any
other documentation which may be reasonably requested to establish that
the applicant qualifies for the permit applied for, including but not limited
to evidence of employment in the of a nonresident employee permit. Upon
approval of the application and receipt of the application fee, if any, the
Police Department shall issue a form or permit which shall be affixed to the
motor vehicle of the applicant in such a manner as provided by the rules
and regulations of the Police Department.
§ 165-7. Term of permit. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04-15]
Any parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at midnight
on December 31 of the year in which it is issued, except that permits issued
to residents of the Borough of Oradell pursuant to § 165-5A shall continue in
effect indefinitely as long as the holder thereof is a resident of the Borough
(4) For violation of any provision of this subsection, an individual shall
be liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of $250
plus a maximum of 90 days' community service for all subsequent
offenses. [Amended 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19; 2-24-2004
by Ord. No. 04-04]
A. Resident permit to be issued only to residents of the Borough of
Oradell.
B. Nonresident employee permit: to be issued only to nonresident person
employed or operating a business as proprietor or partner in the
Borough of Oradell, except employees or operators of businesses in
those areas of the Borough zoned for general office buildings where
parking is provided by the owner of the general office building.
C. (Reserved)25
D. Overnight parking permit: to be issued only to residents of the Borough
of Oradell with the specific approval of the Chief of Police.
E. Borough employee permit: to be issued only to resident or nonresident
employees or elected officials of the Borough of Oradell.
25.Editor's Note: Former § 165-5C, Nonresident commuter permit, was repealed 6-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 1126. Said Ord. No. 1126 stated that these provisions are deleted and eliminated,
except as may be required by contractual obligation on the part of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 165-4 ORADELL CODE § 165-7
1:198
of Oradell. Furthermore, overnight permits are renewable on an annual
basis.
§ 165-8. Effect of parking permit.
A parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter constitutes a license to
park the vehicle for which it was issued and to which it is affixed, in parking
spaces in municipal parking lots designed for the parking of vehicles having
such permit, it does not represent a guaranty or assurance of available
space.
§ 165-9. Surrender and replacement of parking permit.
§ 165-10. Regulations for specific municipal parking lots.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of a parking permit to remove
it from the vehicle and, regardless of condition, surrender it to the
Police Department, when the conditions under which the permit was
issued no longer exist. Failure to do so will be a violation of this chapter.
B. Replacements may be issued upon the return of the existing permit,
regardless of its condition. Permits may be used only for the vehicle for
which it is issued. Any substitution will be a violation of this chapter.
C. In the case of nonresident employee permits, in the event that the
holder no longer qualifies for such permit due to termination of
employment or other cause, it shall be the responsibility of the
employer to cause the surrender of such permit as a condition to the
issuance of a replacement.
A. Veldran Avenue Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot lying east of
Kinderkamack Road north of Veldran Avenue and west of the railroad
right-of-way. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period
exceeding three hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
unless such vehicle bears a valid resident permit, nonresident employee
permit or nonresident commuter permit, except that parking in the first
seven parking spaces at the southeast corner of said lot shall be limited
to 15 minutes. It shall be unlawful to use this lot or any part thereof as a
thoroughfare between Kinderkamack Road and Veldran Avenue either
way. Signs specifying "no through traffic" shall be posted at each
entrance. [Amended 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 950; 8-18-1992 by
Ord. No. 967]
B. Schirra Park Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot between Oradell
Avenue and Veldran Avenue, east of Schirra Park. It shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle, with or without a parking permit, for a period
exceeding one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., and
between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle unless it bears a valid overnight parking permit.
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:199
C. World War I Memorial Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot north of
Oradell Avenue east of the railroad right-of-way. It shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle for a period exceeding three hours between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident
permit.
D. Library Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot between Oradell Avenue
and Church Street west of the Oradell Public Library, consisting of: the
upper lot, being the westerly half thereof; and the lower lot, being the
easterly half thereof. [Amended 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 986]
(1) In the upper lot, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period
exceeding three hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00
a.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident employee permit
and except for 10 parking spaces to be designated by the Chief of
Police, in the west side of said lot, to be reserved for parking for
employees of the Oradell Public Schools. [Amended 10-28-2003
by Ord. No. 03-17]
(2) In the lower lot, east side, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., with or without a
parking permit, for a period exceeding one hour, except for up to
six parking spaces to be designated by the Chief of Police, to be
reserved for parking for employees of the Oradell Free Public
Library; in the lower lot, west side, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. for a period
exceeding three hours unless such vehicle bears a valid resident
permit. [Amended 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1044; 8-21-2001 by
Ord. No. 1128]
E. Borough Hall Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot immediately west of
the Borough Hall, consisting of: the upper lot, being the westerly half
thereof; and the lower lot, being the easterly half thereof. [Amended
7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 986]
(1) In the upper lot, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period
exceeding three hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident permit, nonresident
employee permit or Borough employee permit, and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless it bears a valid overnight
parking permit or, in the case of a commercial or noncommercial
vehicle, it has been given temporary permission, for not over 48
hours, by the Chief of Police. [Amended 2-6-1990 by Ord. No.
875]
(2) In the lower lot, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period
exceeding 30 minutes between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
unless such vehicle bears a valid Borough employee permit. It shall
further be unlawful to park any vehicle in said lot between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless it bears a valid Borough
employee permit.
§ 165-10 ORADELL CODE § 165-10
1:200
(3) On the east side of the exit roadway, leading from the upper lot to
Church Street, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period
of time exceeding 30 minutes. [Added 10-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1041]
(4) In the upper lot, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any of
the parking spaces designated for "Police Department Use Only"
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. There shall be up to
eight parking spaces designated for "Police Department Use Only"
in the upper lot. [Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-06]
(5) In the lower lot, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the
parking spaces designated for the Mayor, Administrator, Clerk and
members of the Police Department. It shall be unlawful for anyone
other than the current or acting Mayor, Administrator, Chief
Financial Officer or Clerk, or a member of the Police Department,
to park in any parking space designated for use by such
officeholder. There shall be one parking space each designated for
the Mayor, Administrator, Chief Financial Officer and Clerk, up to
nine parking spaces designated for members of the Police
Department and, in the north end of the upper lot next to the
existing parking area for police only, 7:00 am to 4:00 p.m., 10
parking spaces for employees only, 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Added
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-06]
F. Park Avenue Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot north of Park Avenue
west of Kinderkamack Road. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for
a period exceeding three hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident permit, nonresident
employee permit or nonresident commuter permit, and between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
unless it bears a valid overnight parking permit.
G. Pyle Street Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot bound on the south by
Lake Avenue and on the west by Pyle Street. It shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle for a period exceeding three hours between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident
permit or nonresident employee permit, except that in the most easterly
line of spaces in said lot it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, with or
without a parking permit, for a period exceeding one hour between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. It shall further be unlawful to park any
vehicle in said lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless it
bears a valid overnight parking permit. [Amended 7-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 986]
H. Waite Place Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot lying east of
Kinderkamack Road and north of Waite Place. It shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle for a period exceeding three hours between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless such vehicle bears a valid resident
permit, and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. it shall be
§ 165-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:201
unlawful to park any vehicle unless it bears a valid overnight parking
permit. [Added 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 986]
I. Meyerhoff Place Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot lying east of
Meyerhoff Place between Mackay Avenue and Winne Avenue. It shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle for a period exceeding three hours
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless such vehicle bears
a valid resident permit, or nonresident employee permit, and between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle unless such vehicle bears a valid overnight parking permit.
[Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 958; 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 986]
J. Ridgewood Avenue Municipal Parking Lot East, being the lot on the east
side of Doug Parcells Athletic Complex on Ridgewood Avenue. It shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle unless said parking is for the purpose of
being a participant in or a spectator watching a sports activity.
[Amended 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 986; 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
18-09]
K. Marginal Road Municipal Parking Lot, being the lot at the Department
of Public Works. The parking spaces will, subject to availability, each be
eight feet by 20 feet, or larger, and the license for the use of each shall
be by written agreement and will be as follows: [Added 11-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 1135; amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-017]
(1) One thousand two hundred dollars per year (annual license) with
payment at start of term. The term of the annual license for the use
of each space shall commence on March 1 of each year and shall
expire on February 28 of each ensuing year. There shall be no pro
rata billing for the parking spaces under an annual license; i.e.,
regardless of when the license for any parking space is entered into
between the Borough and a licensee, the full fee of $1,200 must be
paid; or
(2) Four hundred dollars for three months (quarterly license) with
payment at start of term. The terms of the quarterly license for the
use of each space shall commence on the first day of a calendar
month and shall expire on the last day of the last calendar month of
the term. There shall be no pro rata billing for parking spaces
under a quarterly license: i.e., regardless of when the license for
any parking space is entered into between the Borough and a
licensee, the full fee of $400 must be paid.
(3) Renewals shall be made on or before January 1 of every year. Initial
rentals as well as renewal procedure will include: [Amended
7-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10]
(a) Submittal of application/renewal form.
(b) Proof of registration and insurance.
§ 165-10 ORADELL CODE § 165-10
1:202
§ 165-11. Speed limit.
The speed limit for vehicles in, entering or leaving any municipal parking
lot in the Borough of Oradell is 15 miles per hour.
§ 165-12. Fees.
Fees for parking permits shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 165-13. Violations and penalties.
(c) Execute a hold harmless agreement and lease agreement on
Borough-produced document.
(d) Renters will be issued a color-coded annual sticker that is to be
placed according to rental agreement. Keys shall not be
duplicated and spaces shall not be sublet.
L. It shall be unlawful to stop or park any vehicle in two parking spaces to
be designated by the Chief of Police, immediately adjacent to the
Oradell Train Station, which spaces shall be reserved and designated
for the lessee of the Oradell Train Station. [Added 12-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-2426]
M. Ridgewood Avenue Municipal Parking Lot West, being the lot on the
west side of Doug Parcells Athletic Complex on Ridgewood Avenue.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period exceeding three
hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless: [Added
9-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
(a) Said parking is for the purpose of being a participant in or a
spectator watching an event at Doug Parcels Athletic Complex
or visiting the Oradell Swim Club.
(b) Such vehicle bears a valid resident permit, nonresident
employee permit, Borough employee permit, or student
permit.
(2) There shall be no parking in this lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. unless the vehicle bears a valid overnight parking
permit or, in the case of a commercial or noncommercial vehicle, it
has been given temporary permission by the Chief of Police.
A. For a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto
for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 15 days, or both.
26.Editor's Note: This subsection was originally added as a new Subsection E on 12-28-2004
by Ord. No. 04-24. Ordinance No. 05-04, adopted 4-26-2005, officially corrected this
designation to Subsection L.
§ 165-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-13
1:203
Chapter 166
PARKING SPACES, DPW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Municipal parking spaces — See Ch. 165.
Parking on public and private property — See
Ch. 195, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 166-1. Spaces available for use.
The Borough shall make available for public use nine small parking spaces
and five large parking spaces at the Department of Public Works center
located at Marginal Road. The Borough has determined that these parking
spaces are not necessary for Borough use.
§ 166-2. Use by personal and commercial vehicles.
The parking spaces may be used to park personal and commercial vehicles
that fit within the dimensions of the individual space. No other equipment,
materials or supplied can be stored in the space. Access to the spaces will
only be during the regular hours of the DPW facility.
§ 166-3. Application for use of spaces.
To obtain use of one of the spaces, an individual or business entity must do
the following:
§ 166-4. Fee.
The annual license fee for each parking space is set forth in § 115-13. The
annual license fee must be paid by January 1.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application filed pursuant to this chapter and any continued use of a
permit when the conditions under which the permit was issued shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Complete an application as created and maintained by the Borough
Administrator.
B. Execute the license agreement and the hold harmless agreement.
C. Render license payment in full for the entire year, or the prorated
portion of the year.
§ 165-13 ORADELL CODE § 166-5
1:204
§ 166-5. List of individuals and entities.
The Borough shall maintain a list of individuals and business entities that
are desirous of using the parking spaces. Residents of the Borough shall be
given priority when a space becomes available.
Chapter 170
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Criminal history record checks — See Ch.
102.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
§ 166-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:205

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 7-16-1974 by Ord. No. 618; amended in its entirety
7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-5]
§ 170-1. Recreation facility use priorities and procedures.
A. Any group of 10 or more is required to obtain a permit to use any park
or recreation facility in the Borough. Facility use will be determined by
the Director of Recreation based on availability and using the following
order established by the Recreation Committee:
(1) Priority #1. Recreation Committee-approved events and in-season
sport leagues:
(a) Oradell Little League & Girls Softball (spring).
(b) River Dell Lacrosse Association (spring).
(c) River Dell Soccer Association (fall).
(d) River Dell Jr. Football (fall).
(e) River Dell Jr. Cheerleading (fall).
(f) Oradell Basketball.
(g) River Dell Wrestling.
(h) Oradell Recreation Tennis.
(2) Priority #2. Affiliated Oradell Recreation Leagues, out-of-season
sports leagues and groups:
(a) Travel baseball/softball teams.
(b) Oradell Travel Basketball.
(c) River Dell Soccer Association Blackhawks (Spring).
(d) Borough Department athletic teams (i.e., Fire Department,
etc.).
(e) Men's Softball League (spring).
(f) Oradell Public School.
(3) Priority #3. River Dell High/Middle School Teams.
(4) Priority #4. Any group of 10 or more not listed as approved or
affiliated with Oradell Recreation require an approved field use
permit. This includes:
(a) Residents for a one-time event.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:207
§ 170-2. Permit process.
(b) Nonprofit unaffiliated organizations/leagues/schools.
(c) For-profit unaffiliated organizations and companies.
B. Any organization hosting an event (such as a tournament or clinic)
outside their normal field usage (regular scheduled games and
practices) needs to request permission from the Recreation Committee.
Additional insurance may be required.
A. Recreation Committee-approved events and sport leagues' request for
field time must be put in writing to the Recreation Director and are
expected to be submitted as follows at the:
(1) April recreation meeting for Recreation Committee-approved fall
leagues.
(2) November recreation meeting for Recreation Committee-approved
spring leagues.
(3) May recreation meeting for affiliated recreation fall leagues.
(4) November recreation meeting for affiliated recreation spring
leagues.
B. It will be expected that the League Presidents or representative be
present at the Recreation Committee meeting and provide the following
information:
(1) Requested number of hours of field time.
(2) Financial statement.
(3) Head count of participants.
C. The Recreation Director will allocate the field time based on the
number of hours requested and the number of Oradell participants.
After Recreation Committee-sponsored and affiliated leagues' field time
has been allocated, any open field times will be available by permit.
D. Any group of 10 or more requires an approved field use permit with
proof of minimum insurance requirements.
(1) One-time private events hosted by residents.
(a) Requirements: $1,000,000 limit of liability for general liability
coverage and full indemnification and hold harmless.
(b) There is a $25 permit filling fee and must allow five business
days for processing but are not subject to field use fee
schedule.
E. Both nonprofit and for-profit unaffiliated organizations require field use
permit and subject to Field Use Fee Schedule. Request will be reviewed
§ 170-1 ORADELL CODE § 170-2
1:208
§ 170-3. Fee schedule.
monthly by the Recreation Committee at their monthly meeting and
therefore must be received at Oradell Borough Hall before noon of the
third Wednesday of the month.
(1) Nonprofit unaffiliated organizations.
(a) Minimum requirements: $1,000,000 limit of liability for
general liability coverage and full indemnification and hold
harmless.
(b) Accident and health insurance.
(2) For profit.
(a) Minimum requirements: $1,000,000 limit of liability for
general liability coverage and full indemnification and hold
harmless.
(b) Accident and health insurance.
F. Reminder. Any organization hosting an event (such as a tournament or
clinic) outside their normal field usage (regular scheduled games and
practices) needs to request permission from the Recreation Committee.
Additional insurance may be required.
G. Penalty for failure to obtain permit. Any individual who shall use any of
the fields set forth in § 170-3, who shall not have first obtained a permit
for same, shall be subject to a fine equal to the cost of the field for the
time used, as set forth in § 170-3, plus an additional $50. [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
A. Both nonprofit and for-profit unaffiliated organizations are subject to
the field use fee schedule. Upon the recommendation of the Recreation
Committee, the Mayor and Council reserve the right to waive the fee on
a case-by-case basis.
Field Description 2 hours
Half Day
(4 Hours)
Whole Day
(8 Hours)
2 Hours -
Lights
DPAC (North Side) $100 $200 $400 $200
DPAC (South Side) $100 $200 $400 $200
DPAC (Baseball
Field 90')
$200 NA NA $200
DPAC (Softball
Field 60')
$200 NA NA $200
DPAC (whole
Complex)
$200 $400 $800 $400
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:209
§ 170-4. Facility compliance.
The Borough's athletic fields are in great demand and are one of our
most valuable assets. The Borough is investing a significant amount of
time, materials, and money to improve and maintain the town's fields. As a
result, compliance with the Field Guidelines is extremely important. To help
ensure proper access and proper maintenance of the fields, the Recreation
Committee has established a three-violation policy as described below. The
League President is responsible for notifying coaches, parents and players
about the field usage policies at the start of each season.
Field Description 2 hours
Half Day
(4 Hours)
Whole Day
(8 Hours)
2 Hours -
Lights
Muehleck Little
League 60'
$75 $300 $500 NA
Memorial Field
Softball 60'
$60 $200 $400 NA
Caruso Baseball
Field 90'
$60 $200 $400 NA
Park Avenue Field $60 $200 $400 NA
Prospect Avenue $60 $200 $400 NA
Grant Field-East
60'
$40 $100 $200 NA
Grant Field-West
60'
$40 $100 $200 NA
Grant Field-whole $100 $200 $400 NA
Hoffman Field 60' $40 $100 $200 NA
B. The fee is nonrefundable except in the case of extreme inclement
weather or any unforeseen circumstances that cause a Borough Official
to close the facilities.
A. Below is a list of violations of the Oradell Facility Use Policy:
(1) Playing/practicing in inclement weather when fields are closed (see
§ 170-5, Inclement weather).
(2) Violation of any other Borough ordinance.
(3) Any action that may put a child in danger will automatically be
considered the second violation (i.e., lightening present, etc.).
(4) Excessive and/or repeated instances of not cleaning up litter.
(5) Any action, which could cause damage to a field (i.e., brushing or
raking clay onto the outfield grass, improper equipment on the
Doug Parcells Athletic Complex fields, etc.).
§ 170-3 ORADELL CODE § 170-4
1:210
§ 170-5. Inclement weather.
B. The following activities are not permitted by participants, coaches and
spectators at any of the fields:
(1) Tobacco chewing.
(2) Glass containers.
(3) Cigarette or cigar smoking.
(4) Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances.
(5) Gas or open flames.
(6) Golfing.
(7) Bikes, scooters, skateboards, or rollerblades.
(8) Any violation of the Doug Parcells Athletic Complex regulation (see
§ 170-6).
C. Violations to this policy will be addressed as follows:
(1) First violation. A letter from the Director of Recreation will be sent
to the user group's president or coordinator documenting the
violation of the Oradell Field Use Policy. This letter will serve as
official documentation of the violation and will be kept on file at the
Borough Hall. The president or coordinator will speak to the party/
parties involved warning them to not commit this violation again in
the future.
(2) Second violation. A second letter will be sent to the user group's
president or coordinator documenting the violation of the Oradell
Field Use Policy. A fine of $250 will be assessed to the league.
There is a possibility of the league or team losing field time. This
will be determined by the Recreation Committee and/or Recreation
Director.
(3) Third violation. Another letter will be sent and kept on file. There
will be a fine of $500 assessed to the league. The coach or manager
may be removed, if warranted, as determined by the Recreation
Director/Recreation Committee.
A. In the event of inclement weather, fields may be closed. The Recreation
Department, DPW. Oradell Police Department and Oradell OEM reserve
the right to close a field if deemed necessary. Compliance from the
teams/coaches is expected. Field closures will be determined by the
Director of Recreation, Recreation Committee representatives and/or
league officials.
B. Groups cannot play on fields that have been closed. If play or practice
takes place, the town may bill the user group for damage to the fields
and/or revoke field privileges. Violations will result in a violation
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:211
§ 170-6. Doug Parcells Athletic Complex (DPAC).
The following activities are prohibited on the synthetic field:
against the organization. Once a game has started, game suspension
will be determined by umpire or referee.
C. Thunder and lightning.
(1) The following guidelines are to be followed without exception
whenever there is thunder and/lightning activity before or during a
game or practice:
(a) At the first sound of thunder and/or the activation of the
detection system, the game/practice is to be suspended for 30
minutes.
(b) The thirty-minute wait period is reset after each sound of
thunder or each time lightning is seen. Do not wait until you
see lightning; you must suspend the game even if there is only
thunder. Obviously, any lightning activity will be treated
similarly.
(c) When the game/practice is suspended, you must immediately
clear the field and remove all players to the safety of cars or
shelter. Standing under trees does not meet this requirement,
(d) After the all clear signal and strobe light has deactivated (30
minutes after the last instance of lightning or thunder), the
coaches and officials determine if it is safe to play (meaning
that there is no thunder and lightning in the area). You may
decide to abandon the game/practice or suspend it for another
thirty-minute period.
(2) These procedures are adopted from the Bergen County Umpires
Association.
DO NOT ALLOW ANYONE TO PRESSURE YOU INTO
DISREGARDING THESE GUIDELINES. THE DESIRE TO PLAY
THE GAME SO THAT IT IS AN OFFICIAL GAME IS NOT A VALID
REASON FOR JEOPARDIZING THE SAFETY OF THE
PARTICIPANTS.
A. Wearing of metal spikes.
B. Littering.
C. Food consumption of any kind.
D. Gum or tobacco chewing.
E. Glass containers.
F. Cigarette or cigar smoking.
§ 170-5 ORADELL CODE § 170-6
1:212
§ 170-7. Mandatory contribution to DPAC fund.
§ 170-8. Concession stands.
G. Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances.
H. Gas or open flames.
I. Golfing.
J. Bikes, scooters, skateboards, or roller blades.
K. Remote-controlled planes, cars or any other models powered by any
electrical or mechanical device.
L. Vehicles (except when authorized).
M. Sleds or goals with metal, steel, or aluminum runners.
N. Animals.
O. Unauthorized use of marking paints, lime or any other liquid or powder
to mark the field surface.
P. Unauthorized snow removal from the artificial surface if the field is
snow covered or closed.
Q. Lawn chairs or erection of tents or stands.
A. All Oradell Recreation-sponsored and affiliated leagues must make a
mandatory contribution to the DPAC fund.
B. The fee paid will be based on the hourly usage of the facility. For every
100 hours of use, the payment will be $1,000. Partial blocks of time will
be paid on a fractional basis: 25 hours, $250, etc. Each field is
considered separate usage. For example, if both DPAC North and South
Fields are used for three hours together, it is considered six hours of
usage.
C. Fifty percent of the fee owed for the season will be paid prior to first
practice; balance is due at the end of the season, based on total hours
used.
D. These fees will be used to defray the replacement and maintenance
costs of the turf.
A. There are concession stands located in the two field houses in Oradell,
at Memorial Field and DPAC. Recreation programs can use the
concession stands for fund-raising purposes. It also provides an
important service to the spectators at the fields.
B. It is important that the rules and regulations of the Board of Health be
observed in the serving of food. In addition, at least one person from
each organization using the concession stands must take the food
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:213
§ 170-9. Guidelines for athletic programs.
These guidelines have been established to help ensure that the athletic
programs of Oradell promote sportsmanship, are designed for the benefit
of the children and that all leagues follow a consistent set of procedures
covering the following important areas:
§ 170-10. Organizations subject to Borough guidelines for
recreation programs and facility usage.
handler's course offered by the Bergen County Board of Health.
Information about the course is available from the Oradell Board of
Health.
C. Keys to each concession stand will be distributed by the Recreation
Director at the beginning of the season to the respective organization
and must be returned at the end of the season. In the case of DPAC, it is
possible for two organizations to use the concession stand during the
same season, football/soccer in the fall and baseball/softball/lacrosse in
the spring. There are two refrigerators and ample storage space to be
shared. At the end of the season, the facility must be left in clean
condition, including the refrigerators.
A. Coaching requirements.
B. Conduct of coaches, parents and guardians.
C. Financial condition of each league.
D. League responsibilities.
A. This document establishes the guidelines to be followed by Oradell's
Athletic Program, including certain programs operating in cooperation
with River Edge.
B. Fall season. Start date is on or about the second Monday of August.
C. Winter season. Start date is on or about the Monday after Thanksgiving.
D. Spring season. Start date is on or about the first Friday of March.
E. Exceptions to these start dates must be presented to the Recreation
Committee for review by the League President.
(1) Oradell Junior Basketball.
(a) Travel teams.
(b) Recreation teams.
(2) Oradell Little League.
(a) Travel teams.
§ 170-8 ORADELL CODE § 170-10
1:214
§ 170-11. Coaching requirements.
(b) Recreation teams.
(3) River Dell Cheerleading.
(4) River Dell Junior Football.
(5) River Dell Junior Wrestling.
(6) River Dell Soccer Association.
(a) Travel teams (i.e., Blackhawks).
(b) Recreation teams.
(7) River Dell Lacrosse Association.
(8) Men's Softball.
(9) Oradell Tennis Association.
F. Note: any future leagues that become recognized/sanctioned by the
Oradell Recreation Committee must follow these guidelines.
A. Compliance.
(1) Background check/fingerprint and certification procedures. Each
league president is responsible for ensuring, by signing a
verification letter (Exhibit VI)27 that each coach assigned to any
team in his/her league has met both the certification and
background check/fingerprint requirements. Further details of
background check/fingerprint procedures are include in § 170-14,
League responsibilities.
(2) Procedures.
(a) Background checks.
[1] The background checks must be administered pursuant to
provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A: 3A-1 et seq. Effective
immediately, background checks previously administered
only under the Borough Chapter 102, Criminal History
Record Checks, are no longer accepted.
[2] All volunteer coaches must submit to and successfully
complete a background check/fingerprint check currently
conducted by a third party, the Morpho Trak Inc. Coaches
are responsible for the cost of fingerprinting.28
27.Editor's Note: Exhibit VI is on file in the Borough offices.
28.Note: This procedure for background checks replaces Borough of Oradell Ord. Nos. 04-06
and No. 05-12 and §§ 102-2 and 102-3.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11
1:215
(b) Certifications. In addition, a coach must provide a certificate
from the following programs to the Recreation Director in
order to be eligible to coach:
[1] Rutgers S.A.F.E.T.Y. clinic. This course will be offered in
house or can be taken at other facilities such as
neighboring towns and hospitals. Coaches must complete
this course and submit the documentation to the
Recreation Director for the town's records. Oradell
Recreation may cover the cost of the course when taken in
house.
[2] Heads Up! Concussion in Youth Sports. The CDC (Centers
for Disease Control) prepared a free online training
program that produces a certificate upon successful
completion of the course. All coaches must complete this
course and submit the documentation to the Recreation
Director for the town's records.
http://www.cdc.gov/concussion/HeadsUp/youth.html
(c) Code of conduct.
[1] The Borough of Oradell strongly supports the ideals
promoted by the National Youth Sports Safety Foundation
that the essential elements of character building and
ethics in sports are embodied by the concept of
sportsmanship and six core principles:
[a] Trustworthiness.
[b] Respect.
[c] Responsibility.
[d] Fairness.
[e] Caring.
[f] Good citizenship.
[2] To reinforce the importance of these principles, each
coach must sign a Coach's Code of Conduct, which is
attached as Exhibit II.29 Each coach must sign a new code
of conduct each year and for each program in which the
individual is a coach.
(3) If a league assigns a coach who has not met the criteria described
above, the League President and/or the coach may be suspended
and the league may be subject to fines up to $1,000. If an individual
does not successfully complete the background check and
29.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-11 ORADELL CODE § 170-11
1:216
continues to coach, the league will be fined, the League President
may be suspended and the individual may be subject to fines.
Should a League's President be suspended, removed for any reason
or resign the position, the League's by-laws should establish a
process for replacing the President.
B. Coach's Code of Conduct (see Exhibit II).30
(1) Each league president is responsible to ensure that each coach
signs the Coach's Code of Conduct. If a Code of Conduct is not
signed, a coach is not permitted to participate. The League
President is also strongly encouraged to promote the ideals
embodied by the Code of Conduct by reminding coaches about the
Code in all communications, league meetings and orientation
programs. All Code of Conduct violations must be reported to
Recreation Director within two days.
(2) If a league official or a coach becomes aware of a situation where
the behavior of another coach is inconsistent with the Code, he/she
should notify the umpire/coach and remind him/her of the Coach's
Code of Conduct and politely ask the coach to refrain from the
inappropriate behavior. If the inappropriate behavior continues,
the coach or league official is permitted to cancel the remainder of
the game.
(3) If a coach displays behavior inconsistent with the Code of Conduct,
and whether or not the game is cancelled, the league official or
other coach must report the incident, preferably in writing, to the
League President. The League President must notify the
Chairperson of Recreation Committee and the Borough's
Recreation Director in writing within three days after an incident
has been reported. The Chairperson of the Recreation Committee
shall notify the Chairperson of the River Edge Recreation
Committee (if applicable) in order to ensure that patterns of
inappropriate behavior are detected and addressed.
(4) The Chairperson of the Recreation Committee or his/her designee
shall contact the League President to discuss the incident, set up a
meeting with the parties involved, if necessary, and review the
proposed disciplinary action recommended by the League
President. A sample of the disciplinary actions available to the
League and Recreation Committees are outlined in the Code of
Conduct and may include requiring a written apology from the
coach, suspension of the coach for one or more games, or a
permanent expulsion from all coaching privileges from any sport.
In addition, the Chairperson of the Recreation Committee shall
send a letter to the offending party confirming the incident,
describing the penalty and require that the coach re-sign the
Coach's Code of Conduct.
30.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11
1:217
§ 170-12. Parent/guardian code of conduct.
C. Future changes to procedures. The Recreation Committee reserves the
right to modify from time to time these certification and background
check/fingerprint procedures and the Coach's Code of Conduct in order
to meet legal or insurance requirement changes or to comply with new
procedures established by the Borough's Mayor and Council.
A. Overview. (See Exhibit III.31) The Borough of Oradell strongly supports
the ideals promoted by the National Youth Sports Safety Foundation
that the essential elements of character building and ethics in sports
are embodied by the concept of sportsmanship and six core principles:
(1) Trustworthiness.
(2) Respect.
(3) Responsibility.
(4) Fairness.
(5) Caring.
(6) Good citizenship.
B. Procedures. As a way to reinforce the importance of sportsmanship and
the six-core principle described above, each parent or guardian must
sign a Code of Conduct, attached as Exhibit III.32 The Code of Conduct
must be signed each time a parent or guardian registers a child to
participate in an athletic program.
C. Compliance.
(1) Each league president is responsible to ensure that the parent or
guardian of each participant signs this Code of Conduct. If a Code
of Conduct is not signed, the child is not permitted to participate.
The League President is also strongly encouraged to promote these
ideals by reminding parents/guardians about the Code in all
communications between the league and the parent or guardian. In
addition, league officials and coaches are expected to promote
these ideas to the participants.
(2) If a league official or a coach becomes aware of a situation where
the behavior of a parent/guardian or spectator is inconsistent with
the Code, he/she should calmly approach the spectator or parent/
guardian and remind him/her of the Code of Conduct and politely
ask the person to refrain from the inappropriate behavior. If the
inappropriate behavior continues, the coach or league official is
permitted to cancel the remainder of the game.
31.Editor's Note: Exhibit III is on file in the Borough offices.
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit III is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-11 ORADELL CODE § 170-12
1:218
§ 170-13. Financial information.
(3) If a spectator, parent/guardian displays behavior inconsistent with
the Code of Conduct, and whether or not the game is cancelled, the
league official or other coach must report the incident, preferably
in writing, to the League President. The League President must
notify the Chairperson of Recreation Committee and the Borough's
Recreation Director in writing within three days after an incident
has been reported.
(4) The Chairperson of the Recreation Committee shall contact the
League President to discuss the incident, set up a meeting with the
parties involved, if necessary, and review the proposed disciplinary
action recommended by the League President. A sample of the
disciplinary actions available to the League and Recreation
Committees are outlined in the Code of Conduct and may include
requiring a written apology, suspension of the parent/guardian or
child for one or more games, or a permanent expulsion from
attending any further games. In addition, the Chairperson of the
Recreation Committee shall send a letter to the offending party
confirming the incident, describing the penalty and require that the
parent re-sign the Parent/Guardian Code of Conduct.
A. Financial information. Each league must prepare and submit to the
Recreation Committee the financial information in accordance with the
format included in Exhibit IV(A) and Exhibit IV(B).33 Sports programs
must file tax returns if required by law and provide copies to the
Recreation Committee within 30 days of annual filing.
B. Compliance. Each league president is responsible for preparing the
budget and year-end financial summary as described above and
reviewing it with the Recreation Committee on a timely basis. Failure to
comply with the above policy may result in limited or loss of access to
fields or facilities.
C. Procedures.
(1) To assist the Recreation Committee in fulfilling its responsibilities,
the Committee requires each organization covered by these
guidelines to prepare and submit to the Recreation Committee a
budget 30 days prior to the start of any league activity each season
and a summary of financial results within 60 days after the end of
each season.
(2) In order to facilitate the Committee's review of such information,
each league president or designee shall present to the Recreation
Committee its budget and year-end financial summary, signed by
the League President and League Treasurer in a format
33.Editor's Note: Exhibit IV is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-13
1:219
§ 170-14. League responsibilities.
substantially similar to the example format attached as Exhibit
IV(B).
A. Overview.
(1) The day-to-day activities of each sports program are governed by
its officers led by the president of each league.
(2) In order to meet its responsibilities to the Mayor and Council, the
Recreation Committee has prepared this set of guidelines to
communicate the following administrative and organizational
activities, which must be followed by each league. In addition to the
items noted in previous sections, each league is responsible for the
following:
(a) By-laws. Each league shall create and maintain by-laws
defining its name, organizational structure and other relevant
information. Each league's by-laws shall be submitted to the
Recreation Committee at the beginning of its season. See
Exhibit VI(A)34 for a sample outline of by-laws.
(b) Registration. Each league must collect the following at time of
registration:
[1] Application and fee.
[2] Parent/Guardian Code of Conduct.
[3] Medical release form.
[4] Coach's Code of Conduct.
B. Communication with Recreation Committee.
(1) The President or designated representative from each league must
meet with the Recreation Committee before the start of the season
to discuss upcoming season, issues, needs, etc. Each President
shall provide the committee with information about the league,
including but not limited to the following:
(a) Organization structure.
(b) Field needs.
(c) Number of teams participating.
(d) Schedule for the season (in format required by Recreation
Director).
(e) Financial information described in Exhibits IV(A) and (B).35
34.Editor's Note: Exhibit VI is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-13 ORADELL CODE § 170-14
1:220
(f) Any changes in by-laws.
(2) Coaches' compliance with background checks and certification.
(3) Each league president must ensure that each coach in the league
has:
(a) Successfully completed a background check/fingerprint as
described in Exhibit I.36
(b) Completed the necessary coaching certification programs as
described in Exhibit I.
(c) Signed a Coach's Code of Conduct, Exhibit II.37
(4) Each league president must verify the requirements outlined in
these guidelines by submitting Exhibit VI38 two weeks prior to the
start of the season.
35.Editor's Note: Said exhibits are on file in the Borough offices.
36.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is on file in the Borough offices.
37.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is on file in the Borough offices.
38.Editor's Note: Exhibit III is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-14
1:221

ARTICLE II
Recreation Committee
[Adopted 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-03; amended in its entirety
12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
§ 170-15. Creation and purpose.
There hereby is created a Recreation Department in the Borough of Oradell.
The Recreation Department shall have as its purpose to, maintain, promote
and facilitate the use of Borough-owned parks and recreational facilities
and to provide passive and active recreational programs, including, but not
limited to, athletics and related physical programs, special needs programs
and programs for seniors and families.
§ 170-16. Recreation Director.
A. Creation of position. There hereby is created the position of the
Recreation Director.
B. Appointment; term. The Recreation Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, and the term of office
of the Director shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. Any
vacancy in this office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and
Council.
C. Compensation. The Recreation Director shall receive a salary
established by the Mayor and Council in the Non-Union Salary
Ordinance.
D. Duties. The Recreation Director shall supervise and administer all
recreation and park activities and facilities. The Director shall be
supervised by the Borough Administrator and shall collaborate with the
Recreation Committee. The duties of the Director shall include:
(1) Prepare and submit an annual department budget, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council.
(2) Operate and promote the Borough's recreational and park
programs.
(3) Promote a safe environment for recreation and park programs and
facilities.
(4) Manage and inspect all recreational facilities.
(5) Manage, inspect and maintain/order all recreational equipment
and services.
(6) Inform residents of all recreational programs.
(7) Recommend and screen all potential department staff members
and coaches for approval by the Recreation and Parks Committee,
§ 170-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:223
§ 170-17. Recreation Committee.
to ensure the promotion of a fair, safe and unbiased playing and
coaching environment.
(8) Supervise all recreation and parks employees.
(9) Liaise with all program directors, league directors, coaches and
other volunteers.
(10)With the advice of the Recreation Committee, establish rules and
regulations applicable in programming and use of parks and
recreational facilities, provided that such rules and regulations are
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
(11) Cause all programs and volunteers to be in compliance with
background checks or credential programs, as may be in effect by
Borough ordinance from time to time.
(12) At each regular meeting of the Recreation Committee, report to the
Committee the status of recreation programming and park facilities
and such other matters as the Committee may request.
(13) Ensure compliance with the Recreation and Parks Code of Conduct
by effectively communicating and by enforcing the code as
appropriate.
(14) The Recreation Director shall maintain communication with other
municipal bodies, such as the library and the schools, to minimize
duplication of efforts and to foster joint programs.
A. Creation. There hereby is created a Recreation Committee in the
Borough of Oradell,
B. Composition; terms of office. The Recreation Committee shall consist of
seven members, all of whom shall be required to be residents of the
Borough of Oradell. One member shall be selected from the
membership of one of the sports leagues and shall be considered the
Sports Representative. Appointments to the Committee shall be made
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The terms of
office of the initial Committee shall be for one year, to expire on
December 31. In the event a vacancy occurs on the Committee, the
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment. A member's position on the Committee may be
deemed vacated by the Mayor and Council if such member fails to
attend three consecutive regular monthly meetings of the Committee.
The Mayor and Council shall also designate a Councilperson as the
liaison to the Recreation Committee.
C. Organization.
(1) The Recreation Committee shall annually elect a Chairman, and
such other offices as the Committee may deem necessary, by
§ 170-16 ORADELL CODE § 170-17
1:224
§ 170-18. Studies, recommendations and reports.
January 31. The term of office shall be one calendar year. The
Chairman shall prepare the agenda for all Committee meetings.
(2) The Recreation Committee shall adopt bylaws for its administration
and establish rules and regulations for its activities; provided,
however; that such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be subject
to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Recreation Committee shall meet no less than six times per
year and as needed when called by the Committee Chair.
(4) The Recreation Committee may establish subcommittees, as
necessary, to assist the Committee in meeting its needs.
D. Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Recreation Committee shall
include:
(1) The Recreation Committee shall liaise with the Recreation Director
regarding programs, the development of new initiatives, and the
management of existing programs.
(2) The Recreation Director shall advise the Recreation Committee of
the annual budget for the Recreation Department after the
approval by the governing body.
(3) The Recreation Director shall maintain communications with
recreational quasi-municipal organizations in order to coordinate
the use of facilities, and establish consistent policies and
cooperation among various groups.
(4) The Recreation Committee shall develop guidelines for the
recreational use of playgrounds and recreational facilities in the
Borough, consistent with rules governing the use thereof as may be
adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
(5) The Recreation Director/Committee shall encourage and plan
special entertainment activities for all the citizens of the Borough
throughout the year.
A. The Recreation Director may make recommendations to the Borough
Administrator as to the establishment of any new staff positions it
deems necessary for the successful operation of the Borough's
recreation programs. The responsibility for the hiring of such
employees shall be vested with the Borough Administrator, with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. Any such employee shall be
under the immediate supervision of the Recreation Director, who, in,
turn, shall be under the Borough Administrator.
B. As assigned by the CFO, the Recreation Director shall prepare and
submit to the Borough Administrator a proposed budget for the
Borough's recreation program. Prior thereto, the Recreation Director
§ 170-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18
1:225
shall obtain and review budget requests from each of the various
recreational program organizations, which shall be used in the budget
preparation notice.
C. The Recreation Committee and Director shall also study matters as may
be referred to it by the Mayor and Council, and shall report its findings
and conclusions thereon in writing to the Mayor and Borough Council
as soon as reasonably possible.
§ 170-18 ORADELL CODE § 170-18
1:226
Chapter 175
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 62.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 107.
Firearms — See Ch. 118.
Fireworks — See Ch. 125.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 170.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180.
§ 175-1. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Oradell:
(1) Be intoxicated or drunk or disorderly in any public omnibus, street,
highway or thoroughfare or on any sidewalk or in any private house
or home or in any boardinghouse, store, restaurant or other
private, public or quasi-public place or house to the annoyance of
any person.
(2) Loiter on any sidewalk, street, road, avenue or other public place or
in or about any public building, schoolhouse, store or any place of
amusement, nor utter any loud or make offensive remarks to any
person or persons in any of the places mentioned in this subsection
above, or while passing along or being upon any such sidewalk,
street, road, avenue or other public or private place, nor obstruct
or interfere with any person or persons lawfully being upon any of
the same.
(3) Permit, make or continue or cause to be permitted, amended or
continued any unnecessary noise which shall disturb the comfort,
rest and repose of any person or persons being in his, her or their
place of abode or at any public or private meeting or at church
services; without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no person
shall, within the limits of the Borough of Oradell, operate any
construction, demolition, lawn maintenance or similar machinery
or equipment the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise,
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and one-half hour after
sundown, Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and one-half hour after sundown, on Saturdays, Sundays or
New Jersey State legal holidays, except in the case of a bona fide
emergency, the burden of establishing the existence of such
emergency being that of such person. [Amended 6-3-1991 by
Ord. No. 980]
(4) Ring any bell or blow any horn or make any public outcry at or for
any public sale or auction or to advertise any goods, wares or
§ 170-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-1
1:227
merchandise for sale or to attract any attention or to gain
passengers for any cab, taxicab, hack or omnibus.
(5) Keep or harbor any dog which shall disturb the neighborhood by
excessive barking, whining or howling.
(6) Throw or discard any refuse of any kind whatsoever into the waters
of any spring, pond, stream, lake, river or any other body of water
or upon any public street or public place or discharge any sewage
or waste into said waters or places or any of them or pollute the
said waters in any manner.
(7) Throw any paper or posters, stones, sticks, glass, metal or any
hard, dangerous or offensive substance upon any sidewalk, street,
highway or public or private place or at any car, vehicle, house,
building, fence or person.
(8) Appear on or in any street, road, avenue, park, vehicle or other
public place in a state of nudity or make any indecent exposure of
his or her person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or
behave in a lewd or indecent manner.
(9) Sell or offer to sell any indecent picture, book or thing or exhibit or
perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or other
representation.
(10)Keep or maintain a disorderly house or a house of ill fame or allow
or permit any house, shop, store or other building or structure
owned or occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house
or house of ill fame.
(11) Solicit, invite or in any manner suggest by word of mouth or any
writing or other communication or by any device whatsoever any
lewd, lascivious or other immoral act.
(12) Permit any house, shop, store or other building or structure to be
frequented or resorted to by noisy, riotous or disorderly persons or
by prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants.
(13) Maliciously or intentionally destroy, damage or injure any property,
public or private.
(14) Enter upon or trespass upon the land or property of any other
person without lawful permission so to do.
(15) Cause or permit to be emitted any dense smoke which contains
soot or other substances in sufficient quantities to permit the
deposit of such soot or other substances on any surface within the
limits of the borough.
(16) Cause or permit to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating odor or any odor that may be vile, offensive, obnoxious
or nauseating to any of the residents of the borough.
§ 175-1 ORADELL CODE § 175-1
1:228
(17) Remove, change, alter, obstruct, destroy, tap, shut off or interfere
in any way whatsoever with any water or sewer line or any utility or
any mechanical device connected thereto on any property, either
public or private.
(18) Possess, keep or maintain any faro table, roulette wheel,
equipment or supplies for lottery and a numbers game or other
games of chance or any pinball machine designed for gambling or
other gambling device whatever.
(19) Carry, without lawful authority, any firearm or other dangerous
instrument or explosive concealed in or about his or her clothes or
person or in any vehicle.
(20) Possess, keep, sell or distribute any fireworks of any explosive
nature commonly used at a fireworks display.
(21) Have upon his or her person or in his or her possession any
picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or other implement with any intent to
break and enter into any building.
(22) Go about from door to door or place himself or herself on any
sidewalk, street or store or other public or private place or places
to beg or gather alms.
(23) Participate in any practice, sport or exercise having a tendency to
annoy, disturb or frighten any person or persons on any sidewalk,
street, road, park or other public or private place or having a
tendency to annoy or frighten horses or other animals.
(24) Enter any building or any public or private lands and break, injure
or deface such building or any part thereof or the fences or other
property belonging to or connected with such building or lands or
disturb the exercises of any public school or molest or give
annoyance to children attending such school or annoy any teachers
therein.
(25) Hinder, annoy or obstruct any borough officer or employee in the
performance of his duties or willfully refuse or neglect to assist any
borough officer or employee, when lawfully called upon by him so
to do, in the execution of any process or in the suppression of any
breach of the peace or disorderly conduct or in case of escape or
when such officer or employee is resisted in the discharge of his
duty; or resist or oppose any officer or person authorized by law in
serving or attempting to serve any writ, bill, order or process or
when making any arrest.
(26) Unnecessarily obstruct any sidewalk, street or public place, but the
provisions of this section shall not prevent persons who are
building from occupying such portion of the sidewalk, street or
public place designated in a permit therefor first obtained from the
Building Inspector.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-1
1:229
(27) Hinder, prevent or deter by any device whatever any fireman or
other person from rendering lawful assistance in abating or
quelling a fire or hinder or interfere with any fireman going to or
returning from any fire or place from which a fire alarm proceeds
or hinder, obstruct or destroy any fire engine, hook and ladder
truck, hose car or other fire apparatus.
(28) Drink any alcoholic beverage while upon property owned by the
Borough of Oradell without the consent of the Borough Council.
[Added 7-20-1970 by Ord. No. 557]
(a) The term "alcoholic beverage" shall be construed to mean and
include any liquor intended for human consumption containing
more than 1/2 of 1% per volume of alcohol.
(b) Alcoholic beverages may be consumed upon property owned
by the Borough of Oradell upon application having been made
to and written consent being given by the Borough Council.
[Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
(29) Trespass on private property and surreptitiously or sneakingly
invade the privacy of another by peering into the windows or other
openings of dwelling places located thereon for no lawful purpose.
[Added 9-16-1980 by Ord. No. 703]
(30) Be unable to give a good account of himself when apprehended. In
any prosecution, the fact that the person apprehended cannot give
a good account of himself or is engaged in an illegal occupation is
prima facie evidence that he is present in this borough for an illegal
purpose. [Added 9-16-1980 by Ord. No. 703]
(31) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons
under the legal age. [Added 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 975;
amended 4-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1124]
(a) Regulations.
[1] No person shall offer or serve any alcoholic beverage to a
person under legal age in any public or quasi-public place
within the Borough of Oradell. No person who has
ownership or control of any premises, whether public or
quasi-public, or supervision of any event, shall permit,
suffer or allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage
by a person under legal age in or upon any such premises
or at any such event with the Borough of Oradell.
[2] It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to
consume alcohol, to, without legal authority, knowingly
possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on
private property.
§ 175-1 ORADELL CODE § 175-1
1:230
[3] The prohibition contained in Subsection A(31)(a)[2] shall
not prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and
with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who
has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
[4] As used in this subsection, "guardian" means a person who
has qualified as a guardian of the underaged person
pursuant to testamentary or court appointment. "Relative"
means the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
[5] Nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit
possession of alcoholic beverages by any such underaged
person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, or while
actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled
in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a
county vocational school or post secondary educational
institution; however, nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(b) Violations and penalties.
[1] Any violation of Subsection A(31)(a) shall be punished by a
fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent
offense.
[2] In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court
may suspend or postpone for six months the driving
privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any
person, any suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement imposed by the court
pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the
period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is
imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-1
1:231
§ 175-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
[3] If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a
valid driver's license issued by this state, the court shall
immediately collect the license and forward it to the
Division along with the report. If for any reason the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report
the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and
sex of the person as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
[4] The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that
if the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle
during the period of license suspension or postponement,
the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:3-20. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice or failure to
acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall
not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
[5] If the person convicted under this subsection is not a New
Jersey resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as
appropriate, the nonresident driving privilege of the
person based on the age of the person and submit to the
Division the required report. The court shall not collect the
license of a nonresident convicted under this subsection.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction
of the suspension or postponement.
(32) Engage in any contracting services of any nature, or hire any
individual or entity to engage in any contracting services of any
nature, where such services are to be performed on Sunday. This
restriction shall not apply to work being performed by a
homeowner on his/her own residence, nor to work performed to
effectuate emergency repairs. [Added 9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
1113]
B. All other riotous, indecent or disorderly conduct, breach of the peace
and vagrancy not hereinabove specifically mentioned are hereby
prohibited.39
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding placement of garbage receptacles, added
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 724, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 880. For current provisions, see Ch. 190, Property Maintenance.
§ 175-1 ORADELL CODE § 175-2
1:232
PERSON — Wherever appropriate in connection with the context, includes
corporation, partnership, association and individual and shall include the
plural. The masculine pronoun shall include the feminine.
§ 175-3. Fines to be paid to treasury.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be
paid into the treasury of the borough.
§ 175-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-18-1997 by Ord. No.
1061]
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
or who shall commit or do any act or thing prohibited in this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before the Municipal Magistrate, be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or shall forfeit and pay a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or both. In default of any fine imposed herein, any
person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may,
in the discretion of the Magistrate aforesaid, be imprisoned in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 180
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 100. Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-4
1:233

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to deter the use of peddling and soliciting to
gain access to residences and other places, including business premises,
for criminal purposes, to discourage unethical and dishonest business
practices, to regulate peddlers and solicitors as set forth in this chapter and
to maintain quiet and privacy for the residents of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLING — The practice of going from house to house, or from place
to place, including but not limited to residential or business premises and
public buildings, traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, carrying or transporting merchandise for the purpose of selling
and delivering the merchandise to customers, or engaging in any of the
foregoing activities from a stationary location on any street or any public
place.
SOLICITING — The practice of going from house to house, or from place
to place, including but not limited to residential or business premises and
public buildings, traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, distributing commercial literature or soliciting or attempting
to take orders for the sale of books, periodicals or merchandise of any kind
for future delivery or for the present or future performance of services
of any kind, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale
a sample of the merchandise or services, and whether or not collecting
advance payments on such sales or orders, or engaging in any of the
foregoing activities from a stationary location on any street or any public
place.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:235

ARTICLE II
Peddling and Soliciting
§ 180-3. Permit required.
No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting in the Borough of Oradell
without first obtaining a written peddling or soliciting permit from the
Police Department. The applicant shall submit to the Police Department a
completed peddling or soliciting permit application form. Such forms shall
be kept at the Police Department and shall be made available upon request
from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 180-4. Permit application.
A. The peddling or soliciting permit application form shall call for the
following information:
(1) The applicant's full name and date of birth.
(2) The applicant's permanent home address and current address, if
different.
(3) A physical description of the applicant, including height, weight,
color of hair and sex.
(4) The name and address of the employer or firm represented.
(5) The place of residence of the applicant for the preceding three
years.
(6) The social security number, sales tax identification number, driver's
license number and business certificate, if any, of the applicant.
(7) The description of any vehicle to be used and its license plate
number.
(8) The date on which the applicant desires to commence peddling or
soliciting.
(9) The nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the
nature of the services to be furnished.
(10) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any ordinance concerning
peddling or soliciting, and, if so, when, where and the nature of the
offense.
(11) The names of other communities in New Jersey in which the
applicant has engaged in peddling or soliciting in the preceding
two years.
(12)Waiver authorizing criminal history record information from New
Jersey State Police.
§ 180-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:237
§ 180-5. Investigation.
The officer in charge of the Police Department shall cause such
investigation to be made of the applicant's business and moral character
as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. He shall use
any information available in other New Jersey cities, towns or boroughs
where the applicant has engaged in peddling or soliciting within two years
last past, and he may use criminal history record information from the New
Jersey State Police. The investigation shall include the photographing of the
applicant.
§ 180-6. Issuance or denial of permit.
If the officer in charge is satisfied as to the good moral character and
business responsibility of the applicant, he shall issue a peddling or
soliciting permit to the applicant as provided in this chapter. If the officer in
charge denies the application for such permit, he shall set forth in writing
his reasons therefor, which statement of reasons shall be submitted to the
applicant.
§ 180-7. Appeals.
If dissatisfied with the decision of the officer in charge to deny the
application for a peddling or soliciting permit, the applicant may appeal
that decision to the Borough Council by requesting a hearing, in writing, to
be filed with the Borough Clerk. Said hearing shall be scheduled within 14
days of receipt by the Borough Clerk of such request, if a regular meeting
of the Borough Council is scheduled to be held within said fourteen-day
period; if a regular meeting is not so scheduled within said period, the
hearing must be held no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Borough Council. After the hearing, the Borough Council shall, by
majority vote, either affirm or overrule the decision of the officer in charge.
If the decision is affirmed, no permit shall issue, and the fee paid therefor
shall be refunded. If the decision is overruled, the officer in charge shall
immediately cause such permit to be issued.
B. The peddling or soliciting permit application shall be accompanied by a
letter or other written statement from the individual, firm or
corporation represented by the applicant, certifying that the applicant
is authorized to act as such representative.
C. The peddling or soliciting permit application shall be accompanied by
the peddling or soliciting permit fee provided for in this chapter, as well
as a deposit of $10, to be refunded upon surrender of the permit.
D. No such application shall be filed more than three months prior to the
time such peddling or soliciting shall commence.
§ 180-4 ORADELL CODE § 180-8
1:238
§ 180-8. Information to be included on permit; nontransferability;
display of permit.
The peddling or soliciting permit shall show the name, address, photograph
and thumbprint of the permittee, the kind of goods to be offered or sold or
the services to be performed thereunder, the date of issuance thereof and
the expiration date thereof, which shall be December 31 of the year in which
issued. The permit is not transferable and must be surrendered when no
longer used by the permittee or on the expiration date, whichever is earlier.
The permit shall be worn by the permittee on the lapel or on the chest of the
outermost garment while peddling or soliciting in the Borough of Oradell.
§ 180-9. Time of peddling or soliciting; other terms.
Any person, whether a holder of a peddling or soliciting permit issued
pursuant to this chapter or one who is or exempt therefrom pursuant to
§ 180-10, shall engage in peddling or soliciting in the Borough of Oradell
only after 10:00 a.m. and before the hour of darkness or 6:00 p.m.,
whichever occurs first, and only on Monday through Saturday, and such
permittee shall not enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident in
the Borough of Oradell where such resident has posted a notice prohibiting
such entry, unless specifically having been invited to a dwelling by the
occupant thereof or having previously made an appointment with the
occupant, nor shall such permittee refuse to leave any private dwelling or
property after having been once requested to do so.
§ 180-10. Exemptions.
A peddling or soliciting permit shall not be required of the following
persons:
A. Any veteran of the United States Armed Forces, or any exempt fireman,
possessing a license issued in conformity with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.;
provided, however, that such person exhibits such license to and
obtains an identification badge from the Police Department, which shall
be provided without charge.
B. Any public utility employee, where said public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employee shall display the identification
badge or card issued by the employer.
C. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered the same or were
entitled to receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
D. Wholesale sales people calling on businesses.
E. Any person less than 18 years old; provided, however, that no person
less than 18 years old shall engage in peddling or soliciting in the
Borough of Oradell unless under the supervision of a person at least 18
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-10
1:239
years of age who is in possession of a valid peddling or soliciting permit
issued pursuant to this chapter, is physically present in the Borough
at all times while such peddling or soliciting is being conducted and
who accepts responsibility that such person less than 18 years old will
conduct such peddling or soliciting in accordance with § 180-9 and all
other applicable laws and regulations.
F. Any person carrying a valid canvassing permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 180-10 ORADELL CODE § 180-10
1:240
ARTICLE III
No-Knock Lists
§ 180-11. No-knock list.
A. Establishment of no-knock list. All residents of the Borough may
register their name, address and/or unit/apartment number with the
Municipal Clerk to be placed on the no-knock list, indicating that they
do not want canvassers, distributors, solicitors, peddlers, transient
merchants or hawkers of any sort to approach their homes and/or seek
personal contact with the occupants of the registered residence. The
Municipal Clerk shall provide the registration form, which shall be
available during normal business hours. By registering for the no-knock
list, the resident acknowledges that the Borough police, fire and other
emergency services groups are exempt from the requirements of this
section.
B. Updating and provision of list. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain a noknock
list, a copy of which shall be provided to all persons or
organizations required to obtain a license or register pursuant to this
chapter. Registrants shall remain on the no-knock list for a period of
five years from the date of registration or until such time as they advise
the Municipal Clerk, in writing, that they wish to be removed from the
list. The Municipal Clerk shall ensure that the list is updated
periodically.
C. Registration and display of decal. Upon completion of registration on
the no-knock list, the subscriber may purchase and receive, at no
charge, a decal stating "DO NOT KNOCK; Registered on the No-Knock
List with the Borough of Oradell Municipal Clerk; VIOLATORS WILL BE
PROSECUTED," which may be displayed in a clearly visible location
(e.g., front door or window adjacent to the front door).
D. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any canvasser, distributor, solicitor,
peddler, transient merchant or hawker to approach and/or seek
personal contact with the occupants of any residence if that residence
is registered on the no-knock list. Anyone violating this subsection
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to fines and penalties in
accordance with the Code of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 180-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-11
1:241

ARTICLE IV
Posting of Handbills
[Added 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-10]
§ 180-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed matter, including leaflets,
pamphlets, notices, cards, circulars, handbills, etc., which advertises or
promotes in any way the goods or services of any commercial establishment
and which is delivered or distributed free of charge to the recipient.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed matter, including leaflets,
pamphlets, notices, cards, circulars, handbills, etc., which advertises or
promotes in any way something other than the goods or services of any
commercial establishment and which is delivered or distributed free of
charge to the recipient.
§ 180-13. Permit required.
No person shall distribute any commercial handbill within the Borough
without having first obtained a permit to do so from the Police Department.
The application for a permit shall include the name and address of both
the person engaging in distribution and the person on whose account such
distribution will be made, a copy of the handbill to be distributed, the date
of distribution and an agreement to comply with the police regulations
specified in § 180-18.
§ 180-14. Fee.
The fees for permits under this chapter shall be as set forth in the Borough
Fee Schedule, adopted by resolution of the Borough Council, on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 180-15. Badges.
Each licensee shall be issued and shall wear a badge pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
§ 180-16. Regulations for distribution.
A. Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. No
licensee shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Borough including but not limited to bus shelters, train stations, and
utility poles; nor shall any licensee hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the
borough for any licensee to hand out or distribute, without charge to
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-16
1:243
§ 180-17. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of:
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing
to accept it.
B. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. No
licensee shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle. A licensee, however, may hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial
handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
C. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or
vacant premises. No licensee shall throw or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
D. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. No licensee
shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbills upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon
not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any
similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of the
premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy
disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon the premises.
E. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited
private premises. No licensee shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in
or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the licensee, unless
requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may place or
deposit any such handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if
the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from
being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
A. Commercial handbills that have been previously requested or ordered
by the owner or occupant of the premises or to the distribution of
commercial handbills by mail.
B. Mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined herein, except
that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property.
§ 180-16 ORADELL CODE § 180-18
1:244
§ 180-18. Violations and penalties.
For a violation of any provision of this article, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction thereof, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment
for up to 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
or any combination thereof.
§ 180-19. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Oradell which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 180-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this article.
§ 180-21. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon adoption and publication according to law.
§ 180-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-21
1:245
Chapter 190
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 95.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 121.
Public and private property — See Ch. 195.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 224.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275.
Yard and autumn leaf waste— See Ch. 290.
Sanitation — See Ch. 310.
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Oradell" and may be referred to in this chapter as the "Property
Maintenance Code" or as "this code."
§ 190-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to:
A. Provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Avoid, prevent and eliminate hazards to the public health or safety.
C. Avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or
continue, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties.
D. Preserve property value in the Borough.
E. Prevent the physical deterioration or progressive downgrading of the
quality of housing facilities in the Borough.
F. Maintain the value and economic well-being of the commercial
properties and businesses that serve and help to support the Borough
and its citizens.
G. Prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which
constitute nuisances and are thereby potentially dangerous or
hazardous to the life, health and safety of persons on or near the
premises on which such conditions exist.
H. Establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition
of the land, buildings, structures and premises in the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 180-21 ORADELL CODE § 190-2
1:246
§ 190-3. Definitions.
For the specific purposes of this code, the following terms, whenever used
herein or referred to in this code, shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them hereunder, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
BLIGHTING INFLUENCE — Any unsightly or unkempt condition or
appearance of a premises that adversely affects the property value or
aesthetic quality of the surrounding neighborhood.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure which
are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto; and the open land
space of any premises under the control of the owner or operator of such
premises.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See also "refuse"
and "rubbish.")
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person residing or living on the premises or having
actual possession, use or occupancy of a dwelling premises or rooming unit,
or any person or entity in possession, use or occupancy.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity, not the owner, who has charge,
care or control of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof, with or without
the knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof; or who
shall have charge, care or control of any lot, premises, building, structure
or part thereof, as owner or as a fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian,
lessee or mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
I. Fix responsibilities and duties upon owners, lessees, operators and
occupants of property.
Any public nuisance as defined by statute, ordinance or administrative
regulation.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children. This includes but is not limited to abandoned wells,
shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators,
motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris, garbage, refuse, rubbish or vegetation, such as
poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac, which may prove hazardous for
inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions potentially dangerous to human life or detrimental
to the health of persons on or near the premises, including sidewalks,
where the conditions exist.
C.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:247
obtained. Any person, group of persons or entity who is a lessee, sublessee
or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building with land shall be
deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have responsibility over the portion of the premises so sublet, leased
or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples thereof,
including the building(s) or structure(s) thereon.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes) including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes. (See also "garbage" and "rubbish.")
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials. (See also "garbage" and "refuse.")
§ 190-4. Compliance; application of other laws.
A. Compliance with regulations required. Every residential and
nonresidential building, structure, lot and the premises or part of the
premises on which it is situated in the Borough of Oradell shall comply
with the provisions of this code, whether or not any such building or
structure shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or
after the enactment of this code and irrespective of any permits or
licenses which may have been issued for the use or occupancy of such
building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior
to the effective date of this code. Vacant lots, lands and premises,
including Borough-owned property, are also required to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Conflict with other laws or ordinances. In any case where the provisions
of this code impose a higher or stricter standard than that set forth in
any other ordinance or regulation of the Borough of Oradell or under
the laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey or its agencies, then
the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of
this code impose a lower or lesser standard than any other regulation or
ordinance of the Borough of Oradell or of the laws and regulations of
the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail.
C. Compliance with other ordinances. Compliance with this code shall not
constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the
Borough of Oradell applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall
any one act of compliance constitute a defense against any subsequent
or other violation of this code.
D. Owners, operators and occupants to comply independently. Owners,
operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this code, and no such person or entity
§ 190-3 ORADELL CODE § 190-4
1:248
§ 190-5. Duties of owners, operators and occupants.
In furtherance of the purposes of this code, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, operator or occupant of the premises to comply
with any or all the requirements and standards of this code, to keep the
premises free of conditions which constitute violations hereof and to
promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions.
§ 190-6. Maintenance standards.
shall be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility
hereunder nor be entitled to assert as a defense against any charge
made against him or them for a violation of this code the fact that
another owner, operator or occupant or any other third person or entity
is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
E. Application of Building Code. Any alterations to buildings, structures or
appurtenances thereto or changes of use therein which may be caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be done in
accordance with all applicable sections of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
F. Application of Zoning Ordinance.40 Nothing contained in this code or
any requirement of compliance herewith shall be deemed to alter,
impair or affect the application of the Zoning Ordinance or zoning laws
of the municipality.
G. Existing remedies. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or
impair any existing statutory or common law remedies of the
municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
A. All premises must be maintained free of all nuisances. It shall also be
the duty of the owner, operator or occupant to keep the premises free of
refuse, natural growth, overhangings, ground surface hazards or
unsanitary conditions.
B. Landscaping. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-22]
(1) Premises with landscaping and lawns, grasslike weeds, or similar
growth, which shall be allowed to grow in excess of five inches in
height, shall be considered substandard, unsightly, and a potential
harbor for vermin and insects. Premises having untrimmed,
overgrown or unsightly hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed
and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly, so as to
constitute a blighting influence, depreciating adjoining property. In
the event that the property owner, occupant or operator shall fail to
bring the premises into compliance with this subsection within 10
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Zoning.
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:249
days of receipt of written notice from the Enforcement Officer, or
if the Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency condition
exists, the Borough of Oradell is authorized to go upon said
property and abate said violation and charge the owner of the
property with the costs thereof, and assess the property owner for
the same pursuant to the provisions of § 190-12.
(2) When a subsequent violation occurs within a season of the same
offense from the same property owner, occupant or operator, then
they shall be deemed to still have been given notice for the first
violation, which shall extend to all violations of the same nature and
consecutive summons may be issued.
C. Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other
public areas equipment and materials relating to commercial or
industrial use unless permitted under the Zoning Ordinance41 for the
premises.
D. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of broken glass or
windows, rotted, missing or substantially destroyed window frames and
sashes, door frames, exterior doors or other major exterior components
of buildings or structures.
E. All vacant structures, whether residential or nonresidential, shall be
properly maintained and thoroughly secured so as to prevent
unauthorized access and vandalism. When doors and windows are
boarded over for this purpose, the construction and placement of the
boards shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner so as not to
constitute a blighting influence on adjoining and neighboring
properties and the community at large.
F. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor vehicle except on streets,
driveways and parking areas constructed and installed in compliance
with applicable Borough ordinances, except as permitted under
§ 240-6.9 of this Code.
G. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises
shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a safety
hazard or blighting influence. In the event that such awnings or
marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event that said awnings or marquees are
made of cloth, plastic or similar materials, the cloth or plastic, where
exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall
not show evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other
holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Development.
§ 190-6 ORADELL CODE § 190-6
1:250
H. All brush, hedges, and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways shall be
cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet. In the event that the
enforcement officer determines that it is necessary and expedient for
the preservation of the public health, safety or welfare, he shall issue a
notice to the property owner, occupant or operator to bring such
property into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the
event that the property owner, occupant or operator shall fail to comply
within 10 days, the enforcement officer may take such action as may be
reasonably required to bring such property into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and the Borough shall be entitled to assert a
lien upon the property for the costs of the same. [Amended
11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 947; 9-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1097]
I. Waste materials shall be stored in receptacles in order to prevent them
from being transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural
forces, such as precipitation, surface water, evaporation or wind. Waste
receptacles shall be provided for the exclusive use of each building
located in the Borough and shall be of sufficient size and number to
contain the waste accumulated in such building during a period of 72
hours. The receptacles shall be made of metal or plastic and
constructed so as to hold their contents without leakage. They shall be
provided with tight-fitting lids and shall be covered at all times except
when being filled and emptied. All materials which might create a
safety and health hazard shall be stored indoors and/or be enclosed in
appropriate containers to eliminate such hazard. No flammable or
explosive substance shall be stored on a premises except under
conditions approved by the Fire Department. Except for one- and twofamily
dwellings, waste receptacles shall be enclosed with an approved
safety fence or other screening method as shall be reasonably required
to prevent their being visible from surrounding properties or by the
public in general.
J. No garbage, refuse, rubbish, containers or receptacles for the aforesaid
or any articles or materials for removal by a waste collector shall be
placed or permitted to remain forward of the building line of any
premises or at the curb in the Borough for collection, except between
5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the collection day and 7:00 p.m. of the
collection day.
K. Maintenance of the street between the property line and curb. Every
owner, occupant or person having charge or control of property on any
street in the Borough shall maintain and be responsible for the proper
upkeep of that part of the street or public right-of-way located between
the property line and the curb or street which abuts the property,
including corner areas adjacent to corner lots, whether within the
property or not. Maintenance shall include landscape ground cover,
construction of and/or repair of hazardous sidewalk, removal of debris
and litter. The aforementioned area shall not be paved by the owner,
occupant or person having charge or control unless specifically
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:251
§ 190-7. Enforcement officials. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
06-22; 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-25]
The Construction Official of the Borough is hereby designated as the officer
charged with the enforcement of this code and is hereafter referred to
as the "enforcement officer." All members of the Police Department, the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, and authorized
inspectors of the Building Department and the Board of Health of the
Borough are hereby designated as assistant enforcement officers for the
purposes of the enforcement of this code. The members of the Fire
Department shall also be assistant enforcement officers to the extent of
their expertise in the area of fire prevention.
§ 190-8. Enforcement procedures.
authorized by the enforcement official in writing. [Added 7-26-2005
by Ord. No. 05-17]
A. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is or has been
a violation of any provision of this code, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person or persons or entities responsible therefor under
this code. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance.
B. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if a
copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail, to the last known
address of the person or entity upon which the same is served, as shown
by the most recent tax lists of the municipality or if a copy thereof is left
at the usual place of abode or business of said person or entity. Notice
shall be given as aforesaid within or without the municipality.
C. The notice shall also state that unless either a written request for a
hearing before the Mayor and Council is filed with the enforcement
officer or the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted
from within 10 days of the date of service of such notice, exclusive of
the date of service, a summons shall be issued for such violation. The
enforcement officer may, at the time he issues the notice, extend the
period for compliance if, in his judgment, the abatement, removal,
prevention, mention or cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably
be effected within the 10 days.
D. If no such hearing is requested and the violation is not abated,
removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully
remedied within the period of compliance set forth in the notice, a
summons shall then be issued against the person, persons, entity or
entities so notified. If a hearing is requested and the Mayor and Council
finds that no violation exists, the enforcement officer shall withdraw the
notice. If the Mayor and Council finds that a violation does exist, the
notice shall remain in effect and the violator shall proceed with the
abatement of the same within the time prescribed in the notice, subject
to issuance of a summons in the event of lack of compliance.
§ 190-6 ORADELL CODE § 190-8
1:252
§ 190-9. Emergency conditions.
§ 190-10. Hearings.
If a hearing is requested pursuant to § 190-8 or 190-9 above, the same
shall be commenced not later than 20 days after the filing of the request,
provided that for good cause the Mayor and Council may postpone such
hearing for a reasonable time by majority vote. The proceedings before the
Mayor and Council, including the findings and decision of the Mayor and
Council, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter
of public record in the office of the enforcement officer.
E. (Reserved)
F. The Borough shall, in its sole discretion, dispose of or remove and store
personal property necessary to abate any violations of this chapter.
[Added 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11]
G. In the event that the Borough removes and stores personal property,
instead of disposing of same, in order to abate any violations of this
chapter, the Borough will notify the real property owner that personal
property is being stored. Such notice shall be served in accordance with
§ 190-8 of this chapter. The real property owner shall be granted a
period of 45 days to collect the stored personal property. If any such
personal property is not collected within 45 days, the real property
owner shall lose any and all rights to the personal property and the
Borough may, at its sole discretion, dispose of the stored personal
property in any manner deemed appropriate. The real property owner
shall be responsible for any and all fees and costs associated with the
storage and/or disposal of such personal property. [Added 7-22-2008
by Ord. No. 08-11]
A. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency condition in
violation of the code exists, which condition requires immediate
attention in order to protect health or safety, he may issue an order by
service of notice as set forth in § 190-8, entitled "Enforcement
procedures," reciting the existence of such an emergency condition and
requiring that such remedial action be taken by the violator as soon as
is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this code, such order shall be effective immediately
and any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply
therewith.
B. Upon request, in writing, to the enforcement officer within two days of
receipt of said notice (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays), any such person shall be afforded a hearing before the Mayor
and Council of the Borough. After a hearing and decision by the Mayor
and Council as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency
conditions, the Mayor and Council may continue such order in effect or
modify it or withdraw it, subject to issuance of a summons for violation
thereof, if such order is continued.
§ 190-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-11
1:253
§ 190-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty by the municipal court of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for each offense.
§ 190-12. Failure of landowner or tenant to comply. [Added
8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 07-13; amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No.
07-22]
In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for failure to comply and
adhere to any provision of this chapter, the Borough of Oradell is hereby
authorized to take such remedial action as may be appropriate to bring any
premises into conformity with the provisions of this chapter and to assess
the costs incurred in connection with such remedial action against the
owner and/or tenant of such premises. In such event, the costs so incurred
shall be certified to the Borough Council by the officer in charge of the
remedial action. The Borough Council shall examine such certificate and,
if the charges are found to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged
against the premises, and the amount so charged shall thereupon become a
lien or tax upon such real estate and shall be added to and be a part of the
taxes next to be levied and assessed thereon. Such charge shall be enforced
and collected with interest by the Collector of Taxes of the Borough of
Oradell in the same manner as other taxes are collected.
Chapter 195
PROPERTY, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 165.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 190-11 ORADELL CODE § 190-12
1:254
ARTICLE I
Parking
[Adopted 3-1-1971 by Ord. No. 571]
§ 195-1. Unlawful where notice posted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle
on lands of another, whether publicly or privately owned, in the Borough of
Oradell after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by the owner,
occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking. Nothing herein
contained shall apply to any lands lying within the bounds of any public
street or highway.
§ 195-2. Signs to be posted.
Suitable signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches bearing the words
"No parking, Borough Ordinance No. 571 strictly enforced," together with
any qualifications or restrictions of such parking, if any, and conspicuously
displayed shall be posted on said lands by the owner, occupant, lessee or
licensee thereof where this article is effective.
§ 195-3. Defacing, tampering with or damaging of signs.
Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs when posted shall
constitute a violation of this article.
§ 195-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
05-02]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days,
or both.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:255
Chapter 198
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Yard and autumn leaf waste — See Ch. 290. Sanitation — See Ch. 310.
§ 198-1. Program established, supervision, promulgation of
additional rules and regulations. [Amended 2-15-1994 by Ord. No.
995; 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1018]
There is hereby established a program for the collection and separation of
the items set forth in this section for recycling purposes, such collection
and supervision shall be under the direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works, who is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and
regulations for the separation and collection of the following items:
§ 198-2. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM — Recyclable aluminum cans.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Concrete, brick, tree
parts, nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, corrugated cardboard. [Added
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
FERROUS SCRAP — Pieces of metal or containers made exclusively or
primarily of steel, tin-plated steel and composite steel.[Added 4-28-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03]
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone
which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or bottling
of various matter and all other materials commonly known as "glass";
excluding, however, blue and flat glass, commonly known as "window
glass."
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All computer paper, high-grade white
paper, including letterhead, typing paper, copier paper, onionskin and
notepad.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
A. Newspaper.
B. Aluminum.
C. Glass.
D. Leaves.
E. Household batteries.
§ 195-4 ORADELL CODE § 198-2
1:256
HOUSEHOLD BATTERIES — Household batteries include primary batteries
which are not rechargeable such as carbon, zinc batteries, alkaline
batteries, mercuric oxide batteries, silver oxide batteries, lithium batteries
and zinc air batteries; secondary batteries which are rechargeable and
are most commonly the nickel cadmium battery and small sealed leadacid
batteries not exceeding 25 pounds and generally found in cordless
power tools, portable computers, cordless phones, camcorders and other
such items. Car batteries are not considered as household batteries.[Added
12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1018]
LEAVES — Any of the flat, thin expanded organs, usually green and
growing, from the stems of trees, but turning brown and falling. Fallen
leaves are only a problem during the months of September through
December and then coped with as hereinafter set forth.
MIXED PAPER — Magazines, glossy inserts, computer paper, junk mail,
colored paper and office paper.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY OWNER — The owner, occupant or operator
of any commercial, industrial or institutional premises, including but not
limited to business establishments, restaurants, warehouses, factories,
office buildings, governmental premises and schools.[Added 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-03]
PLASTICS — All plastic containers coded as 1 and 2-HDPE, except plastic
containers containing pesticide, motor oil and antifreeze which will not be
accepted as recyclable materials.[Added 2-15-1994 by Ord. No. 995;
amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
RECYCLABLES — Those items required to be recycled under this
chapter.[Added 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1018]
REGULATIONS — Includes such rules, implementation dates, schedules of
times and such other requirements promulgated by the Superintendent of
Public Works and approved by the Borough Council as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally collected by
regular, twice-weekly contract collection.
TIN — Tin cans used for the storage of food and beverages such as soups,
vegetables, juices and sodas.[Added 2-15-1994 by Ord. No. 995]
TREE PARTS — Unfinished wood from land-clearing projects, storm damage
or pruning activities.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
USED NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to
as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded, however, are all
magazines or similar periodicals, as well as all other paper periodicals of
any nature whatsoever.
WHITE GOODS — All large appliances such as washers, dryers,
refrigerators.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:257
YARD WASTE — Includes leaves, grass clippings and brush and included
with "solid waste."42
§ 198-3. Responsibilities of property owners. [Amended 10-4-1988
by Ord. No. 834; 2-15-1994 by Ord. No. 995; 12-20-1994 by Ord. No.
1018]
All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of residential property or
commercial and institutional establishments in the Borough shall separate
all recyclables from any other trash and garbage produced by any such
residences and shall separately bundle or deposit the recyclables for
pickup, collection and recycling, in accordance with all applicable
regulations.
§ 198-4. Separation of recyclables; placement for collection.
All separated recyclables shall be placed for pickup, collection and recycling
in strict conformity with the following regulations:
A. Used newspapers, mixed papers, high-grade office paper and
corrugated cardboard shall be separated and secured in bundles not to
exceed 12 inches in height. Such bundles shall not be contained in
plastic bags and shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. [Amended
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
B. Aluminum shall be separated and secured in suitable reusable
containers supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant.
C. Glass shall be separated by color and placed in suitable, reusable
containers supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant. Containers
constructed of paper or cardboard materials shall be deemed not
suitable for this purpose.
D. Leaves, from September 1 through December 31, shall either be made
available for collection by the Department of Public Works during its
scheduled rounds of the streets of the municipality or properly bagged
and left for collection, presumably by the scavenger. No more than five
bags may be disposed of in this manner at any one time.
E. Tin shall be separated and secured in suitable reusable containers
supplied by the owner, lessee, or occupant. [Added 2-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 995]
F. Type 1 and Type 2 plastics shall be separated and secured in suitable
reusable containers supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant. [Added
2-15-1994 by Ord. No. 995; amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
09-03]
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which immediately followed, regarding the meaning
of the terms "newspaper" and "used newspaper" in this chapter, was repealed 4-28-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03.
§ 198-2 ORADELL CODE § 198-4
1:258
§ 198-5. Amendments to pickup and collection regulations; copy to
be on file.
Any regulations promulgated by the Superintendent of Public Works shall
be approved by the Borough Council and may be changed, modified,
repealed or amended in whole or in part by majority vote of the Borough
Council. A copy of such regulations as approved, modified, or amended shall
be available for public inspection at the office of the Borough Clerk during
regular office hours.
§ 198-6. Recyclables to become Borough property following
placement for collection.
From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection and recycling,
recyclables shall be the property of the Borough of Oradell or its duly
authorized agent. No person unauthorized by the Borough of Oradell shall
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclables.
Each collection or pickup of recyclables in violation hereof from any one or
more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 198-7. Donation or sale of recyclables; curbside correction
restricted.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who is an
owner, lessee or occupant may donate or sell recyclables to any person,
partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit.
Said person, partnership or corporation may not, however, under any
circumstances pick up said recyclables from curbside in the Borough,
whether or not said recyclables are placed at curbside on or immediately
preceding regular curbside collection.
G. The Borough shall designate sites for the collection of household
batteries. The Borough shall provide containers for the collection of
household batteries at designated collection sites. [Added 12-20-1994
by Ord. No. 1018]
H. Ferrous scrap, construction and demolition debris (concrete, brick, tree
parts, nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, corrugated cardboard; where
practical). Property owners, lessees and occupants must ensure that
any contractors engaged by them separate and recycle such materials.
[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
I. White goods shall be separated and recycled. Residential property
owners, lessees and occupants may contact the Department of Public
Works to schedule collection of white goods. Nonresidential property
owners, lessees and occupants are responsible for the separation and
recycling of white goods. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 198-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-8
1:259
§ 198-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Superintendent of Public Works and Department of Police hereby are
authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200, except,
however, in an initial conviction, the fine shall not exceed $10.
Chapter 200
RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 200-1. Hours of operation.
§ 200-2. Prohibited acts.
A. Every retail business within the Borough of Oradell shall be closed to
the public and business with the public therein shall be and is hereby
prohibited after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of 6:00 a.m.
of any day.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bars, taverns and
holders of plenary retail distribution licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in original containers for consumption off the licensed
premises, delicatessens, pharmacies, retail establishments selling only
perishable foodstuffs, restaurants, the sale of fresh cut or live plants,
nail salons, hair salons, pet grooming, veterinary care and primary
medical care. [Amended 11-5-1984 by Ord. No. 709A; 6-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 898; 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No.
18-06]
C. Gasoline service stations may remain open for business during the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Sundays, Independence Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day. [Added
11-5-1984 by Ord. No. 709A]
A. It shall be unlawful to permit the public to remain within any premises
used as a retail business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful to conduct any retail business with the public, with
the exceptions set forth herein, on Sundays, Independence Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
§ 198-8 ORADELL CODE § 200-3
1:260
§ 200-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 207
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 137.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation who, through any
means, buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, coins, precious metals or
jewelry and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 207-2. Registration; license; fee. [Amended 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
12-09]
Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Oradell shall first register with the Chief of Police, who shall investigate the
applicant. Upon approval, the applicant shall then obtain a license from the
Borough Clerk by paying a fee of $50.
§ 207-3. Records to be kept.
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale,
including the amount paid, indicating the name, residence, occupation,
age and description of the person from whom the items were purchased,
received or sold. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 207-4. Description of items to be provided.
Each dealer doing business in the Borough of Oradell shall deliver to the
Chief of Police the description of all items purchased, received or sold,
within 72 hours of the completion of the transaction, on forms prescribed
by the Chief of Police.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:261
§ 207-5. Prohibited acts.
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within five days from the date notification is made to
the Chief of Police, and all such items shall remain on the premises where
the purchase was made for at least five days.
§ 207-6. Identification required.
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom he is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
hereinabove defined.
§ 207-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined above, who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, within
the discretion of the municipal judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed in each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 210
SECURITY ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 100. Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 207-5 ORADELL CODE § 207-7
1:262
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 956]
This chapter is adopted to provide for the public interest and public safety
of the residences and businesses in the Borough of Oradell by encouraging
the hookup of all applicable emergency alarm systems to the computerized
alarm console in its Police Headquarters so that they may respond and
operate in the most efficient and beneficial manner possible; to impose
standards and regulations for the hookup of alarm systems to this console
and for all other alarm systems that cannot be hooked up to this console;
and to encourage the proper use of such alarm systems so as to limit
unnecessary Police and Fire Department responses to false alarms.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response or both and located within the confines of the Police
Department.
ALARM DEVICE — Refer to definition of "alarm systems."
ALARM INSTALLER — Any business operated by a person or persons for a
profit which engages in the installation of any alarm device or alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device or an assembly of equipment
and devices designed to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police or Fire Department may
be expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall include the terms
"alarm devices," "direct alarms," "digital alarms," "central service alarms"
and "local alarms."
CENTRAL SERVICE ALARMS — Any type of alarm system which, when
activated, transmits a signal to an independent communication center not
under the control of the Borough of Oradell or the Police Department, which
independent communication center, upon receipt of such signal, is to take
appropriate action including the relaying of such information to the Police
Department telephone communication center.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Oradell.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Construction Official of the Borough of
Oradell.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system which, when activated, transmits
a preprogrammed electronic telephone message over the regular telephone
lines to the telephone communications center in Police Headquarters.
DIGITAL ALARMS — Any type of alarm system which, when activated,
transmits a signal directly into the alarm console in Police Headquarters
over regular telephone lines.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:263
DIRECT ALARMS — Any type of alarm system which, when activated,
transmits a signal directly into the alarm console at Police Headquarters via
special leased telephone lines.
FALSE ALARMS — Any signal of an alarm system actuated by inadvertence,
negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person other than an
intruder and including as well signals caused by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment, but not including signals created by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm console.
LOCAL ALARMS — Any type of alarm system which, when activated,
produces a signal not connected to the alarm console or the Police
Headquarters switchboard, such as any actuating bell, siren or horn device
providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril. The term
"local alarm" shall not include a warning system on a motor vehicle,
provided such system is not interconnected with an alarm device, a direct
alarm or a digital alarm. The term "local alarm" shall also not include any
alarm equipment designed to signal solely within the building (or series of
buildings, if owned by the same person) on which it is located and which
is not designated to emit signals visible or audible to persons outside such
building (or series of buildings).
MAYOR and COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of Oradell.
POLICE HEADQUARTERS — The headquarters of the Police Department,
at present located in the Borough Hall of the Borough of Oradell at 355
Kinderkamack Road in said Borough.
§ 210-2 ORADELL CODE § 210-2
1:264
ARTICLE II
Regulations
§ 210-3. Alarm console.
§ 210-4. Local alarms.
Each local alarm shall be of a type approved by the Chief of Police or
his designated representative. Each local alarm shall be equipped with
a fifteen-minute automatic shutoff. In the event of malfunction of the
equipment and no person can be located to secure the device, then the
owner shall be liable to pay a fine of $25. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, in
the event the Police or Fire Department have to respond to a false alarm,
the provisions of Article III hereof shall also apply.
§ 210-5. Access to premises. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 956]
The owner of any alarm system registered pursuant to this chapter may
leave with the Police Department the names of residents of the Borough of
Oradell who have keys to the premises or, in lieu thereof, a sealed key to
provide entry to the premises may be left with the Chief of Police, providing
A. Any connection to the alarm console shall be of a type approved by the
Chief of Police or his designated representative.
B. All direct alarms and digital alarms existing as of the effective date of
this chapter, which comply with § 210-3A hereof may continue to be
connected to the alarm console with no installation or programming
fee.
C. After the effective date of this chapter, an alarm system installed at a
residential subscriber, single or multifamily, may have its signal
transmitted to the alarm console as a digital alarm only. A one-time
programming fee shall be paid to the Police Department as provided in
Chapter 115 for the programming of the alarm console to receive such
signals. No further direct alarms installed in residences, single or
multifamily, shall be connected to the alarm console.
D. After the effective date of this chapter, an alarm system installed at a
commercial subscriber may have its signal transmitted to the alarm
console as provided in § 210-3A as a digital alarm or as a direct alarm.
In the case of a direct alarm there shall be a one-time installation
charge payable to the Police Department as provided in Chapter 115 in
addition to any telephone installation charges. For a digital alarm a onetime
programming fee shall be paid to the Police Department as
provided in Chapter 115 for the programming of the alarm console to
receive such signals.
E. No installation, programming or registration fees shall be charged to
any Borough agency or department for use in the respective public
buildings.
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:265
that in so doing the owner does thereby release the Borough of Oradell, its
various departments, agencies, employees and officials from any claims for
damages or loss in connection with such entry.
§ 210-6. Dial alarms.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, any new dial alarms shall be
prohibited. Within 90 days from said effective date, all existing dial alarms
programmed to send a message through the telephone communication
center of the Police Department shall be disconnected or reprogrammed
to discontinue the sending of such messages to the Police Department
telephone communication center. Failure to do so may result in a fine
of $250. Any dial alarm may, at the subscriber's option, be programmed
to send such messages to an independent central station or licensed
answering service.
§ 210-7. Registration required. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No.
956]
§ 210-8. Standards and inspection.
A. No person shall operate any central service alarm, digital alarm, direct
alarm or local alarm installed in the Borough of Oradell after the
effective date of this chapter without first causing the same to be
registered with the Police Department.
B. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter for each central
service alarm, digital alarm, direct alarm or local alarm in the Borough
of Oradell which was installed on or before the effective date of this
chapter shall be registered with the Police Department.
C. All such registrations shall be valid for the calendar year in which
issued and shall be renewed annually on a calendar-year basis, before
February 1 of such year. Fees payable to the Police Department upon
registration and for renewal thereof shall be as set forth in Chapter
115, Fees.
D. Failure to obtain or renew a registration within the prescribed period
shall subject the alarm system owner to a fine of $50.
A. This chapter shall serve as a guideline for the installation of all alarm
systems and copies of same shall be available to the general public
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
exclusive of holidays.
B. The Chief of Police or his designated representative may inspect and
test any newly installed alarm system within seven days of the initial
installation. This provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on
the Borough to make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from
inspecting, testing and maintaining his own alarm system.
§ 210-5 ORADELL CODE § 210-8
1:266
§ 210-9. Alarm installers.
§ 210-10. Response to alarms. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No.
956]
In responding to any alarm signal indicating a panic alarm or medical
emergency, if so authorized by the alarm system owner in the application
for registration, the Police Department may enter the premises, by force if
necessary, to respond to such signal, and the alarm owner in granting such
authorization shall do so on the express condition that by registering said
alarm system and authorizing such entry, said owner does thereby waive
C. Any alarm system designed to detect fire shall be installed in
accordance with the fire prevention laws of the Borough of Oradell or
higher authority, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
D. Each alarm system shall be equipped with a fifteen-minute automatic
shutoff.
E. Any unauthorized installation may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter.
F. The Chief of Police or his designated representative may order the
immediate, temporary, disconnection of any alarm system from the
alarm console if said alarm system is malfunctioning and causing a
disturbance in Police Headquarters or interfering with the efficiency of
the monitoring procedure. In the event of such disconnection, an effort
shall be made promptly to notify the alarm system subscriber of same.
A. Any alarm installer proposing to do work in the Borough of Oradell
must apply to the Construction Official of the Borough of Oradell for a
permit for each and every alarm system installation so proposed.
B. No permit shall issue unless the alarm installer submits to the
Construction Official proof of bonding by a bonding company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
C. Failure of the alarm installer to obtain such a permit prior to installation
will result in a fine of $200 for each occurrence.
D. Any resident or commercial establishment intending to install an alarm
system without the services of an independent alarm installer shall first
obtain a permit therefor from the Construction Official.
E. Fees for such permits shall be payable as set forth in Chapter 115, Fees.
F. Should the Construction Official deny the issuance of such permit, the
applicant may appeal the decision to the Mayor and Council within 30
days of the decision.
G. If required, an alarm installer shall also register as a contractor
pursuant to Chapter 100, Contractors, Licensing of.
§ 210-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-10
1:267
any claim against the Borough of Oradell, its various departments, agencies,
employees and officials, from and on account of any and all damages as a
result of such entry. In the event the alarm system owner, in the application
for registration, withholds permission for such entry, the Borough and its
various departments, agencies, employees and officials, assumes no duty
or obligation to attempt to gain entry to the premises, and shall have no
liability for its failure or inability to respond to such panic alarm or medical
emergency.
§ 210-10 ORADELL CODE § 210-10
1:268
ARTICLE III
False Alarms
§ 210-11. Penalties. [Amended 4-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1026]
A. The penalties for false fire alarms, that is alarms to which the Fire
Department of Oradell is expected to respond, shall be as follows:
(1) For the second false fire alarm in the same calendar year, there
shall be a fine of $20.
(2) For the third false fire alarm in the same calendar year, there shall
be a fine of $35.
(3) For the fourth false fire alarm in the same calendar year, there shall
be a fine of $50.
(4) For the fifth false fire alarm in the same calendar year, there shall
be a fine of $75.
(5) For the sixth and any subsequent false fire alarm in the same
calendar year, there shall be a fine of $100.
B. False alarms other than fire alarms. [Amended 3-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 998; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 07-26]
(1) The penalties for false alarms other than fire alarms shall be as
follows:
(a) For the first and second false alarm in any given calendar year,
a warning shall be issued.
(b) For the third and fourth false alarms in the same calendar year,
there shall be a fine of $30.
(c) For the fifth up to and including the eleventh false alarm, there
shall be a fine of $45.
(2) Penalty fees shall be payable to the Police Department within 30
days of mailing or delivery of written notice.
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:269

ARTICLE IV
Rule-Making Authority
§ 210-12. Established.
The Chief of Police may promulgate written rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for recordkeeping and
efficient management of the alarm console and related system; provided,
however; that the Mayor and Council by appropriate resolution shall first
approve said rules and any changes thereto.
§ 210-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-12
1:271

ARTICLE V
Disclaimer of Liability
§ 210-13. Borough not liable. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 956]
The Borough of Oradell, its various departments, agencies, employees and
officials, shall be under no duty or obligation hereunder to any alarm
systems owner or to any other person or persons, with respect to the
adequacy, operation, installation, repair or maintenance of the alarm
console and any allied equipment or services and assumes no liability in
connection therewith, the alarm console and equipment being maintained
at will and subject to termination at any time by cancellation by resolution
duly adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell and
any individual registration hereunder may be revoked at any time by the
Mayor and Council upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, provided
30 days' notice is given in writing to such permittee. Registration of any
alarm system pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the express
condition that the alarm system owner, by registering such alarm system,
does thereby waive any claim against the Borough of Oradell, its various
departments, agencies, employees and officials from and on account of
any and all damages arising out of the Borough's installation, operation or
maintenance of the alarm console or any such alarm system.
§ 210-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-13
1:273

ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
§ 210-14. Penalty for violations.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Oradell of a violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $200 or such other penalty as shall be set
forth in this chapter, in the sole discretion of the municipal magistrate.
§ 210-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-14
1:275
Chapter 214
SEWERS
§ 214-1. Compliance with rules and regulations required.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough of Oradell shall be in
compliance with the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County
Utilities Authority.
§ 214-2. Sanitary sewer system rental fee: billing: payment.
[Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-4]
§ 214-3. Fees. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-4]
The fees for use of the Oradell sanitary sewer system shall be as follows:
§ 214-4. Calculation of fees. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-4]
The fees set forth in § 214-3 shall be based upon the total water consumed
at a particular property during the prior year as determined by the water
meter reading and/or land meter readings of that property. In the case
of multiple structures on a single property, the usage of all structures on
the property shall be aggregated and the fee shall be based upon the
total amount of water usage and/or well usage. In the case of a structure
which is located on more than one property, the Tax Assessor shall make
a determination upon which parcel the structure shall be considered to be
located.
A. All users of the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of Oradell which,
for the purposes of this article, includes the facilities of other
municipalities, the use of which is provided by the Borough under a
contract with another municipality, shall pay a fee for the discharge of
wastes in the sanitary sewer system.
B. The fee for all users, including residential, commercial, industrial and
all others, shall be calculated and billed annually and shall be payable
to the Tax Collector in four quarterly installments due February 1, May
1, August 1 and November 1 of each year, at the place where real
property taxes are paid. The failure to bill for such charges shall not
relieve the owner of any property subject to this charge from the
obligation to pay such charges as provided herein. The Tax Collector
shall charge upon any delinquent account of such sewer charge,
interest and penalties at the same rate and in the same amounts as may
be charged against delinquent accounts of municipal taxes pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-67 and the resolutions of the Borough of Oradell adopted
pursuant thereto.
A. For usage of 250,000 gallons per year or less: no charge.
B. For all usage over 250,000 gallons per year: $2.41 per 1,000 gallons.
§ 210-14 ORADELL CODE § 214-5
1:276
§ 214-5. Appeals. [Added 11-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-14; amended
4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
Whenever it is claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply or
that the true intent and meaning of this chapter has been misconstrued
or that a decision of the Borough official made hereunder has been an
improper one, or for any other grievance arising hereunder, the aggrieved
claimant may appeal the decision or the grievance in writing to the Mayor
and Council, in which event the matter will be set down for a special
hearing, at which time all interested persons shall present evidence
relevant to the subject matter of such hearing. If such grievance regards
excess sewerage fees totaling less than $500, the aggrieved claimant must
make their appeal to the Borough Administrator. If the aggrieved claimant
is not satisfied with the decision of the Borough Administrator, he/she
can appeal to the Mayor and Council in accordance with the following
procedure. Notice of said hearing in writing shall be given to the aggrieved
claimant at least 10 days in advance by mailing same to the claimant's
last post office address. Appeals shall be made 45 days after the grievance
arises or after the rendering of a decision by the Borough official.
Chapter 224
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
§ 224-1. Responsibilities of landowner or tenant.
Every owner or tenant of any lands abutting upon the public streets within
the Borough shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of
such streets within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall have fallen or
have formed thereon.
§ 224-2. Failure of landowner or tenant to comply.
In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for failure to remove snow
and ice from the abutting sidewalks of any public street, as required in
§ 224-1, such snow and ice may be removed from the abutting sidewalks of
such public streets, wherein the owners or tenants have failed to remove the
same, by the Department of Public Works. The cost of removal of any such
snow and ice from the sidewalks of any public street shall be certified to
the Borough Council by the officer in charge of such removal. The Borough
Council shall examine such certificate and, if the charges are found to be
correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against such real estate so
abutting upon such sidewalks thereof, and the amount so charged shall
§ 214-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-2
1:277
thereupon become a lien or tax upon such real estate and be added to and
be part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed thereon. Such charge
shall be enforced and collected with interest by the Collector of Taxes of the
Borough in the same manner as other taxes are collected.
§ 224-3. Depositing snow or ice on streets. [Added 2-15-1994 by
Ord. No. 994; amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
No person, including the owner or tenant of any premises abutting on any
street, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street
nor within one foot on all sides of any fire hydrant in the Borough of Oradell.
It is the intent and purpose of this section to prohibit all persons from
throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice upon the sidewalks or
streets of the borough or within one foot on all sides of any fire hydrant.
§ 224-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-15-1994 by Ord. No.
994]
Upon the finding of a violation of this chapter, the fines and penalties of
Chapter 1, § 1-10, shall apply.
Chapter 230
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 230, Soil, Moving of, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 3-20-61, and 468, was repealed by
Ordinance No. 992. See Chapter 240, Land Development for moving of soil
regulations.]
Chapter 234
SEXUAL HARASSMENT PERSONNEL POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel practices — See Ch. 47A.
§ 234-1. Declaration of policy on sexual harassment.
The Borough of Oradell expressly prohibits any form of sexual harassment.
Improper interference with the ability of employees to perform their
expected job duties will not be tolerated. It is Borough of Oradell policy that
all employees have a right to work in an environment free of discrimination,
which encompasses freedom from sexual harassment. The Borough of
Oradell strongly disapproves of sexual harassment of its employees, in any
form, and states that all employees at all levels of the Borough of Oradell
must avoid offensive or inappropriate sexual and/or sexually harassing
behavior at work and will be held responsible for ensuring that the work
§ 224-2 ORADELL CODE § 234-1
1:278
place is free from sexual harassment. All employees, female or male, shall
be permitted to work in an environment free from all forms of unlawful
discrimination and conduct which can be considered harassing, coercive
or disruptive, including sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is a form of
employee misconduct which undermines the integrity of the employment
relationship. Sexual harassment debilitates morale and interferes with work
productivity and, therefore, will not be tolerated.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
SEXUAL ASSAULT — Gross sexual imposition such as touching, fondling,
grabbing or assault.
SEXUAL BRIBERY — Solicitation of sexual activity or other sex-linked
behavior by promise of reward.
SEXUAL COERCION — Coercion of sexual activity by threat of punishment.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct based on gender when:
§ 234-3. Guidelines.
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of a person's employment;
A.
Submission or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a basis
for employment decisions affecting that person;
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
a person's work performance; or
C.
D. Such conduct creates an intimidating or offensive work environment.
A. The Borough policy prohibits unwelcome sexual advances; requests for
sexual acts or favors with or without accompanying promises, threats or
reciprocal favors or actions; or other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature which has the purpose or effect of adversely affecting an
employee's performance or which creates a hostile or offensive working
environment. Examples of prohibited conduct include but are not
limited to lewd or sexually suggestive comments; slurs and other
verbal, graphic or physical conduct relating to an individual's sex; or
any display of sexually explicit pictures, greeting cards, articles, comic
books, magazines, photos or cartoons.
B. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, supervisory
personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with
this policy; and, upon being informed of possible sexual harassment,
are required to take appropriate immediate action in response,
including informing employees of their right to file a discrimination
complaint with the Administrator.
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:279
§ 234-4. Complaint procedure.
C. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third party,
to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is offensive
and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude filing a
complaint. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all alleged
incidents of sexual harassment to the Administrator.
A. Who may file. Any Borough employee who feels that he or she has been
the victim of sexual harassment, or who witnessed acts of sexual
harassment against a fellow employee of the Borough, may file a
complaint of sexual harassment with the following persons in the
following order: (1) his or her department head; (2) the Borough
Administrator; or (3) the Mayor and Council. Any filing of a complaint
against a person other than the complainant's department head must
be accompanied by a statement that the person to whom the complaint
should otherwise be addressed in accordance with the list hereinabove,
cannot, according to the complainant, be objective about the sexual
harassment charge the complainant wishes to file.
B. Contents of complaint. The initial complaint may be made orally or in
writing. If the complaint is made orally, the Borough Administrator or
the alternate officer shall reduce same to a written document which
shall, if it is deemed accurate, be signed by the complainant. The
complaint must include the following information:
(1) The name, department and position or title of the complainant;
(2) The name, department and position or title of the charged party;
(3) The date, time, nature and circumstances, in detail, of each
instance of alleged sexual harassment, including but not limited to,
the injuries or consequences suffered by the complainant, the
names of any witnesses to such actions and the duration of the
actions at issue; and
(4) Whether such harassment has been previously reported, and if so,
the date and to whom it was reported.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from
providing other information or documents they believe are
essential to the fair adjudication of their case.
C. Investigation of filed complaint. The Borough Administrator is hereby
designated as the sexual harassment officer. The Chief Financial Officer
of the Borough is hereby designated as the alternate officer. Persons
who, by reason of the circumstances, are uncomfortable directing a
complaint to the Administrator, may report same to the alternate
officer. The Borough Administrator, or alternate officer, shall be
responsible for the prompt and thorough investigation of each claim.
The investigation shall be completed within five business days of filing
of the complaint, and a written report of the investigation shall be
§ 234-3 ORADELL CODE § 234-4
1:280
§ 234-5. Determination of guilt.
§ 234-6. Sanctions.
forwarded to the Mayor within seven days of the completion of the
investigation. A copy of the report shall be furnished to the
complainant. It shall be the duty of the person responsible for the
investigation to: (1) interview the complainant, potential witnesses and
the charged party; (2) review municipal files for similar incidents
involving the complainant and the charged party; and (3) assess the
presence or absence of corroborative evidence.
D. To the extent possible, the sexual harassment investigative proceedings
will be conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the
complainant, the alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved
in the proceedings will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality,
from the initial meeting to the final decision, to safeguard the privacy
and reputation of all involved. The investigation shall make every
attempt to maintain the confidentiality of the information provided to
the investigator.
E. A finding of no probable cause as a result of an investigation does not
necessarily establish that an accusation is false. However, this policy
shall not be used to intentionally bring frivolous or malicious charges
against an employee.
A. Standard for determination of guilt. The Borough Administrator or the
alternate officer shall determine that a charged party is not guilty of the
offense of sexual harassment unless he/she/they find, based on the
investigation and hearing, in the case of an appeal, that substantial,
credible evidence supports the conclusion that: (i) the facts as alleged
by the complainant are true; (ii) those facts constitute sexual
harassment defined herein; and (iii) the charged party is the person
who committed the act of sexual harassment.
B. If the validity of the complaint cannot be determined, immediate and
appropriate action will be taken to assure that all parties are
reacquainted with the sexual harassment policy as to prevent sexual
harassment in the future.
A. Penalties. In the event of an appeal, the Borough Administrator, or the
alternate officer, shall be permitted to impose the following penalties or
conditions of employment upon a Borough employee found to have
committed the offense of sexual harassment:
(1) Written reprimand which shall become a part of the employee's
personnel file;
(2) Discharge or demotion;
(3) Require the employee to undergo psychological therapy at his or
her own expense;
§ 234-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-6
1:281
§ 234-7. Retaliation.
(4) Suspension (with or without pay); and
(5) Referral to the criminal justice system.
Any disciplinary action shall be consistent with applicable
collective bargaining agreements and any applicable Borough
Personnel Code provisions.43
B. Appeal to the Mayor and Council. A complainant or charged party may
appeal the determination of the Borough Administrator to the Mayor
and Council. The appealing party must file a request for an appeal in
writing with the Borough Administrator within 10 days of the
determination of the Borough Administrator stating why the
determination of the Borough Administrator should be overturned. The
party not appealing shall have the option of submitting, within 10 days
of the filing of the request for an appeal, a statement explaining why the
determination of the Borough Administrator should be affirmed. The
determination by the Mayor and Council shall be a final action.
C. To the extent permitted by law, the Borough will not be liable for
damages obtained as a result of a decision of a nonlocal agency or court
of superior administrative remedies described herein.
A. Retaliation. It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take
reprisals against any person because she/he has filed a complaint,
testified or assisted in any proceeding under this policy. Threats, other
forms of intimidation, and/or retaliation against the complainant or any
other party based on involvement in the complaint process may be
cause for disciplinary action. There will be no retaliation against
employees for reporting sexual harassment or assisting the Borough in
the investigation of a complaint. However, if after investigating any
complaint of harassment or unlawful discrimination the Borough learns
that the complaint is not bona fide or that an employee has provided
false information regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be
taken against the individual who provided the false information.
B. False accusations. Since a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and
serious one, false accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be
treated as, a disciplinary offense and will result in a level of punishment
appropriate for a person actually engaging in such behavior.
A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful
testimony to the Administrator shall also be guilty of having made false
accusations.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47A, Personnel Practices.
§ 234-6 ORADELL CODE § 234-8
1:282
§ 234-8. Distribution of policy.
A copy of the sexual harassment policy will be distributed to all Borough
employees and will be posted in a prominent place in the Oradell Municipal
Building.
§ 234-9. Training.
Employees of the Borough shall be provided with training, by a person
trained to lead or implement such training, which shall include a detailed
discussion of the following:
Chapter 234A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Flood-fringe areas — See Ch. 132.
Sewers — See Ch. 214.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
A. A detailed explanation of what constitutes sexual harassment;
B. The procedures for filing a sexual harassment charge;
C. The procedures to be followed in the investigation of a sexual
harassment charge;
D. Management's obligation regarding incidents of sexual harassment;
E. Record keeping requirements.
§ 234-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-9
1:283

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-25; amended in its entirety
4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
§ 234A-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 234A-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Borough of Oradell.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare.
§ 234A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-1
1:285
§ 234A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The County review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
(2) This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision
of law except that, where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 234A-1 ORADELL CODE § 234A-2
1:286
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means
any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC); and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance, for the purpose of this
rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation. Major
development also means any development that provides for 0.25 acres of
impervious cover and/or increase of impervious cover by 0.25 acres.
Note: A single-family dwelling on a single-family lot is not considered a
major development unless it meets one of the above criteria.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, Borough, town, township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 234A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-2
1:287
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Oradell or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural and
construction waste or runoff or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the state
development and redevelopment plan's goals and statewide policies and the
official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin) or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
§ 234A-2 ORADELL CODE § 234A-2
1:288
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 234A-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 234A-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
§ 234A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-3
1:289
§ 234A-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
(2) The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 234A-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an
existing public roadway or railroad, or the construction or enlargement
of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternative analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
§ 234A-3 ORADELL CODE § 234A-4
1:290
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
§ 234A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-4
1:291
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 234A-4 ORADELL CODE § 234A-4
1:292
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall meet one of the following requirements:
§ 234A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-4
1:293
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency; or
(b) Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office; or
(c) Subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 234A-7 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 234A-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
§ 234A-4 ORADELL CODE § 234A-4
1:294
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities, as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high-water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 234-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
§ 234A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-4
1:295
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 234A-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
subsection, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
§ 234A-4 ORADELL CODE § 234A-4
1:296
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or
in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from
this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches
of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 234A-7 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 234A-7. TSS reduction
shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
§ 234A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-4
1:297
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs,
and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 234A-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 234A-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
§ 234A-4 ORADELL CODE § 234A-4
1:298
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center-line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center-line of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
§ 234A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-4
1:299
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
§ 234A-4 ORADELL CODE § 234A-5
1:300
§ 234A-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods) or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
§ 234A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-5
1:301
§ 234A-6. Standards for structural and nonstructural stormwater
measures.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/, or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas;
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal highwater
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of § 234A-8B.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed and installed to be strong, durable and
corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
§ 234A-5 ORADELL CODE § 234A-6
1:302
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at § 234A-8.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 234A-4 of this chapter.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of § 234A-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
B. Nonstructural stormwater strategies.
(1) Strategies.
(a) Buffers. Buffer areas are required along all lot and street lines
separating residential uses from arterial and collector streets,
separating a nonresidential use from either a residential use or
residential zoning district line and along all street lines where
loading and storage areas can be seen from the street. The
buffer area shall use native vegetation, which requires less
fertilization and watering than nonnative species. Buffer areas
may be used for stormwater management by disconnecting
impervious surfaces and treating runoff from these impervious
surfaces. Preservation of natural wood tracts and limiting land
disturbance for new construction must be incorporated where
practical.
(b) Curbs and gutters. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are
encouraged where practical to allow vegetated swales to be
used for stormwater conveyance and to allow the
disconnection of impervious areas where practical.
(c) Drainage systems. An existing ordinance may require that all
streets be provided with inlets and pipes where the same are
necessary for proper drainage. The use of natural vegetated
swales in lieu of inlets and pipes are encouraged where
practical.
§ 234A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-6
1:303
(d) Driveways and accessways. The use of pervious paving
materials to minimize stormwater runoff and promote
groundwater recharge should be considered for driveways and
accessways, where practical. Consideration should be given
for subsurface soil conditions. The use of crowned driveways is
also encouraged to promote disconnectivity between
impervious surfaces and grass areas to promote groundwater
recharge.
(e) Natural features. Natural features, such as trees, brooks,
swamps, hilltops and views, are to be preserved whenever
possible, and that care be taken to preserve selected trees to
enhance soil stability and landscaped treatment of the area. In
addition, forested areas shall be maintained to ensure that leaf
litter and other beneficial aspects of the forest are maintained
in addition to the trees.
(f) Nonconforming uses, structures or lots. The existing ordinance
may allow an applicant/owner of an existing use to propose
additions or alterations that exceed the permitted building
and/or lot coverage percentages. The applicant should mitigate
the impact of the additional impervious surfaces unless the
stormwater management plan for the development provided
for these increases in impervious surfaces. This mitigation
effort must address water quality, flooding and groundwater
recharge.
(g) Off-site and off-tract improvements. Any off-site and off-tract
stormwater management and drainage improvements must
conform to the design and performance standards described
herein.
(h) Off-street parking and loading. Parking lots with more than 10
spaces and all loading areas should allow for flush curb with
curb stop or curbing with curb cuts to encourage developers to
allow for the discharge of impervious areas into landscaped
areas for stormwater management. The use of natural
vegetated swales for the water quality design storm, with
overflow for larger storm events into storm sewers, should be
utilized where practical. A developer may demonstrate that
fewer spaces would be required, provided area is set aside for
additional spaces if necessary. Previous paving could be
provided as overflow parking areas.
(i) Performance standards. Pollution source control must be
evaluated in order to prohibit materials or wastes from being
deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they can be
transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural forces
such as precipitation, evaporation or wind. Materials and
wastes that might create a pollutant or a hazard shall be
enclosed in appropriate containers.
§ 234A-6 ORADELL CODE § 234A-6
1:304
§ 234A-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(j) Shade trees. The preservation of mature trees and forested
areas must be considered in the management of environmental
resources, particularly watershed management, air quality and
ambient heating and cooling. A critical disturbance area that
extends beyond the driveway and building footprint where
clearing of trees cannot occur shall be depicted on the plan
minimizing land disturbance. Identification of forested areas
and the percentage of wooded areas be protected from
disturbance shall also be provided.
(k) Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be designed to discharge
stormwater to neighboring lawns, where feasible, to
disconnect these impervious surfaces or use permeable paving
materials where appropriate.
(l) Soil erosion and sediment control. The applicant shall comply
with the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
standards and should incorporate signs to retain and protect
natural vegetation; minimize and retain water runoff to
facilitate groundwater recharge; and install diversions,
sediment basins and similar required structures prior to any
on-site grading or disturbance.
(2) Further guidance on the implementation of these strategies can be
found in the NJDEP Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, April 2004, as amended, accessible as noted within
§ 234A-5B(1).
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, previous paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 234A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-7
1:305
§ 234A-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 0862;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
provisions of this section do not preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater
management basins. Municipal and county stormwater management
plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require existing
stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of
the safety standards in Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) for trash racks,
overflow grates and escape provisions at outlet structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
§ 234A-7 ORADELL CODE § 234A-8
1:306
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to
six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step
shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance of
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 234A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-8
1:307
§ 234A-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site pan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planing and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
§ 234A-8 ORADELL CODE § 234A-9
1:308
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet or greater, showing two foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains, along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, previous or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 234A-3
through 234A-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
§ 234A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-9
1:309
§ 234A-10. Maintenance and repair.
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 234A-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 234A-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 234A-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall include the following:
(a) Contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; and the name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons responsible for preventative and corrective
maintenance (including replacement).
(b) Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
§ 234A-9 ORADELL CODE § 234A-10
1:310
identifies a person other than the developer (for example,
a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the
management plan or deed shall require notification and approval
from the applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
§ 234A-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-10
1:311
§ 234A-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine as follows:
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located form requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. First offense: warning.
B. Second offense: $100.
C. Third offense: $250.
D. Fourth offense: $500.
E. For the fifth and each subsequent offense, there shall be a fine of
$1,000.
§ 234A-10 ORADELL CODE § 234A-11
1:312
ARTICLE II
Sump Pump Discharge
[Adopted 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
§ 234A-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the discharge of sump pump or
other mechanical discharge of any stormwater onto any Borough street or
sidewalk when such a discharge would create a hazardous condition.
§ 234A-13. Sump pump discharge.
There shall be no sump pump discharges or mechanical discharge of any
stormwater directly onto any Borough street or sidewalk if in the
professional opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer, or their designee, that said
discharge would create a hazardous condition. If a hazardous condition is
created by discharge onto Borough streets or sidewalks then sump pump
or mechanical discharge of stormwater must be discharged so that it will
percolate into the soil, and not run directly into any public streets or
sidewalks.
§ 234A-14. Penalties.
Any person(s), entity, firm or corporation or other group found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to any penalty
as set forth in the Revised General Ordinances. Each daily incident shall be
considered as a separate violation.
§ 234A-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234A-14
1:313
Chapter 235
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 224.
Land development — See Ch. 240.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 234A-14 ORADELL CODE § 234A-14
1:314
Part 1
[Adopted 3-20-1961 As GAertn.e Ir,a Al rPtr. oIvI i(sDioivnissions 1, 2, 3 And 5) And
Art. III Of Ch. 17 Of The 1961 Revised Ordinances]
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 235-1. Obstruction prohibited. [Amended 7-26-2005 by Ord. No.
05-18]
No person shall, within the Borough right-of-way, obstruct any sidewalk,
street or public place, but this section shall not prevent persons who are
building from occupying such portion of the sidewalk, street or public place
designated in a permit therefor first obtained from the Building Inspector.44
§ 235-2. Throwing or discarding of refuse.
No person shall, within the Borough, throw or discard any refuse of any kind
whatsoever upon any public street or public place or discharge any sewage
or waste into such places.
§ 235-3. Spillage during transport of loads.
It shall be unlawful for any person transporting loads within the limits of the
Borough to drop or spill the contents of the vehicle in any manner that may
injure or damage the surface of the roadways.
§ 235-4. Litter.
No person shall, within the Borough, throw any paper or litter of any kind
upon any sidewalk, street, highway or public or private place.
§ 235-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 1, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper
or other natural or synthetic material including but not limited to any
bottle, can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing
material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or
other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic
or paper containers or other packaging or construction material.[Added
6-3-1991 by Ord. No. 931]
44.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 17-2 of Chapter 17 of the 1961 Revised Ordinances, adopted
3-20-1961, which immediately followed this section and provided for obstructing gutters
and drains, was deleted 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:315
OCCUPANT — The owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of or in control
of or in possession of any building or premises or part thereof or any
personal property.
OWNER — The person having the legal title to lands and premises or to
personal property.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — That portion of land owned by the Borough of Oradell
which is located between two property lines wherein is located the roadway,
curbing, shade trees, utilities and sidewalk.[Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No.
05-18]
ROADWAY — That portion of the street lying between the curblines.
SIDEWALKS — The pavement between the curblines and property lines.
STREET — Includes the portion thereof devoted to gutters, curbs and
sidewalks.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of Public
Works appointed by the Borough or such person as shall succeed to his
office, powers or duties.
§ 235-6. Application for permit.
No permit authorized by this Part 1 shall be granted except pursuant to
an application therefor, in writing, signed by the person desiring such
permit or his agent, which application shall set forth such facts as the
officer authorized to grant such permit shall require. When forms for such
application are furnished by the Mayor and Council, such permit shall be
upon such forms and shall set forth all the information required.
§ 235-7. Authorization for refusal; appeal.
The officer authorized by this Part 1 to issue any permit is also authorized
to refuse the issue of any such permit if, in his opinion, such refusal is
in the interest of the public safety, pubic convenience or public health. In
case any permit shall be refused by any such officer, an appeal from such
officer's determination may be taken to the Mayor and Council, and the
Mayor and Council, after hearing the applicant and such officer and such
other evidence as may be produced, may either direct the issuance of such
permit or sustain the refusal of the officer.
§ 235-8. Permit not to create vested rights; revocation.
No permit granted in pursuance of the provision of this Part 1 shall create
any vested rights, but such permit may be revoked at any time by the officer
issuing it. Such revocation may be appealed to the Mayor and Council for
its final determination.
§ 235-5 ORADELL CODE § 235-9
1:316
§ 235-9. Fee required before issuance of permit.
No permit authorized by this Part 1 shall be issued until the fee therefor
shall have been paid to the officer authorized to issue such permit for the
use of the Borough.
§ 235-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-9
1:317

ARTICLE II
Street Openings and Excavations
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11; 11-29-2016 by Ord. No.
16-10]
§ 235-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations and fees for the
opening of municipal streets within the Borough of Oradell.
§ 235-10.1. Definitions.
The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the
meanings here indicated.
EXTENSIVE OPENING — An opening, tearing up or excavating, for any
purpose, of a Borough road of 100 feet or more of roadway length, or where
connecting lateral openings are made at average intervals of less than 100
feet along the roadway length, or an opening which disturbs 20% or more
of the curb-to-curb width of the pavement area.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, public utility or other entity on whose
behalf a street opening is performed by a permittee.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm, or corporation granted a permit
hereunder.
PUBLIC UTILITY — New Jersey Bell Telephone Company, or its successor
corporation or corporations, Public Service Electric and Gas Company,
Rockland Electric, Suez Water Company, Verizon, Cablevision, any other
cable television company or any other entity having either the power of
eminent domain or subject to the regulations by the Public Utilities
Commission of the State of New Jersey.
SMALL OPENING — Any opening, tearing up or excavating, for any
purpose, of a Borough road, which is not an extensive opening and generally
not larger than 48 inches by 48 inches or 16 square feet in size.
STREET — Any street, road or other public way dedicated to and accepted
by the Borough of Oradell, and shall include all of the area thereof lying
within the bounds of the curbing or, in the absence of curbing, the dedicated
right-of-way.
§ 235-11. Permit; restrictions on excavating recently sealed roads.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person, persons or corporation, municipal or private, nor any
utility company, public or private, shall for any purpose open, tear
up, excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the
surface or subsurface within the paved or unpaved limits of any
street in the Borough of Oradell without first obtaining a road
opening permit from the Construction Official.
§ 235-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-11
1:319
§ 235-12. Application requirements.
(2) Only such persons, firms or corporations to whom or to which
permits have been granted shall be permitted to perform such work
and then only in the manner herein required and only as
specifically allowed in the permit. Assignment of rights under any
permit issued hereunder is prohibited; the permittee is always
responsible for performance under this article.
B. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the
Borough of Oradell or under a contract with the Borough for the
construction of waterlines or street improvements.
C. No permit applicant shall begin work until he receives the authorization
number from the Underground Location Service and the appropriate
utility. The applicant must comply with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
2C:17-4 and 2C:17-5, which provide, among other things, that said
applicant give to any person or corporation engaged in the distribution
or transmission of manufactured, mixed or natural gas or synthetic
natural gas, liquefied natural gas or propane gas in the area of the
proposed excavation written notice of the proposed excavations and
ascertain from such person or corporation the location of all such
gaslines or pipelines within 200 feet of the proposed excavation.
D. Nonopening of road. No street, road or paved area constructed,
reconstructed or repaved within five years of the time that the road is
sealed can be excavated, built or patched except in the case of
emergency, which includes but is not limited to gas leaks, without prior
approval of the Mayor and Council.
E. No Borough street shall be excavated between November 1 and March
30 without prior approval of the Mayor and Council.
A. Form.
(1) Application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be
prescribed by the Borough of Oradell and issued by the
Construction Official and shall be filed at least one week prior to
the commencement of any work. The application shall specify the
name and address of the applicant; the specific location of the
proposed excavation and the width, length and depth thereof; the
type of road or other surface; and the individual(s), firm or
corporation for whose benefit the excavation is to be made and
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for the issuance of the
permit as hereinafter provided, together with the charges as
hereinafter set forth.
(2) Additional information.
(a) Applications for extensive openings shall require, in addition to
the above, information regarding:
§ 235-11 ORADELL CODE § 235-12
1:320
[1] All improvements.
[2] Typical details and sections of construction procedure.
[3] Plans, profiles and other details necessary to accurately
depict the work.
(b) Standard details used by Public Utilities and accepted and
approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works or the Borough Engineer may be used to satisfy the
requirements of Subsection A(2)(a)[2] and [3] above.
(3) No work may commence by the permittee until the date set forth in
the issued permit.
B. Emergency road opening.
(1) In the event that an emergency condition exists requiring
immediate action by any person, firm or corporation required to
obtain a permit pursuant to this article, the person may
immediately cause the roadway to be entered and emergency
measures taken without first obtaining a permit, provided that:
(a) A true emergency exists and the person or persons doing the
work notify the Oradell Police Department prior to start of
work; the Police Department shall log the emergency and send
a copy to the Building Department.
(b) A permit is applied for within 72 hours of the road opening or
on the next business day, whichever is more practical.
(c) All work is to be performed in accordance with the provisions
of §§ 230-13, 230-14, 230-15 and 230-16.
(d) The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer shall be notified within 24 hours of a road
opening. If a road opening commences on a Saturday or
Sunday as a result of emergency road work, the Police
Department of the Borough of Oradell shall be notified prior to
start of work, and the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer shall be notified on the
morning of the first business day thereafter.
(2) The Borough reserves the right to issue a written stop-work order
where same is deemed appropriate by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or Borough Engineer.
C. Review of the application of small openings. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, copies of the application therefor shall be referred to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer who shall, within five working days, note any objections to the
issuance of a permit or any conditions which shall be satisfied prior to
§ 235-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:321
§ 235-13. Work requirements.
or be imposed as conditions upon the issuance of the permit, as
appropriate.
D. Applicant. The applicant must be a licensed contractor registered with
the Borough or agent of a public utility, whether corporate, individual,
or partnership, who will be actually engaged in the performance of the
work to ensure the safety of the public and that the work is done in
accordance with Borough specifications. The application shall be made
for and on the behalf of the owner for whom such work is being done
and shall be countersigned by such owner. Permits will not be issued
directly to private owners or developers without specific written
approval of the Mayor and Council.
E. Agreement. The owner shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of a
permit, that any facilities, pipes or poles or other object(s) to be
installed within the Borough right-of-way pursuant to the permit shall
be promptly relocated at the owner's expense, except where otherwise
provided by law, as required by the Borough of Oradell, to
accommodate the installation of Borough facilities. Such agreement
shall be in writing and contained on the face of the application form and
permit.
F. Review of application for small and extensive openings. All small and
extensive openings shall first be reviewed and approved by the
Superintendent of the Roads and Parks Department of Public Works,
and extensive openings shall subsequently be reviewed and approved
by the Borough Engineer prior to the issuance of a permit.
G. Issuance. Street opening permits shall be issued by the Construction
Official once reviewed and approved as provided for herein by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works; provided, however,
that no permit shall be issued until an application fee and an
engineering fee, as described in § 230-18 of this article, have been paid
to the Construction Official.
A. Generally. The New Jersey State Department of Transportation 2007
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with all
amendments and supplements, shall govern all of the work performed
under Borough of Oradell road opening permits, except as
supplemented below.
(1) No Borough road shall be closed to traffic without prior written
consent of the Police Department and a permit issued by the
Construction Official. In the event that a road is closed, uniformed
police may be required to act as traffic directors, and the proper
traffic control devices shall be erected and maintained in
accordance with standards described in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, 1988 Current Edition. All costs of providing
uniformed police shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the
§ 235-12 ORADELL CODE § 235-13
1:322
owners. The Borough will bill the permittee for such services at the
prevailing rate specified annually by the Borough. In the event that
a detour is deemed necessary by the permittee, application shall be
made to the Chief of Police, who shall determine the necessity for
such detour and the route to be followed. In emergency situations,
notification by phone to the Police Department shall be done prior
to start of work.
(2) Any work under an issued permit must be commenced within three
months from the date of issue and completed 45 days from
commencement, or said permit shall be deemed void, and
reapplication shall be required. The Superintendent of Department
of Public Works or the Borough Engineer may grant a single fortyfive-
day completion extension past the original permit expiration
date.
(3) Work commenced under a permit shall be continued expediently
during normal working hours until completed.
(4) The applicant shall notify the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer 24 hours in advance of the
actual commencement of any work on an extensive opening, or on
the same day for a minor opening.
B. Guard. The applicant shall keep the work site properly guarded both
day and night and shall have lights, barriers and adequate safety
devices as described in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
placed thereat and maintained throughout the performance of the work
and shall interfere as little as possible with the traffic along the street
or road within the Borough, and only that part of any such street or
road as is set forth in the permit shall be opened.
C. Cover and protection. All utilities shall be constructed with adequate
depth of cover protection for the utilities in the event that further
Borough road construction, repair or modification necessitates
excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the area where
the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the utility
owner of the responsibility of relocating said utility at said utility
owner's expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of related facilities, except as otherwise
specified herein.
D. Protection of existing structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to give other notice of the proposed street opening to any
person, firm or corporation whose pipe, conduits or other structures are
laid in the portion of the street to be opened. Said notice shall be given
to all utilities by calling the Garden State Underground Plant Location
Service at telephone number 1-800-272-1000 48 hours before
commencement of said opening, or as provided by law, and the
permittee shall restore the same, at his own expense, to the condition it
was in prior to commencement of work.
§ 235-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-13
1:323
§ 235-14. Repair and cleaning of streets and property.
§ 235-15. Inspections.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or Borough
Engineer shall periodically inspect all road openings and the repair and
resurfacing thereof for the purpose of determining compliance with the
conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit and the specifications. The
Borough may, upon the recommendation of either of them:
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled at the end of each
working day unless it would constitute a hardship to the permittee or
where the size of the excavation makes it impossible to backfill at the
end of each working day, in which event a waiver may be granted by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or Borough
Engineer. In the event that a waiver is granted, the contractor or owner
shall cover the excavation with heavy one-inch-thick steel plates
secured to existing pavement to prevent rattles and movement and
erect appropriate barriers and lights around the entire excavation and
arrange to provide appropriate security protection, if such security is
necessary, at his own cost, and such other safeguards as may be needed
to protect the public from an open excavation. If steel plates are placed
for over a weekend or for an extended period, all edges are to be
macadam-sealed and sloped. In no event shall an excavation be left
open for more than 72 hours unless an emergency exists and
permission has been secured from the Chief of Police, Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works and Borough Engineer or their
designated representatives.
F. Permittee shall contact the Superintendent of Public Works at least
three hours prior to final backfilling. The Superintendent of Public
Works or his designee shall be on site to supervise final backfilling and
ensure compliance with Borough requirements. Permittee shall be
responsible for payment of the Department of Public Works employee's
time at a rate set forth in § 230-18C(2).
A. The permittee shall be liable for any damage to the roadway leading to
or adjacent to the work site.
B. The permittee shall, on a continuing basis, maintain all streets and
other property affected by the construction in a clean condition free
from all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. Upon completion
of all work under the permit, the permittee shall again clean the
affected property and remove all debris and unused material. In the
event that the permittee fails to act as provided herein, the Borough,
upon 24 hours' notice to the permittee, may clean and remove all
rubbish, excess earth, rock, debris and unused material and charge the
permittee the cost thereof. If the permittee fails to reimburse the
Borough for the costs incurred, said costs shall be deducted from the
permittee's deposit held by the Borough Clerk.
§ 235-13 ORADELL CODE § 235-15
1:324
§ 235-16. Specifications.
A. Order a temporary stop to any road paving.
B. Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance with
the direction of the Borough.
C. Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
Borough of Oradell shall complete the work, or cause it to be
completed, and either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or notify
the applicant's surety of an intent to file claim on the bond, or both to
the extent necessary to complete the work.
D. Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the permittee
and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to make such
corrections within 24 hours and, after the completion of same, either
declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the permittee's surety
of an intent to file a claim on the bond, or both to the extent necessary
to make the necessary corrections.
E. Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances to
protect the Borough's interests.
A. The existing pavement must be cut with a compressor, wet saw or an
approved mechanical cutting device in a straight line and to the full
depth of pavement before excavation. All storm drains and catch basins
will be protected at all times. Any damage will be repaired by the
applicant at the applicant's expense.
B. All fill removed from the trench is to be discarded by the applicant. The
trench must be of suitable width to obtain proper mechanical
compaction. All backfill is to be done with quarry process stone Type I-5
or DGA for the full depth of the trench. The first lift of fill, 12 inches
above pipe, shall be compacted using a Jumping Jack tamper.
Successive lifts shall be compacted by mechanical means such as
tamping, vibrating or rolling. A vibra plate tamper is not acceptable.
C. Upon completion of the proper backfill compaction, a ten-inch layer of
bituminous stabilized base Mix I-2 shall be utilized in two lifts of five
inches each compacted in all trench areas. The top surface shall be
flush with the adjacent pavement and be uniformly contoured to
conform to the existing surrounding surface.
D. For installation of plastic piping, the applicant shall place a sand
cushion around the plastic piping for a minimum distance of 12 inches
from the pipe.
E. The applicant must install and maintain temporary line striping and
pavement markings.
§ 235-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-16
1:325
F. The applicant further agrees to keep the trench filled to the level of
surrounding pavement until settlement has ceased. The Borough shall
be held harmless in any and all accidents arising out of trench defects.
G. After a reasonable settlement period, final restoration will require
infrared application or a two-inch compacted surface course of
bituminous surface course Mix I-5 to be placed over the entire area of
stabilized base.
(1) Infrared resurfacing shall be permitted in accordance with the
specifications set forth in Subsection H below. When using infrared
resurfacing application, all stabilized base material in the road
opening, plus a minimum of six inches surrounding the edge of the
opening, require heating and raking to a depth of one inch. All
raked material is to be discarded and replaced by fresh, hot FABC
top mix.
(2) Prior to the application of the surface course, the entire area of
stabilized base, including 12 inches surrounding the edge of the
opening, shall be milled by a milling machine (self-propelled,
power-operated planing, grinding or cutting machine) to a
minimum depth of two inches from the outside edge of the trench
to the curbline in a uniform width a minimum of 10 feet wide.
(3) The resulting milled surface shall then be swept, and tack coat
material applied, before the two-inch compacted surface course is
laid. This course shall be thoroughly compacted flush with the
surrounding surface by vibratory rolling and be uniformly
contoured to the adjacent pavement.
(4) All manhole frames and covers installed within the pavement area
shall be set to finished grade. Any scarring or road damage to any
other part of a roadway caused by this permit shall be repaired as
per the above conditions.
H. Specifications for infrared restoration.
(1) The purpose of this specification is to establish a consistent and
standard process for infrared paving applications and to insure the
quality of infrared restoration for road openings.
(2) The contractor shall provide all materials, equipment and labor
required to perform a seamless, to-grade, permanent infrared
restoration.
(3) The infrared contractor shall provide FABC at plant temperature of
275° F. to 300° F. The infrared contractor must guarantee that the
asphalt will be transported and stored in a thermostatically
controlled storage unit. Asphalt should not be kept in a storage unit
at plant temperature for a period longer than 24 hours.
(4) Required equipment:
§ 235-16 ORADELL CODE § 235-16
1:326
§ 235-17. Insurance, security and deposits.
(a) The infrared heater must have the ability to soften asphalt to a
depth of 1 1/2 inches to two inches in eight to 10 minutes
without burning the surface. The heater must be a minimum
size of six feet by eight feet. A truck-mounted infrared heater is
the preferred equipment.
(b) A thermostatically controlled asphalt storage unit which
maintains a temperature of 275° F. to 300° F.
(c) A roller-type compactor that will generate at least one ton of
applied force per square inch.
(d) A steel asphalt rake that is strong enough to scarify to a depth
of two inches.
(e) A thirty-six-inch asphalt loot.
(5) The contractor opens the road and performs the repair or adds a
new service. The hole is then filled in accordance with specific
Borough requirements for sub-base fill and compaction. Adequate
space is left for base asphalt. The vertical inside edge of the
existing pavement is cleaned of dirt and then tack coated. If this
edge is not tack coated, sheer point cracking may occur after the
infrared repair is completed. The opening is then filled with binder
asphalt (three-fourths-inch aggregate) as a stabilized base, being
sure to properly compact the asphalt even with the existing road.
The repair should settle within 60 to 90 days to allow weather,
traffic and time to thoroughly compact the repair before the
infrared repair is performed.
I. Final line striping and pavement markings must be restored
immediately to original or better condition. The standard for the
Borough for line striping and traffic markings is the application of
thermoplastic.
A. Insurance. The applicant shall present evidence satisfactory to the
Borough Attorney of insurance sufficient to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough, its agents and servants against and from all suits
and costs of every kind and from all personal injury or property damage
resulting from negligence or from any phase of operations performed
under the permit. Said insurance shall provide limits of not less than
$1,000,000 of single limit or, in the case of a public utility, may be in the
form of a certificate of self-insurance. Where there is an extensive
opening, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer may request additional insurance if it is deemed
necessary under the circumstances.
B. Security.
§ 235-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-17
1:327
(1) The Construction Official shall not issue a permit unless the
applicant has deposited as security for faithful performance a
certified check made payable to the Borough of Oradell or filed a
bond with the surety satisfactory to the Borough Attorney, the
amount thereof, to be based upon the security deposit fee schedule
as contained in § 230-18 of this article.
(2) In lieu of the security deposit required above, a public utility
applicant may file with the Construction Official a corporate
performance bond in the amount of at least $20,000. This corporate
performance bond must be an annual one and must be renewed
annually. In the event that a public utility applicant applies for a
permit for road opening and/or road openings and the required
security deposit fee set forth in § 230-18 exceeds said $20,000 the
public utility applicant shall file a corporate performance bond in
an amount equal to the difference between the $20,000 and the
required security deposit. For all nonpublic utility applicants, the
surety bond shall be at least $1,000. A certified check for a lesser
amount may be deposited, however, in the amount provided by
§ 230-18 for the work to be performed.
(3) Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or required
under the permit for extensive openings, if the security deposit is
$2,000 or less, the Borough of Oradell will retain 100% of the
security deposit as security for maintenance of said work for a
period not to exceed one year from the date of completion,
provided that if the security deposit is in the form of a certified
check, the permittee may deposit a surety bond of $2,000
satisfactory to the Borough Attorney in lieu of said certified check.
If the security deposit is greater than $2,000, then the Borough will
release or refund 60% or more of the same with the approval of the
Superintendent of Department of Public Works or Borough
Engineer, except that it shall retain a minimum of $2,000, and the
surety bond will be deposited for the maintenance as set forth
above. All bonds and certificates of insurance shall contain a
provision that the same shall remain in full force and effect for a
period of one year after the last work under any permit.
C. Application fee and escrow deposit.
(1) The applicant shall also pay, by separate money order, certified
check or, if the applicant is a public utility as herein defined, by a
corporate check, a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in
§ 230-18 of this article. An applicant other than a public utility shall
pay, by separate money order or certified check, a refundable
escrow deposit fee for inspection and professional services as set
forth in § 230-18 of this article. Should the escrow deposit fee
account at any time become insufficient to cover the actual or
anticipated inspection and professional expenses, said fund shall
be subject to increase on demand of the Borough Clerk.
§ 235-17 ORADELL CODE § 235-17
1:328
§ 235-18. Fees.
Fees shall be as follows:
(2) The Borough shall pay from the escrow deposit fee any costs
incurred by its designated representatives or professional
consultants for inspection or other engineering services or legal
fees required in connection with the proposed opening or
excavation at the rate established.
A. Application fee, nonrefundable (other than public utilities):
(1) Road opening:
(a) The fees for the right-of-way opening permit shall be as follows
(per square yard or per linear foot), minimum permit fee of
$250 applies:
Type Fee
Asphalt $30 per square yard
Curb $23 per linear foot
Unimproved $15 per square yard
Sidewalk $32 per square yard
Tunneling, special permit $20 each
Public utility corporation,
bond
$10,000
Curb cut or sidewalk removal
and replacement
$35
New driveway and/or paving,
one- or two-family
$45
New driveway and/or paving,
all others
$150
(b) First five linear feet by three feet wide: $25
(c) From five linear feet to 25 linear feet by three feet wide to be
defined as the longest dimension: an additional $20.
(d) From 25 linear feet to 50 linear feet by three feet wide: an
additional $40.
(e) Extensive openings: $75.
(2) Boring, tunneling or driving under road: lump sum minimum of
$75.
(3) Curb, gutter, apron, sidewalk or driveway: lump sum of $15 when
affected by excavation.
§ 235-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:329
(4) In lieu of individual application fees set forth above, public utilities
as defined in this chapter may pay a single annual fee of $250.
B. Security deposit fee for guaranteeing paved area, curb, sidewalk,
driveway or grass area:
(1) Opening paved area, curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $15.
(c) Charge for each square yard of paving: $5.
(d) Charge for each linear foot of curb: $7.
(2) Opening shoulders and roadside areas:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $5.
(3) Boring, tunneling or driving under the road:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge per linear foot of boring: $1.
C. An escrow deposit fee for engineering, legal costs and Department of
Public Works supervising employee will be required for all nonpublic
utility applicants.
(1) All road openings, excavations, borings and other work as stated on
the permit application:
(a) Base charge, including the first five square yards on any
trench, driveway or sidewalk opened, torn up or excavated and
including the first 20 linear feet of any curb or gutter torn up or
excavated: $100.
(b) For all work proposed on each application that exceeds the
quantities delineated in Subsection C(1)(a) above, a work
schedule shall be submitted to and approved by the
Superintendent of Department of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer, who shall estimate the total escrow fee required
based thereon. If, at any time during the course of the work, it
appears evident to the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer that the escrow deposit
fee is or will be insufficient to cover all costs of inspection and/
or other professional services, additional escrow deposit fees
shall be estimated by the Superintendent of Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer and paid to the
Construction Official, based on a revised work schedule to be
submitted by the applicant. This procedure shall be repeated
§ 235-18 ORADELL CODE § 235-18
1:330
§ 235-18.1. Return of deposit upon completion of work.
Upon the completion of any such work, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or Borough Engineer shall file a report, which
report shall contain the date of completion, the amount of deposit, the cost
to the Borough for resurfacing the area so excavated or opened, if the same
shall have been necessary, and the balance, if any, due to the applicant.
Upon receipt of the report by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works, the balance due, if any, to the applicant on account of any
deposit shall be forthwith returned.
§ 235-18.2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, company, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject for each offense to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In case of failure to restore
payments or roads or streets as herein above provided, after written notice
by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works to do so, each day
that such pavement, roads or streets remain unrestored shall constitute a
separate offense.
as often as necessary to guarantee sufficient escrow deposit
fees being available.
(2) Actual payment from the escrow deposit fee fund shall be based
upon the following rates:
(a) Professional engineering services: minimum fee of $90 per
hour.
(b) Attorney: minimum fee of $95 per hour.
(c) Department of Public Works supervising employee: minimum
fee of $60 per hour.
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18.2
1:331

ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
§ 235-19. Maintenance.
The owner or occupant of premises abutting any sidewalk shall keep such
sidewalk at all times in a good and passable condition at a grade which will
prevent water from accumulating thereon. The surface of all sidewalks shall
be kept properly roughened so as not to become smooth and slippery.
§ 235-20. Repair. [Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1119]
§ 235-21. Riding or driving prohibited on sidewalks.
No person shall ride, drive or pass over or along any sidewalk with horses,
wagons, carts, carriages, automobiles, motor trucks, motorcycles or
bicycles, provided that this section shall not prevent the use of driveways or
the crossing of a sidewalk at right angles for the purpose of entering upon
property, provided that in the last-mentioned case, the curb, if any, shall be
protected in a manner approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 235-22. Handcarts.
No person shall propel, by hand or any other means, any handcart along any
sidewalk.
§ 235-23. Bridging over gutters prohibited.
No person shall place any bridging over any gutter or any pipe or other
obstruction in any gutter without first obtaining a written permit therefor
from the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. In case any sidewalk becomes out of repair, the owner or occupant of
the lands abutting such sidewalk shall forthwith, upon receipt of
written notice from the Superintendent of Public Works, repair or cause
the same to be repaired and made in good and passable condition and
conform to the requirements of § 235-19.
B. With respect to those properties located adjacent to those streets and
sidewalks improved as a part of Ordinance 1088 adopted by the
Borough of Oradell on December 1, 1998, and entitled "Improvement of
the Intersection of Kinderkamack Road and New Milford Avenue," any
and all repairs to sidewalks shall be made in conformity with the special
sidewalk/pavement specifications and standards prepared by Burgis
Associates, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by
reference and copies of which are available through the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 235-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-24
1:333
§ 235-24. Objects rendered dangerous and unsafe.
No person shall place or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk any object
or thing that shall in any manner encumber such sidewalk or render travel
upon such sidewalk dangerous or unsafe.
§ 235-25. Lowering of curbs; change in grade. [Amended
12-20-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
No person shall lower the curb and change the grade of a sidewalk for the
purpose of providing a driveway without a permit therefor from the Borough
Clerk upon recommendation of the Superintendent of Public Works. The fee
for such a permit shall be as stated in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 235-24 ORADELL CODE § 235-25
1:334
ARTICLE IV
Streets
§ 235-26. Parades; permit required.
§ 235-27. Removal of warning signs, lights or signals prohibited.
No person shall remove, displace, break or change any sign or lights or
signals set up or placed in any street or public place as a warning of danger
or indicating an excavation or obstruction or showing that any street or
public place is closed to traffic. No person shall, between the hours of
sunset and sunrise, extinguish any light used for such purposes.
§ 235-28. Precautions for opening manhole.
No person shall open any manhole in any street or public place or remove
the cover thereof, unless such opening shall be guarded by a guardrail and
shall be so marked by both day and night so as to be plainly seen at a
distance of 50 feet, which guardrail shall be maintained so long as such
manhole shall remain unopened or uncovered.
§ 235-29. Sledding and tobogganing prohibited on certain streets.
[Amended 12-20-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
No person shall sled, toboggan or participate in similar activities upon
any street, unless such street or the portion thereof used for sledding,
tobogganing and similar activities shall be closed to vehicular traffic
pursuant to § 235-30.
§ 235-30. Designation of streets for sledding, tobogganing and
similar activities. [Amended 12-20-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets or
portions thereof upon which sledding, tobogganing and similar activities
will be permitted at certain times of the day and may direct that such street
or portion thereof shall be closed to vehicular traffic during such hours.
When any street or portion thereof shall be closed, there shall be a sign
at each end of the portion closed, plainly visible to approaching traffic,
reading substantially as follows: "Street Closed—Passing Forbidden." No
person shall drive or cause to be propelled any vehicle over any street or
A. No person shall organize or conduct or assist in the organization or
conduct of any parade upon any of the public streets or public places
without obtaining a permit therefor from the Chairman of the Police
Committee.
B. The Chairman of the Police Committee shall not issue any such permit
until an application therefor shall have been submitted to the Mayor
and Council at a regular or special meeting and such permission has
been granted and a permit authorized by a resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 235-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-30
1:335
portion thereof so closed and marked. For the purpose of this section, a
sleigh or sled used for sledding, tobogganing and similar activities shall not
be construed as a vehicle.
§ 235-31. Closing of streets during repairs.
The Superintendent of Public Works may close any street or public place or
section thereof to public traffic for the purpose of repairing, constructing or
reconstructing the same. When any street or public place or portion thereof
shall be closed, there shall be a sign at each end of the portion closed,
plainly visible to approaching traffic, reading substantially as follows:
"Street Closed—Passing Forbidden." No person shall drive or cause to be
propelled any vehicle over any street or portion thereof so closed and
marked.
§ 235-32. Erection of poles.
A. No person shall place or erect any electric light, telegraph, telephone or
other pole in or upon any street or public place, except pursuant to
permission granted by a resolution adopted by the Mayor and Council.
B. No electric light, telegraph or telephone or other pole shall be placed or
erected on any street or public place, unless the same shall be straight
and neat in appearance and every such pole shall be kept well-painted.
No wires shall be run or strung upon any pole at a distance less than 18
feet from the ground.
C. Any portable pole, including, but not limited to, portable basketball
backstops, located, maintained or used on or adjacent to any street or
other public place shall be removed or tipped back so as to not
overhang such street or other public place when not in use. [Added
12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1120]
§ 235-30 ORADELL CODE § 235-32
1:336
ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 235-33. Compliance required.
No person shall lay out, open, grade or pave any public street or other
public thoroughfare nor construct or install therein any curb, gutter,
sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm drain or other type of street improvement
without complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 235-34. Permission required.
No person shall lay out, open, grade or pave any public street or other
public thoroughfare nor construct or install therein any curb, gutter,
sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm drain or other type of street improvement
without first having obtained permission therefor from the Mayor and
Council.
§ 235-35. Application.
Any person desiring permission as required in § 235-34 shall make
application therefor to the Mayor and Council.
§ 235-36. Information to be supplied with application.
An application made as provided in § 235-35 shall be accompanied by
detailed plans, profiles, cross sections, grade maps and specifications of the
proposed work. Such maps and drawings shall be submitted in the number
and for the use as follows: one blueprint for the Borough Engineer; one
blueprint on cloth for the Public Works Department; and one white print on
cloth for the Borough Clerk. Where a sewer improvement is included in the
project, two additional blueprints shall be submitted for the use of the State
Board of Health.
§ 235-37. Payment required for examination services.
Any person making application as provided in § 235-35 shall submit a
certified check made payable to the Borough in a sum estimated by the
Borough Engineer to be sufficient to cover his fees for services in examining
the plans, profiles, cross sections and grade maps and the cost for
inspecting and supervising the proposed work. In the event that the deposit
shall be less than was estimated to cover these charges, the deficit shall be
paid to the Borough by the applicant prior to approval and acceptance of
the improvement by the Mayor and Council, or if the sum deposited for such
purpose shall be more than required to defray such expenses, the moneys
in excess shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 235-38. Deposit or bond upon application.
Any person making application as provided in § 235-35 shall make a cash
deposit or furnish a corporate surety bond, approved by the Borough
§ 235-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-38
1:337
Attorney, conditioned upon the completion of the improvement in question
to the satisfaction of and within the time designated by the Mayor and
Council. The cash deposit or bond shall be in double the amount of the
estimated cost of the improvement, as determined by the Borough Engineer.
In the event that a cash deposit is made and the work is not completed
within the specified time, the Mayor and Council may, at its option, proceed
to have the work completed using the funds so deposited and returning the
excess thereof, if any, to the applicant.
§ 235-39. Submission of information to Borough Engineer.
The plans, profiles, cross sections, grade maps and specifications filed as
provided in § 235-36 shall be submitted by the Mayor and Council to the
Borough Engineer for his examination and approval.
§ 235-40. Permission to be granted.
Upon the approval of the plans, profiles, cross sections, grade maps and
specifications filed as provided in § 235-36 and upon the written
certification thereof by the Borough Engineer, permission to make the
proposed improvement shall be granted by the Mayor and Council, provided
that the applicant has complied with §§ 235-37 and 235-38.
§ 235-41. Supervision of Borough Engineer; compliance required.
Except as provided in the following Article, all improvements mentioned
in § 235-34 shall be done under the supervision of the Borough Engineer
and shall conform to the minimum specifications contained in the Standard
Specifications for the Borough of Oradell, Bergen County, New Jersey on file
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 235-42. Certification.
No improvement made pursuant to permission granted under § 235-40
shall be accepted by resolution of the Mayor and Council as having been
satisfactorily completed until the Borough Engineer shall certify in writing
to the Mayor and Council that the work has been completed in accordance
with the approved plans, profiles, cross sections, grade maps and
specifications.
§ 235-38 ORADELL CODE § 235-42
1:338
ARTICLE VI
Construction of Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons and Curbs
[Amended 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 07-24]
§ 235-43. All zones.
Sidewalks constructed in the residential, apartment house, business or
industrial zones, as defined and set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough,45 shall be constructed of concrete.
§ 235-44. Specifications for concrete.
The following specifications provide specifications for the construction of
sidewalks of one-to-two-to-three concrete and of the single-course type.
Such sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and a minimum
thickness of four inches:
A. Materials. The materials used shall be as follows:
(1) Sand. Sand for concrete and mortar shall be Cow Bay sand or
washed sand equal to Cow Bay, clean, coarse silica sand containing
not more than 5% of clay or loam and free from any organic matter
coating the grains. All of the particles must pass a one-fourth-inch
mesh sieve, not more than 30% by volume shall pass a No. 50 sieve
and not over 6% shall pass a No. 100 sieve.
(2) Crushed stone. The coarse aggregate for concrete shall be broken
trap rock or dolomite free from dust screenings, clay, dirt or other
objectionable substances. It shall be uniformly graded from 3/8
inch to 3/4 inch in size. It must not contain flat or elongated pieces
and must be hard and durable.
(3) Cement. Cement used for concrete shall be air-entraining cement
and shall conform to the latest revision of the American Society for
Testing and Materials: C-175 Type IIA. Unless otherwise permitted,
only one brand of cement shall be used at the same time.
(4) Cinders. Steam cinders used in the work shall be free from
particles that will pass through a one-fourth-inch mesh screen and
shall be composed of hard, durable cinders homogenous in
character.
B. Construction. The construction requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Excavation. All grass, roots, sod or other materials unsuitable for a
foundation shall be removed, together with such earth and rock as
is necessary to permit the surface of the sidewalk to be laid to the
proper grade. Where the sidewalk has to be placed on fill, the fill
shall be deposited in six-inch layers and rolled or tamped.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Development.
§ 235-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-44
1:339
(2) Drainage.
(a) Where the subgrade is wet or apt to be frequently watersoaked,
provision shall be made to secure adequate drainage
by excavating the unsuitable material and filling in with
tamped cinders, sand, gravel or crushed stone and, if
necessary, by laying drainpipes.
(b) The Borough Engineer may order such work done or may
substitute equally efficient measures for securing adequate
drainage if, in his opinion, such work is necessary in order to
secure good construction
(3) Subbase. Unless otherwise permitted, all sidewalks shall be laid on
a foundation of cinders which have been thoroughly compacted by
tamping, ramming and wetting. The cinder foundation shall have a
minimum thickness, measured after compacting, of four inches.
The Borough Engineer may increase or decrease this depth of
cinders or may omit it entirely when, in his opinion, the nature of
the subsoil warrants such action.
(4) Concrete. Concrete shall be composed of one part cement, two
parts sand and three parts crushed stone. The mixing shall be done
in an approved type of concrete mixer and shall be carried on for at
least 50 revolutions and not more than 150 revolutions at the
manufacturer's specified speed. Transit-mix concrete may be used,
provided that the Borough Engineer is at liberty to inspect all
materials at the central mixing plant. The drum of the mixer shall
be vented during mixing. Excessive air-entraining due to overlong
mixing shall be corrected as directed by the Borough Engineer. The
volume of entrained air shall be equal to 3% to 6% of the volume of
concrete. The concrete shall be laid at once on the prepared bed in
one layer in slabs of five feet in length and of a minimum width of
four feet. Steel plates may be used to form the joints between the
slabs. Such plates shall be 1/4 inch in thickness and shall be
removed before the pouring of the adjoining slab. Slabs shall be
poured alternately, that is, every other slab shall be poured and
allowed to harden before the pouring of the one in between. The
sidewalks shall be finished by floating with a wood float. Care shall
be exercised to bring sufficient mortar to the surface. Bituminous
felt joints 1/2 inch thick shall be spaced at intervals not greater
than 75 feet apart. These joints shall also be placed wherever the
sidewalk intersects any other walk or curb.
(5) Height above curb; slope. All sidewalks shall be at least one inch
above the finished curb and shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot of
width towards the curb.
(6) Protection of surface. When completed, all walks shall be kept
moist and protected from traffic and the elements for three to four
days according to weather conditions. The forms shall be removed
§ 235-44 ORADELL CODE § 235-44
1:340
§ 235-45. Specifications for bituminous concrete.
The following specifications provide for the construction of driveways of
bituminous concrete and of the double-course type.
with great care, and, upon their removal, the edges of the walks
shall be protected in a suitable manner.
C. Driveways. If driveways are required, they shall be built in the same
manner as prescribed for sidewalks, except that they are to be six
inches in thickness. A bituminous felt joint shall be placed between the
driveway and curb.
D. Driveway aprons. Driveway aprons shall be considered to consist of that
portion of the driveway extending from the curbline to the edge of the
sidewalk nearest the curb. The edge of the sidewalk nearest the curb
shall not be higher than the top line of the curb if projected, and the
apron shall run in a straight grade from this edge to the bottom of the
driveway opening or gutter.
E. Drains under sidewalks. No new leader pipe or other drain shall
discharge over the sidewalk, but shall be carried under the sidewalk to
the gutter in a cast-iron pipe or bituminized fiber pipe. The hole in the
curb shall be round, neatly cut, leaving at least one inch of solid stone
or concrete over the hole, doing no other damage to the curbing and
shall be of no larger diameter than necessary. When the sidewalk is but
four feet wide, the pipes shall be so laid that the hubs will not come
under the sidewalk. In the place of a cast-iron pipe or bituminized fiber
pipe, a trough of masonry may be constructed and covered with a
suitable cover having its top surface flush with the surface of the
sidewalk and of a rough character to prevent slipping. No trough shall
be wider than six inches.
F. Drop curb at driveways. Drop curbs at driveways shall be constructed
of concrete. Specifications for construction must meet the Residential
Site Improvement Standards for New Jersey. Granite/Belgian blocks
may be used in the drop curb and must meet the RSIS of NJ.
A. Materials. The materials used shall be as follows
(1) Bituminous concrete. All bituminous concrete shall be prepared
from asphalt cement Grades OA3 or OA4, or shall be Tar T3, T4, all
in accordance with the state highway specifications. The
composition of the bituminous concrete shall be in accordance with
state highway specifications for Types FABC-1, hot mix, or A, cold
mix.
(2) Aggregates. All aggregates used in bituminous mixtures must
comply with the highway specifications referred to in the preceding
subsection.
B. Construction. The construction requirements shall be as follows:
§ 235-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-45
1:341
§ 235-46. (Reserved)
§ 235-47. Strict compliance with specifications required.
Any person who shall construct, remove, repair, replace, reset or alter the
sidewalk or cause the construction, removal, repair, replacement or altering
of the sidewalk on any public street shall do so strictly in accordance with
the specifications and requirements set out in this article and under the
(1) Excavation and subgrade. All grass, roots, sod and other material
unsuitable for a foundation shall be removed, together with such
earth and rock as is necessary to permit the surface of the sidewalk
to be laid to the proper grade. Where the sidewalk has to be placed
on fill, the fill shall be deposited in six-inch layers and rolled or
tamped.
(2) Drainage. Where the subgrade is wet or apt to be frequently watersoaked,
provision shall be made to secure adequate drainage by
excavating the unsuitable material and filling in with tamped
cinders, sand, gravel or crushed stone and, if necessary, by laying
drainpipes. The Borough Engineer may order such work or may
substitute equally efficient measures for securing adequate
drainage if, in his opinion, such work is necessary in order to
secure good construction.
(3) Stone base and supporting walls. Before laying the stone base, oneinch-
by-six-inch boards or steel edging measuring at least 1/8 inch
thick and equal to the depth of the pavement shall be placed
vertically, on edge, as a form or frame strictly to the lines and
grades as established by the Borough Engineer. The forms shall be
well supported by stakes on the outer side only.
(4) Spreading. Immediately after being dumped, the bituminous
mixture shall be placed in its final position with forks, rakes or lutes
in such manner as to correct any segregation or other irregularities
in composition and so that the pavement course will have the
proper thickness, grade, contour and weight when finished. No
walking shall be done on the pavement mixture until it is rolled,
except when necessary to adjust surface irregularities by raking.
All porous spots, depressions and projections shall be carefully
removed from the top course by raking. The rate of spreading shall
not exceed that at which the raking can be satisfactorily done. The
bituminous mixture may be spread with a mechanical spreader,
provided that notice is given to and approval received from the
Borough Engineer.
(5) Rolling. Rolling shall be done with a power roller having a load of
not less than 330 pounds per linear inch of tread of rear wheels and
shall be in one direction only. Any roller not meeting this
requirement must be approved by the Borough Engineer before the
work commences.
§ 235-45 ORADELL CODE § 235-47
1:342
supervision and inspection of the Borough Engineer and shall pay such
reasonable fee for inspection by the Borough Engineer as may be required.
§ 235-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-47
1:343

Part 2
Vehicles On Streets
ARTICLE VII
Misuse of Streets
[Adopted 5-21-1974 as Sections 9-5 and 9-6 of Art. IV of Ord. No.
610]
§ 235-48. Damage by vehicles.
No vehicles or other apparatus shall be operated upon the streets of the
Borough in such a manner as to unnecessarily wear or harm the pavement
thereof.
§ 235-49. Parking for cleaning or repairs.
No vehicle shall be parked or placed on any street for the purpose of
advertising the same for sale or for cleaning or repairs, except in the case
of emergency.
§ 235-50. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-3-1991 by Ord. No.
931]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty by the Municipal Court of
violating any section of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for each offense.
§ 235-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-50
1:345
Chapter 240
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Flood-fringe areas — See Ch. 132.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 234A.
§ 235-50 ORADELL CODE § 235-50
1:346
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 240-1.1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Oradell Land Development Ordinance."
§ 240-1.2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a pattern for land use based on
the Master Plan and to guide appropriate and orderly development which
will promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. To this
end, procedures for submitting and acting upon development applications
and setting design standards to guide the preparation of plans are included.
This chapter is intended to regulate the use of land within zoning districts;
secure safety from fire, flood, and other disasters; provide adequate light,
air and open space; limit and restrict buildings and structures to specified
districts according to their type and the nature and extent of their use
for trade, industry, residence, open space or other purposes; regulate the
bulk, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures;
avoid a conflict with neighboring municipalities, the county and the state;
establish appropriate population densities and concentrations contributing
to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
the preservation of the environment; provide sufficient space for residential,
recreational, business, commercial and industrial uses and open space;
encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight; promote a
desirable visual environment; promote the preservation of valuable
historical resources; promote the conservation of buildings and their
appearance; preserve open space and valuable natural resources to prevent
urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land; provide procedures for planned developments which incorporate the
best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
business, commercial, industrial and recreational development to the
particular site; encourage coordination of various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development and to the more
efficient use of land; and to promote the conservation of energy through the
use of planning practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to
provide for maximum utilization of renewable energy resources.
§ 240-1.3. Severability.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and such determination shall not
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
§ 240-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-1.3
1:347

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 240-2.1. Word usage.
§ 240-2.2. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following definitions:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A detached subordinate
structure, the use of which is clearly incidental and relates to that of the
principal use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the
principal structure, building or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use, clearly incidental and related to the
principal structure, building or use of land and located on the same lot as
that of the principal use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Construction Code Official who shall be
designated as the administrative officer for purposes of this chapter.
ALLEY — A minor way that is used primarily for vehicular service access to
the rear or side of properties that otherwise abuts on a street.
ALTERATION — Any changes in the supporting members or parts of a
building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam, girder or similar
construction.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms having cooking and sanitary
facilities, which is arranged, designed or used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit for a single family.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building or that portion thereof containing three
or more apartments.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words are defined in this
article. Any word not defined herein shall be construed to have the
meaning that is conferred on it by standard usage for the context in
which the word is used. However, if said word is defined by the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., that word shall have
the same meaning conferred upon it by that statute unless a contrary
intent is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular number include the plural number and vice versa. The word
"occupy" or "use" shall be considered as though followed by the words
"intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used." The words
"used for" include "designed for" and vice versa. The word "used" shall
include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented,
leased or intended to be used; the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "dwelling" includes the words "residence and
housing unit"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The
word "lot" shall include the word "plat."
§ 240-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:349
APPROVING BOARD — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, which approves a particular application.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters, including uninhabitable space.
AUTO BODY AND AUTO PAINT SHOPS — Premises used for the painting
and/or repair of body work of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SALES — Premises used for the storage and display of
vehicles that results in the transfer of title or lease.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business where
gasoline, fuel, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories are
installed and supplied directly to the retail customer and where mechanical
repair but not body work may be rendered.
AUTO REPAIR SHOPS — Premises used for the mechanical repair of motor
vehicles.
AWNINGS — Any canopy or covering consisting of a rigid frame and canvas
or vinyl material covering, which shelters the entrance or window area of a
building from the elements.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade plane. A basement shall be considered as a story above grade plane
where the midpoint between the basement floor and the basement ceiling is
above the grade plane. A basement shall also be considered as a story above
grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
BILLBOARD — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of displaying
outdoor advertising of products or services provided off-premises.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer of the State of
New Jersey hired by the governing body to provide professional services
to the Borough of Oradell, the Planning Board, and/or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
BOROUGH PLANNER — A licensed professional planner of the State of
New Jersey hired by the governing body to provide professional services
to the Borough of Oradell, the Planning Board, and/or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
BUFFER — A contiguous area of specified width adjacent to a lot line, either
in its natural state or planted with evergreen or other suitable vegetation
sufficient to form an effective year-round noise and visual screen. Such
areas may contain fences, underground utilities, walls and earth berms, but
shall not include any principal or accessory building use, parking areas and
aisles or storage areas, except that driveways providing access from the
street to the site and which extends through a front yard buffer, and signs
approved by the Approving Board, may be included.
A. More than six feet above grade plane; or
More than nine feet above the finished ground level at any point around
the perimeter of the building.
B.
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:350
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, posts or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosing of persons, animals
or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot area which is occupied
by buildings and accessory structures, including but not limited to porches,
decks, raised patios, stairs, landings, cabanas, covered patios, gazebos,
sheds, garages, chimneys and other related building appurtenances, but
not including walkways, driveways, patios, tennis courts and open parking
areas.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING PLOT — Any parcel of land upon which a building is located or a
building is to be located.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line established by ordinance, setting forth
a minimum distance between any structure and any front, side or rear
property lines.
BULK — The terms used to describe the size of buildings or other structures
and their relationship to each other and to open areas and lot lines and
therefore includes:
BUSINESS — See § 240-6.5, Subsections G through I and L.46
CELLAR — See definition of "basement."
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, to facilitate
pedestrian access across a paved public street.
CULTURAL FACILITY — An establishment that documents the social and
religious structures and intellectual and artistic manifestations that
characterize a society, including museums, art galleries, and botanical
gardens of natural, historic, educational, or cultural interest.
DECK — An exterior unroofed floor system supported on at least two
opposing sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers or other
independent supports.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
The size of buildings or other structures (for example height, length,
width, number of stories, FAR) of buildings or other structures.
A.
B. The shape of buildings or other structures.
The location of exterior walls of buildings or other structures in relation
to lot lines or other walls to the same building or to other buildings or
structures on the lot or adjacent lots.
C.
46.Editor's Note: Subsection L of such section was not included in the version of the Land
Development Ordinance adopted 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-9.
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:351
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision or
in the construction of two or more dwelling houses, business or industrial
buildings, in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by
another person.
DEVELOPMENT — The division or consolidation of land into more or less
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DISTRICT — Any part of the territory of the Borough of Oradell to which
certain uniform regulations and requirements of this chapter apply. See
"zone."
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands or interest in lands required for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or land or interests
therein required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein so as to safeguard the
public against flood damage in accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
DRIVE-THROUGH — The use of land, buildings, or structures, or parts
thereof, to provide or dispense products or services, either wholly or in
part, through an attendant or window or automated machine, to persons,
remaining in motorized vehicles that are in a designated stacking lane. A
drive-through facility does not include a fuel service station.
DRIVEWAYS — An improved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles
from the street onto and within the parcel and/or used for parking. Such
improved area shall be constructed of finished stone, concrete, masonry,
asphalt or other suitable material.
DRIVEWAY APRON — Driveway space from street line to sidewalk or to
right-of-way line if no sidewalk exists.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings, but not
including hotels, motels, lodging houses, boardinghouses or tourist homes.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more multiple-family
buildings with four or more dwelling units located one above the other, and/
or side-by-side units, containing off-street parking, landscaped areas and
other appurtenant facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure or building occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two families or
households, with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit.
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:352
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building which is completely
surrounded by permanent open space, occupied or intended for occupancy
exclusively by one family or one household, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for the use of the occupants of the dwelling unit; also
referred to as a "single-family dwelling."
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units, in which each unit has its own front and rear access to
the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated
from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for occupancy
as separate living quarters for no more than two families or two households,
with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use
of the occupants of each unit, which units are separated from each other by
vertical walls to and through the roof or by horizontal floors; also referred
to as a "duplex dwelling."
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof having cooking, living and
sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of one household or one family.
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or
particular persons for specified use.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the aggregate floor area or an increase
in the height of an existing building or area of the lot covered by a building.
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use within an existing building.
FACADE — The area from grade level to the top of the highest point of the
structure and extending the full width of the structure.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together as a single, nonprofit
housekeeping unit whose relationship is of a permanent and domestic
character, as distinguished from fraternities, sororities, societies, clubs,
associations, lodges, combines, halfway houses, shelters, rooming houses,
boardinghouses, specialized housing and other forms of transient
associations. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to interfere with
or restrict the placement of children in a group home pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66, or any other use of single-family dwellings protected by state
statute.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
plastic, metal, or any other manufactured material or a combination of
these materials erected for the enclosure of land, dividing of one piece from
another.
FENCE HEIGHT — The vertical height of a fence measured from the highest
point of the fence to the lowest grade elevation of the ground within three
feet horizontally of the vertical face of the fence.
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the land surface following completion
of all site preparation work, grading, and disturbances.
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:353
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors
of a building from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center
line of a wall separating two buildings, and including attached or detached
garages and accessory buildings, but excluding:
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the gross horizontal area of all stories
above grade, except the basement floor of residential buildings or
structures, compared to the total area of the site. Detached garages and
accessory buildings shall be included in the floor area ratio calculation
when the structure is located in a side yard, front yard or in a rear yard and
is closer than 20 feet to the farthest rear line of the principal building on the
site. The distance between these structure(s) and the principal building's
rear line shall be measured in a direction that is perpendicular to the street
address front lot line of the principal building.
FRONTAGE — The straight line distance between the end points of the
street address front lot line.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial or cremation and the display of the deceased and rituals attendant
to burial or cremation. The definition of "funeral home" does not include
facilities associated with cremation.
GARAGE —
GAS STATION — See "automobile service station."
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall
be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building,
between the building and a point six feet from the building.
A. Residential basements;
The floor area of rooms devoted to mechanical equipment accessory
to the building and/or rooms with a ceiling height of less than six feet
located in basements of nonresidential properties, including but not
limited to commercial, industrial or business properties;
B.
Any terraces, balconies, open porches or decks extending beyond the
exterior face of the building.
C.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building or a portion of the building for the
storage of three or fewer motor vehicles, without provision for
repairing or servicing of vehicles for profit.
A.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building or structure for the storage or parking
of more than three passenger motor vehicles or motor-powered boats or
more than one commercial motor vehicle and in which provision may be
made for the dispensing of fuel, oil or similar products for the servicing
of such vehicles.
B.
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:354
HEIGHT OF NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — The vertical distance of a
building measured from the top of the highest point of the structure to the
average finished grade taken six feet from the building foundation, at the
midpoint of each building wall and at a point six feet from each building
corner (measured as if the building wall were extended six feet from the
building corner).
HEIGHT OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — The vertical distance of a
building measured from the top of the highest point of a structure to the
average finished grade taken six feet from the building foundation, at the
midpoint of each building wall and at a point measured diagonally at 45°
from each corner. Where new grades are proposed, the grade measurement
cannot exceed a height established at more than one foot six inches above
the existing grade.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Any building, structure or portion thereof or land
maintained and operated by a religious group in which religious services
are regularly conducted, but which may include accessory uses in the main
building or structure or in accessory buildings or structures for religious
education, assembly, food preparation, recreation or library, but not
including missions, district offices or regional headquarters of a religious
group.
HOUSEHOLD — A social unit comprised of those living together in the same
dwelling unit, each member having unrestricted access to all the parts of
the total dwelling unit.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Oradell,
unless that discharge is authorized, under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJO 141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
INTERIOR BUILDING SPACE — Defined the same as the term "floor area,
net."[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-02]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Loading space for all commercial and industrial zones shall be a minimum
of 12 feet by 30 feet.
LOT — A single piece or parcel of land separated from other parcels or
portions by legal description, abutting on a street, whose area, in addition
to the parts thereof occupied or which may be hereafter occupied by a
principal building and its accessory buildings, is sufficient to provide the
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:355
yard space and lot frontage width required in this chapter and conforming
to minimum area requirements of this chapter.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or
more intersecting streets. A corner lot is also a lot bounded on two or more
sides by the same street. All yards on corner lots abutting any street shall
be deemed as front yards and shall comply with all the Borough codes and
zoning requirements for front yards.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which is occupied by
buildings and structures, decks, swimming pool decks, tennis courts, and all
improved surfaces, including but not limited to parking and loading areas,
driveways, walkways, patios and pavers.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines measured perpendicular to (or radial on curved streets) the front
lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot. All yards on an interior lot
abutting any streets shall be deemed as front yards and shall comply with
all the Borough codes and zoning requirements for front yards.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming lot."
LOT LINE — The legal boundaries of a lot as determined by an accurate
survey or in the records of the Borough Engineer.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
On corner lots and interior lots, all lot lines separating a lot from a street
right-of-way are front lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — The line that most nearly qualifies as the line most
distant and opposite from the street address.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot
lines, measured along the street address front lot line. On a corner lot, the
horizontal distance between the non-address front lot line and the opposite
side lot line.
MAIN BUILDING — The building in which the principal use of the lot is
conducted.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and converting of raw finished or
unfinished materials or products or any of these into an article or substance
of different character or for use for a different purpose; also, industries
furnishing labor in the case of manufacturing, assembling or refinishing of
manufactured articles.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to Section 19 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28).
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:356
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than three
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road
or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Zoning Ordinance or this chapter.
MUNICIPAL BOARD — A Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
or a governing body of Oradell when acting pursuant to this chapter or the
Municipal Land Use Act.47
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Oradell or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDEP PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A legal existing building which fails to
comply with the current requirements concerning bulk (for height, number
of stories, size, FAR, area, coverages, yards or locations) set forth in this
chapter applicable to the zone in which the building is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to adoption, revision or amendment of a
zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the current requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity that was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which fails to
conform to the current requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and
Building Permit Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., or any prior act authorizing
such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:357
to the location and width of the streets, public parks and playgrounds and
drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OPEN PORCH — A covered entrance to a building which has no walls or
other enclosing materials but is open to light and air.
OPEN SPACE — Any part of a lot with a building which is unbuilt upon and
intended to meet the side, rear or front yard requirements of this chapter, or
an open area of potentially developable use as a park or active recreational
area.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association or legal entity having legal title
to the lands sought to be developed or having written consent from the legal
owner of said lands to act on his behalf.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An area, improved in the same manner as a
driveway, on a residential lot used for the parking of passenger vehicles
without provision for repairing or servicing of vehicles for profit.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — A paved area, improved in the same manner as
a driveway, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of
passenger vehicles and available to the public whether for a fee, free or as
an accommodation for employees, guests, clients or customers.
PARKING BAY — An area sufficient to park one passenger vehicle.
PARKING SPACE — An accessory off-street space, for the parking of one
passenger vehicle, opened or enclosed and paved, which is accessible and
available at all hours when the building to which it is an accessory is in use.
PATIO — A structure which will be no more than eight inches above finished
grade at any point and used primarily for passive recreation.
PATIO, RAISED — A structure which is more than eight inches above
finished grade used primarily for passive recreation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security that may be accepted
pursuant to the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Act to guarantee the
completion of the required improvements before approval of a final site plan
or final plat and shall include performance bonds with a responsible surety
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, or escrow agreements
secured by cash, certified check or cashier's check.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of the land as permitted according to this
chapter. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not include any
nonconforming use.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Oradell unless
specifically designated otherwise.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:358
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the proposed development which is submitted to the Borough for
consideration and tentative approval.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for final
approval in accordance with the regulations of this chapter and which, if
approved, shall be filed with the proper County Recording Officer.
POND — Any basin/structure/container above or below ground that
contains water from three inches to 24 inches in depth used for any reason.
PREMISES — A building or structure or a portion of a lot, vacant or
otherwise.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "main building."
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A space used by a person who is duly licensed
by the State of New Jersey and practicing as an architect, attorney at law,
certified public accountant, dentist, licensed professional engineer, medical
doctor, osteopath or chiropractor. In a residential zone, this use must be
carried on wholly within a completely enclosed building, in an area not
greater than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit and by a
resident of the principal building with not more than two employees, none
of whom may be practicing the same profession as the resident, except for
members of his or her family living on the premises. All professional offices
are hereafter excluded from all residential zones.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building owned or operated by the Borough of
Oradell, any public board of education, the County of Bergen, the State of
New Jersey, or the United States of America.
REDEVELOPMENT — See "development."
RESERVE STRIP — That parcel of undeveloped land designated for
dedication as a public or quasi-public use.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
served, and consumed, mostly within the principal building.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land and space required on the surface, subsurface
and overhead for the construction and installation of materials necessary to
provide a passageway for vehicular traffic, pedestrians, utility lines, poles,
conduits and mains, signs, trees and shrubbery and the proper amount of
light and air as established by local authorities. Street rights-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building or portion thereof containing sleeping
accommodations without individual cooking facilities and rented for
compensation to people who are not members of the family as defined in
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:359
this section. The term "rooming house" shall be deemed to include lodging
house and boardinghouse.
SATELLITE RECEPTION ANTENNA — See FCC regulations.
SHED — A structure used exclusively for storage allowed only as an
accessory building.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic.
SIGN — Any inscription written, printed, painted or otherwise placed on a
board, plate, banner or upon any material object or any device whatsoever,
which by reason of its form, color, wording, activity or technique, or
otherwise, attracts attention to itself, whether it be used as a means of
identification, advertisement or announcement. A sign shall also include a
description, display or illustration which is affixed to any building, structure
or part thereof or any piece of land which displays or includes any letter,
word, banner, model, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used
as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or
advertisement. For the purpose of this chapter, the word "sign" does not
include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, group of nations, states,
cities or other governmental unit, or the number and name of the street
upon which the building is located. This term shall apply only to such signs
as are visible and intelligible to persons located outside the building.
SIGN, AREA — The surface area computed by drawing a rectangle touching
the outermost edges of letters comprising the sign or the area established
by reason of distinctive variation in background color, by borders or by
some other equivalent manner, whichever is greater.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign which is separate and apart from the building.
SIGN, MOVING — Any sign whereby the sign or a portion thereof is not
fixed as a whole or in part moves from its fixed position. This definition
shall not preclude a sign from incorporating a clock or temperature reading
indicator.
SIGN, PROFESSIONAL — The sign indicating the profession as set forth in
the definition of "home professional office" and may be used only to identify
actual office premises.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — All signs not of a permanent nature, either attached
or freestanding, such as "for sale," "for lease" or "for rent" signs, real estate
signs, advertising, promotional or premium signs which may remain on a
property for a limited time only, as specifically set forth in Article XII of this
chapter.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign located on the inside of a window, or a sign being
visible from the exterior, or a sign secured to the outside face on a window.
SITE PLAN — The plan to be submitted with the final plat of subdivision.
It shall set forth all drainage, the present elevations of the subdivision
and proposed final elevations of roads, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, the
individual lots, the first floor and garage floor, if any, of the building to be
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:360
constructed thereon and any intermediate grades as may be required by the
Borough Engineer.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to
be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, stone, rock or dirt,
without regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
SOIL, MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade,
level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour, transport or
supply of soil. This word shall not be construed to include plowing, spading,
cultivating, harrowing or disking of soil or any other operation usually and
ordinarily associated with the conservation or tilling of soil for agricultural
or horticultural purposes.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway, or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law,
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street right-of-way and a lot.
Where title to land extends to the center of a road, easement or right-of-way,
the side line of such road, easement or right-of-way shall be deemed to be
the street line of a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having such permanent
location.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for such entity or for
another. Such person shall be the owner of the property or shall obtain the
owner's consent, in writing, to apply for such subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land and/or consolidation
of existing lots into a lesser number for sale or development. The term
"subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A tank, basin or structure
capable of holding water over 24 inches in depth and which is to be
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:361
used for private, recreational swimming by private families and their social
guests on residential premises and as accessory to the residential use. This
includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs
and spas. All other uses are prohibited in all zones.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Any swimming pool other than a private
residential swimming pool available for use by the public or a private club
or association.
TOPSOIL — The natural, undisturbed surface layer of soil having more
organic material than subsequent layers.
USE — The specific purpose for which a parcel of land or a building or a
portion of a parcel of land or a building is designed, arranged, constructed,
altered, converted, occupied, maintained, rented, leased or intended to be
used.
VEHICLE —
WALKWAY — Any impervious improved pathway on private property used
for pedestrian traffic.
YARD — The space on a lot extending along a lot line between such lot line
and a principal building or a non-building use occupying such lot.
YARD, FRONT — The open space extending across the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the minimum distance between the nearest point on
the street line and the nearest part of the main or accessory building. Yards
abutting a street line shall meet minimum zoning for front yards.
YARD, REAR — The yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rearmost main building and the rear lot line, the depth of which shall
be the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of such main
building. Where the rear yard overlaps the front yard, the front yard zoning
requirements shall take precedence.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space within a lot between a side lot
line and the parts of the building, structure or outbuilding nearest thereto.
Such side yard shall extend on both sides of the lot from the building
setback line to the rear line of said lot. However, each side of a corner
lot or interior lot abutting a street line shall meet the minimum zoning
requirements for front yards.
A. PASSENGER VEHICLE — Any noncommercial vehicle.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle registered as a commercial
vehicle, any vehicle equipped with pipe and/or ladder racks, or any
vehicle with signage.
B.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A self-propelled or towed vehicle,
including boats, used for recreational, camping or travel purposes and
used solely as a family or personal conveyance.
C.
TRAILER — Any vehicle with or without motor power designed for
carrying persons or property or that can be drawn by a motor vehicle.
D.
§ 240-2.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-2.2
1:362
ZONE — An area within which:
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Borough of Oradell.
ZONING OFFICER — The official designated by the governing body to
be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of the local zoning
ordinances and this chapter.
A. Certain uses of land and building are permitted.
B. Certain other uses are prohibited.
C. Yards and other open spaces are required.
D. Lot areas, frontage, and sizes are required.
E. Building height limits are imposed.
F. Floor area ratio and various coverage limits are imposed.
§ 240-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2.2
1:363

ARTICLE III
Planning Board
§ 240-3.1. Establishment.
§ 240-3.2. Terms of members.
See Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 240-3.3. Alternate members.
A. There is hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), (hereinafter "MLUL"), in
the Borough of Oradell a Planning Board of nine members consisting of
the following four classes:
(1) Class I. The Mayor or designee, in the absence of the Mayor.
(2) Class II. One of the officials of the municipality, other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that if there is an Environmental Commission, the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of
the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member, unless there be among the Class
IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of
the Zoning Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission and a member of the Board of Education, in which
case the member common to the Planning Board and Municipal
Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of
the Planning Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on
a municipal board or commission whose function is advisory in
nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary and not
required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office.
(3) Class III. A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education.
B. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
was made.
A. The Planning Board shall have two alternates.
B. Alternate members of the Planning Board shall be appointed for terms
of two years. The terms shall be staggered so that one expires at the
end of each year. The Mayor shall appoint the alternates. Alternate
members shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members of nine-
§ 240-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3.3
1:365
§ 240-3.4. Disqualification or removal of members.
Whenever any member of the Planning Board, without being excused by
majority of the authorized members of the Board, fails to attend and
participate at meetings of such body for a period of six consecutive weeks,
or for three consecutive regular meetings, whichever shall be of longer
duration, at the conclusion of such period, the office of that member shall
be deemed vacant, provided that the Planning Board shall notify the Mayor
and Council in writing of such determination. The Planning Board may not
refuse to excuse a member with respect to those failures to attend and
participate which are due to legitimate illness.
§ 240-3.5. Vacancies; conflicts of interest.
member Planning Boards. At the time of appointment, the Mayor shall
designate the alternates as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2,"
respectively, and each alternate shall retain said designation during
the term for which the alternate was appointed. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be appointed by the Mayor
for the unexpired term only.
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of all matters but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member.
D. During the absence or disqualification of any regular member, the
Chairperson shall appoint one of the alternate members to serve in the
place of said regular member; provided, however, that where the
alternate member is designated to serve in the place of the regular
member who is disqualified from participating in the hearing of a
particular case, the alternate member shall be designated to serve only
with respect to such case.
E. An alternate member who has been designated to sit in place of a
regular member and who has participated in any hearing or matter
coming before the Planning Board shall continue to act in the place of
such regular member until the final disposition of said matter by the
Board.
F. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor for the unexpired
term.
B. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by the MLUL from acting on a matter
due to the member's personal or financial interests therein, regular
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to
§ 240-3.3 ORADELL CODE § 240-3.5
1:366
§ 240-3.6. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 240-3.7. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of the Planning Board Attorney. The
Planning Board may annually appoint the Planning Board Attorney or a firm.
§ 240-3.8. Employment of expert staff and services.
See Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 240-3.9. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. It shall have
the powers and duties enumerated by the MLUL.
§ 240-3.10. Time limits for decisions.
serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning
Board, in order of seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members necessary
to constitute a quorum, to act upon the matter without any personal or
financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to
be made between regular members of equal seniority, the Chairman of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
A. Major subdivision. Upon submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than 10
lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the
subdivision.
B. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is required to exercise
its ancillary powers on an application for site plan, subdivision or
conditional use which includes a request for the granting of a variance,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 120 days after submission by the developer of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate
§ 240-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3.10
1:367
§ 240-3.11. Subdivision and Site Plan Committee.
There may be appointed by the Chairman of the Planning Board such
committees of at least three members of the Board in accordance with this
chapter to perform such duties as may be conferred on it by the Planning
Board.
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
C. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat, unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the Count Recording
Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
(3) The Planning Board may extend the 95 days or the one-hundredninety-
day period if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Planning Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or
quasi-governmental entities and that the developer applied
promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The
length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused
by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
Planning Board. The developer may apply for an extension either
before or after the original expiration date.
§ 240-3.10 ORADELL CODE § 240-3.11
1:368
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 240-4.1. Establishment; alternate members.
§ 240-4.2. Organization of Board.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee
designated by the Board.
§ 240-4.3. Vacancies; conflicts of interests.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the Borough of
Oradell appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Council, to serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year of
their appointment.
B. Alternate members.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have two alternates.
(2) Alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
appointed for terms of two years. The terms shall be staggered so
that one expires at the end of each year. The Mayor shall appoint
the alternates with the advice and consent of the Council. At the
time of appointment, the appointing authority shall designate the
alternates as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," respectively,
and each alternate shall retain said designation during the term for
which the alternate was appointed.
(3) During the absence or disqualification of any regular member, the
Chairperson shall appoint one of the alternate members, starting
with Alternate No. 1, to serve in the place of said regular member;
provided, however, that where the alternate member is designated
to serve in the place of the regular member who is disqualified from
participating in the hearing of a particular case, the alternate
member shall be designated to serve only with respect to such
case.
(4) An alternate member who has been designated to sit in place of a
regular member and who has participated in any hearing or matter
coming before the Board shall continue to act in the place of such
regular member until the final disposition of said matter by the
Board.
A. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the consent of
the Council, for the unexpired term.
§ 240-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4.3
1:369
§ 240-4.4. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney or a firm.
§ 240-4.5. Employment of experts, additional staff and services.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed
the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 240-4.6. Powers.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. It shall have
the powers and duties enumerated by the MLUL.
§ 240-4.7. Additional powers.
B. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its
regular or alternate members is prohibited by the MLUL from acting on
a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein,
Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve,
for that matter only, as temporary members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be
called upon to serve, in order of seniority of continuous service to the
Planning Board, until there are the minimum numbers of members
necessary to conform to the MLUL, to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
C. Whenever any member of the Zoning Board, without being excused by
majority of the authorized members of the Board, fails to attend and
participate at meetings of such body for a period of six consecutive
weeks, or for three consecutive regular meetings, whichever shall be of
longer duration, at the conclusion of such period, the office of that
member shall be deemed vacant, provided that the Zoning Board shall
notify the Mayor and Council in writing of such determination. The
Zoning Board may not refuse to excuse a member with respect to those
failures to attend and participate which are due to legitimate illness.
A. Appeals and applications for variances. Appeals to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any
decision of the Administrative Officer. Each appeal shall be taken within
the 20 days prescribed by the statute by filing a notice of appeal with
the office from whom the appeal was taken, together with 17 copies of
said notice with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the
administrative officer. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds
§ 240-4.3 ORADELL CODE § 240-4.7
1:370
§ 240-4.8. Power to reverse and modify decisions.
See Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 240-4.9. Expiration of variance.
§ 240-4.10. Time limit for decision.
See Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
for said appeal. The office from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Interpretations and applications addressed to the original jurisdiction
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the administrative officer. Seventeen copies of
the application shall be filed. At the time of the filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 14 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary
forms from the Secretary of the Board, who shall inform the applicant of
the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting
dates of the Board.
A. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board permitting the
erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a
specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced within one year from the
date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board; except, however, that
the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled
from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment or Planning Board to a court of competent jurisdiction
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
B. The municipal board (Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board)
which granted the variance may grant an extension of the expiration
date if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities or that the
applicant has encountered a hardship in proceeding with the
development. An applicant shall apply for an extension before the
expiration date.
§ 240-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4.11
1:371
§ 240-4.11. Appeals from Zoning Board of adjustment to Mayor and
Council.
An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a
use variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d may be taken
to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Oradell, provided that such
appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 240-4.11 ORADELL CODE § 240-4.11
1:372
ARTICLE V
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 240-5.1. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto, except as a member of the public.
§ 240-5.2. Meetings.
§ 240-5.3. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the person appearing and addressing the Board and of the
person appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if
any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes.
§ 240-5.4. Fees.
Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115 of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell, which establishes fees. All fees shall be payable at the time of
filing any application for development. If such fees and escrows are not
maintained at least at a minimum of 70% of the initial escrow on a monthly
basis (two full work days before the next hearing), the application/case
shall be considered to be put on hold by the applicant, whereby the time
limit for decision is put on hold and hearing of the case shall cease until
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process or for such reasons as are set
forth in the duly adopted rules and regulations of such Board.
B. Special meetings may be requested by the applicant which are
dedicated solely to the applicant's case for efficiency reasons, and then
with Board approval, shall be conducted on a schedule at the discretion
of the Board. The applicant will compensate the Borough for all costs,
expenses and fees incurred as a result of the specially scheduled
meeting(s). In addition, the applicant shall specify that the time limit(s)
for the Board's decision is waived and such waiver may be withdrawn
by the applicant within 70 days' written notice to the Board.
§ 240-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5.4
1:373
the escrow and fees are reestablished to their required initial levels. If no
action/full payment is taken by the applicant for a three-month period, the
application will be deemed withdrawn and will be dismissed by the Board
without prejudice. If the applicant in the future reapplies for any kind of
construction or relief on this property or part thereof, all prior expenses
shall be paid/covered prior to having the new application deemed complete/
acceptable for hearing by the Board.
§ 240-5.5. Hearings.
§ 240-5.6. Notice.
Pursuant to requirements of MLUL prior to commencement of hearing, the
municipal Board may require any additional notice it deems necessary to
meet the objectives of the notice requirements of this chapter.
§ 240-5.7. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative office
of the municipality shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee as established in the Fee
Schedule in Chapter 115, make and certify a list, from the current tax
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
§ 240-5.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-5.7
1:374
duplicate, of names and addresses of owners and other persons required to
receive notice, to whom the applicant is required to give notice.
§ 240-5.8. Decisions on application for development.
§ 240-5.9. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Administrative Officer with separate charge to the applicant. Said notice
shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the
date of any such decision.
§ 240-5.10. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessment or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
§ 240-5.11. Rules and regulations.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board shall each adopt,
and may from time to time amend, such rules and regulations with respect
to their various functions as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall
not be inconsistent with this chapter. Said rules and regulations shall be
available for inspection at the office of the respective Boards, and copies
thereof shall be provided to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the Borough.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
§ 240-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5.12
1:375
§ 240-5.12. Escrow for professional fees.
§ 240-5.13. Flood-fringe areas.
In all applications involving a flood-fringe area, the provisions of Chapter
132 of the Code of the Borough of Oradell shall be followed.
§ 240-5.14. Conditional approval; county approval.
The applicant shall comply with reasonable conditions laid down by the
approving board for design, dedication, improvements and the use of the
land to conform to the physical and economical development of the
municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future residents/
owners in the development and the community at large. Where County
Planning Board review or approval is required on an application, the
approving authority shall condition any approval it grants upon receipt
of a favorable report from the County Planning Board. If the county's
report attaches mandatory conditions, the original conditional approval by
the approving municipal Board shall be void, and the application shall be
denied, and a new resolution shall be adopted which considers the County
Planning Board's report.
§ 240-5.15. Simultaneous review and approval.
A. All applicants or appellants to the Municipal Board shall deposit and
maintain escrows for professional fees as established in Chapter 115 of
the Code of the Borough of Oradell, which establishes fees.
B. The Borough shall make all of the payments to professionals for
services rendered to the municipality for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvements or other purposes under the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law. If the Borough requires of the developer an escrow
toward anticipated municipal expenses for these professional services,
the deposit shall be pursuant to vouchers from the professionals stating
the hours spent, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. The
Borough shall render a written final accounting to the developer setting
forth all the charges made to the escrow. Thereafter, the Borough shall,
upon written request, provide copies of the vouchers to the developer.
For professionals, the charge to the escrow shall be at the same rate as
all other work of the same nature by the professional for the
municipality.
A. Where an applicant is seeking simultaneous subdivision and/or site plan
review and approval of a use variance, the applicant shall submit, in
addition to the Zoning Board of Adjustment application, all Planning
Board applications accompanied by plats and other supporting
documents required for subdivision and site plan approval by the
Planning Board.
§ 240-5.12 ORADELL CODE § 240-5.15
1:376
§ 240-5.16. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance
or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice
of appeal in the manner set forth in this chapter and in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. Where an applicant is seeking simultaneous variance approval as part
of an application for subdivision and/or site plan, the applicant shall
submit, in addition to the Planning Board application, all applications
and documents required for variance approval by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 240-5.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5.16
1:377

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Districts and Regulations
§ 240-6.1. Establishment of zones and regulations.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following zones are hereby created,
and the following regulations governing the height, number of buildings and
size of buildings and other structures, their construction, reconstruction,
alteration or repair, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size
of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the
location, use and extent of use of buildings, structures and lands for trade,
commerce, residence and other purposes are hereby approved and shall
hereafter apply in the Borough of Oradell.
§ 240-6.2. Zones designated; boundaries established.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Borough of Oradell is divided into
13 zones, which are as follows: [Amended 10-9-2018 by Ord. No.
18-13]
R-1 One-Family Residential Zone
R-2 One-Family Residential Zone
R-3 One-Family Residential Zone
R-4 One-Family Residential Zone
R-5 Two-Family Residential Zone
A-1 Garden Apartment and Residential Zone
B-1 Business Zone
B-2 Limited Business Zone
B-3 Business and Apartment Zone
C-1 Commercial Zone
CR Conservation/Recreation Zone (Recreation, Watershed, Open
Space)
MX Mixed-Use Development Zone (Residential/Business)
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay District
B. The boundaries of these zones are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of Oradell, New Jersey,"
revised March 1, 2010, which map is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.48
C. District boundary lines are intended to follow street and railroad center
lines and lot or property lines as they exist at the time of enactment of
this chapter unless otherwise indicated on the Zoning Map. The exact
location of any disputed boundary line shall be determined by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
48.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and amendments thereto are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.2
1:379
§ 240-6.3. Application of zoning regulations.
The regulations set forth in this chapter within each zone shall be the
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure of land within said zone.
§ 240-6.4. Buffer area.
When a nonresidential use abuts a residential zone on the side or rear, a
space not less than 10 feet in width on the nonresidential property shall be
designated as a buffer area and so indicated on the plat. Buffer areas will
be contiguous with residential property lines and shall be of uniform width.
If the buffer is less than 20 feet wide, the applicant may be required to
erect and landscape a six-foot-high double-sided "sight-proof" fence within
the buffer area parallel to the lot line of the abutting residential lot and
set back a distance appropriate for the landscaping treatment in the buffer
area. No chain-link or cyclone fences shall be permitted. Buffer areas on
the nonresidential property between parking areas, loading areas and/
or streets shall be at least 10 feet wide. When two or more commercial
properties abut on the side or rear, an area of not less than three feet
in width shall be designated on each property as a buffer area, and so
indicated on the plat.
D. Where a vacated right-of-way is bounded on either side by more than
one district, the former center line of such right-of-way shall become
the new district line.
E. Where a district boundary line divides one or more lots that are in a
single ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, the use
provided for one district shall not extend into the other district.
A. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and
no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, altered, reconstructed or moved unless in conformity with
all the regulations for the zone in which said building, structure or land
is located.
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered
which is in any manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
C. No yards, setbacks or lots existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements of this chapter for said zone. All yards, setbacks and lots
created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter for each zone.
A. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds and tall grass. Any screen planting shall be maintained
permanently, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season.
§ 240-6.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.4
1:380
§ 240-6.5. Use and bulk regulations.
The uses permitted and the bulk regulations for each zone shall be those
set forth below and as shown in the Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations
Schedule:49
B. No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall
be permitted in the buffer area, except access drives from public
streets, one unlighted directional sign per each direction of traffic per
access drive, and permitted signs as specified in this code.
C. Requirements for planting in the buffer area.
(1) A solid and continuous sight proof landscaped screen shall be
planted and maintained to conceal the parking and loading areas,
eliminate the glare of vehicle lights throughout the year and
camouflage the building from the abutting residential areas. The
landscape screen shall consist of evergreen trees. Trees shall be
planted in an area five feet to 20 feet from the residential line in a
zigzag pattern and not more than six feet apart, except where
otherwise authorized by the approving board. Evergreen trees shall
not be less than six feet high above the top of the root ball when
planted, and the lowest branches shall be not more than one foot
above the ground. In the event that existing evergreens do not
provide an adequate buffer, supplemental plantings or sight proof
screening may be required.
(2) In addition to the landscaped screen, other trees which are on the
currently approved list of the Borough shall be planted by the
applicant at a distance of not more than 30 feet from each other.
(3) A landscape plan prepared by a New Jersey licensed landscape
architect/professional shall be submitted for review and approval.
A. R-1 One-Family Residential.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) One-family dwelling.
(b) Community residences specifically permitted by state
statute(s).
(c) Family day-care homes specifically permitted by state
statute(s).
(2) Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(a) Home office use, meaning an office activity carried on for gain
by a resident in a dwelling unit, shall be a permitted accessory
use in residential zone districts, provided that:
49.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:381
[1] The use is limited solely to office use by permanent, fulltime
residents of the home.
[2] No nonresident of the dwelling unit, employees,
customers, business invitees or guests shall visit the
dwelling unit for business purposes.
[3] Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office
supplies.
[4] There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or
structures because of the use, and no outside appearance
of a business use, including but not limited to parking,
storage, signs or lights.
[5] The use operates no equipment or process that creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with
telephone, radio or television reception, detectable by
neighboring residents.
[6] The use does not require any increased or enhanced
electrical or water supply.
[7] The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same
as other residential uses in the zone district.
[8] The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal
residential use and creates no potential or actual
detriment to the sanitary sewer system or its components.
[9] Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service,
United Parcel Service, Federal Express and other delivery
services providing regular service to residential uses in
the zone district. Maximum deliveries shall be 10 per
week.
[10] All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall
be limited in volume, type and frequency to what is
normally associated with other residential uses in the zone
district.
(b) Private garages, limited to the storage of not more than three
vehicles, of which only one may be a commercial vehicle.
(c) Swimming pools and ponds. (See § 240-7.11.)
(d) Fences. (See Article X.)
(e) Tennis courts. (See § 240-8.4D.)
(3) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:382
(4) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 18,750 square feet.
[2] Width: 125 feet.
(b) Yards.
[1] The minimum yard requirements of a principal building
are as follows:
[a] Front yard setback: 35 feet.
[b] Rear yard setback: 25 feet or 25% of the property
depth, whichever is greater.
[c] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 20
feet; the minimum total of both side yards shall be 40
feet.
[2] For every foot or part thereof for which the front yard lot
width line is five feet above the required front lot width in
a lot in a residential zone, 50% of that additional front yard
lot width shall be added to the lot's total both side yard
setback requirements of that zone, and the other 50% may
be used for the added building width. If the lot has only
one side yard, the additional side yard footage shall be
added to the single side yard setback requirement. In
addition, one-story open front porches that conform to the
front yard setback may extend into the side yards along
the entire front of the building but limited to each of the
building's two side walls.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material, but excluding the water surface area of any
swimming pool/pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio. Not more than 29% for the first 18,750 square
feet, and an additional 14.5% for lot square footage between
18,750 and 37,500 square feet. There shall be no additional
floor area ratio permitted for lot area above 37,500 square
feet.
(f) Height allowances shall be in accordance with Building Height
Diagram A or B.50
(g) The wall length along any side yard must be in accordance with
the restrictions shown in Diagram C.51
50.Editor's Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:383
B. R-2 One-Family Residential.
(1) All uses permitted in the R-1 Zone, including accessory uses, are
permitted in this zone.
(2) All uses prohibited in the R-1 Zone are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 12,000 square feet.
[2] Width: 100 feet.
(b) Yards.
[1] The minimum yard requirements of a principal building
are as follows:
[a] Front yard setback: 30 feet.
[b] Rear yard setbacks: 25 feet or 25% of the property
depth, whichever is greater.
[c] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 15
feet; the minimum total of both side yards shall be 35
feet.
[2] For every foot or part thereof for which the front yard lot
width line is five feet above the required front lot width in
a lot in a residential zone, 50% of that additional front yard
lot width shall be added to the lot's total both side yard
setback requirements of that zone and the other 50% may
be used for the added building width. If the lot has only
one side yard, the additional side yard footage shall be
added to the single side yard setback requirement. In
addition, one-story open front porches that conform to the
front yard setback may extend into the side yards along
the entire front of the building but limited to each of the
building's two side walls.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material, but excluding the water surface area of any
swimming pool or pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio. Not more than 31% for the first 12,000 square
feet, and a additional 15.5% for lot square footage between
12,000 and 24,000 square feet. There shall be no additional
51.Editor's Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:384
floor area ratio permitted for lot area above 24,000 square
feet.
(f) Height allowances shall be in accordance with Building Height
Diagram A or B.52
(g) The wall length along any side yard must be in accordance with
the restrictions shown in Diagram C.53
C. R-3 One-Family Residential.
(1) All uses permitted in the R-1 Zone, including accessory uses, are
permitted in this zone.
(2) All uses prohibited in the R-1 Zone are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 9,000 square feet.
[2] Width: 75 feet.
(b) Yards.
[1] The minimum yard requirements of a principal building
are as follows:
[a] Front yard setback: 25 feet.
[b] Rear yard setback: 25 feet or 25% of the property
depth, whichever is greater.
[c] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10
feet; the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25
feet.
[2] For every foot or part thereof for which the front yard lot
width line is five feet above the required front lot width in
a lot in a residential zone, 50% of that additional front yard
lot width shall be added to the lot's total both side yard
setback requirements of that zone and the other 50% may
be used for the added building width. If the lot has only
one side yard, the additional side yard footage shall be
added to the single side yard setback requirement. In
addition, one-story open front porches that conform to the
front yard setback may extend into the side yards along
the entire front of the building but limited to each of the
building's two side walls.
52.Editor's Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:385
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool or pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio. Not more than 33% for the first 9,000 square
feet, and a additional 16.5% for lot square footage between
9,000 and 18,000 square feet. There shall be no additional floor
area ratio permitted for lot area above 18,000 square feet.
(f) Height allowances shall be in accordance with Building Height
Diagram A or B.54
(g) The wall length along any side yard must be in accordance with
the restrictions shown in Diagram C.55
D. R-4 One-Family Residential.
(1) All uses permitted in the R-1 Zone, including accessory uses, are
permitted in this zone.
(2) All uses prohibited in the R-1 Zone are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Width: 75 feet.
(b) Yards.
[1] The minimum yard requirements of a principal building
are as follows:
[a] Front yard setback: 25 feet.
[b] Rear yard setback: 25 feet or 25% of the property
depth, whichever is greater.
[c] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10
feet; the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25
feet.
[2] For every foot or part thereof for which the front yard lot
width line is five feet above the required front lot width in
a lot in a residential zone, 50% of that additional front yard
lot width shall be added to the lot's total both side yard
setback requirements of that zone and the other 50% may
54.Editor's Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:386
be used for the added building width. If the lot has only
one side yard, the additional side yard footage shall be
added to the single side yard setback requirement. In
addition, one-story open front porches that conform to the
front yard setback may extend into the side yards along
the entire front of the building but limited to each of the
building's two side walls.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool or pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio. Not more than 35% for the first 7,500 square
feet, and a additional 17.5% for lot square footage between
7,500 and 15,000 square feet. There shall be no additional floor
area ratio permitted for lot area above 15,000 square feet.
(f) Height allowances shall be in accordance with Building Height
Diagram A or B.56
(g) The wall length along any side yard must be in accordance with
the restrictions shown in Diagram C.57
E. R-5 Two-Family Residential.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) All uses permitted in the R-1 Zone, including accessory uses.
(b) Two-family residential-type dwellings.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions for newly created lots are as
follows:
[1] Total area: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Width: 75 feet.
(4) Bulk requirements and setbacks.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Width: 75 feet.
56.Editor's Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
57.Editor's Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:387
(b) Yards.
[1] The minimum yard requirements of a principal building
are as follows:
[a] Front yard setbacks: 25 feet.
[b] Rear yard setback: 25 feet or 25% of the property
depth, whichever is greater.
[c] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10
feet; the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25
feet.
[2] For every foot or part thereof for which the front yard lot
width line is five feet above the required front lot width in
a lot in a residential zone, 50% of that additional front yard
lot width shall be added to the lot's total both side yard
setback requirements of that zone and the other 50% may
be used for the added building width. If the lot has only
one side yard, the additional side yard footage shall be
added to the single side yard setback requirement. In
addition, one-story open front porches that conform to the
front yard setback may extend into the side yards along
the entire front of the building but limited to each of the
building's two side walls.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool/pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio. Not more than 35% for the first 7,500 square
feet, and a additional 17.5% for lot square footage between
7,500 and 15,000 square feet. There shall be no additional floor
area ratio permitted for lot area above 15,000 square feet.
(f) Height allowances shall be in accordance with Building Height
Diagram A or B.58
(g) The wall length along any side yard must be in accordance with
the restrictions shown in Diagram C.59
F. A-1 Garden Apartment and Residential.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) All uses permitted in the R-4 Zone, and R-5 Zone, including
accessory uses. If a single-family home, the bulk requirements
58.Editor's Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:388
of the R-4 Zone are to be met and not those of the A-1 Zone. If
a two-family home, the bulk requirements of the R-5 Zone are
to be met and not those of the A-1 Zone.
(b) Garden apartment buildings housing four or more dwelling
units.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Total area: 40,000 square feet.
[2] Width: 150 feet.
(4) Bulk requirements and setbacks.
(a) The minimum yard requirements of a principal building are as
follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 40 feet.
[2] The rear yard shall be used to provide off-street parking as
required by this chapter.
[3] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 20 feet;
the minimum total of both side yards shall be 40 feet.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(c) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool/pond: 40% of the total lot area.
(d) Floor area ratio: no more than 35%.
G. B-1 Business.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) Business, professional and governmental office, including
parking accessory thereto.
(b) Retail stores, or mercantile stores, excluding auction galleries
and automotive sales or service establishments.
(c) Dancing, music and art instruction studios.
(d) Radio and television repair, locksmiths, watch, clock and
jewelry repair, upholstery and furniture repair and other
similar service establishments furnishing services other than
of a personal nature, but not including gasoline filling stations
and other automotive services.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:389
(e) Residential units in other than the ground floor are permitted,
provided that they are efficiency apartments.
(2) Restaurants are permitted as a conditional use.
(3) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(4) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Width: 150 feet.
(b) The minimum yard requirements of a principal building are as
follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 15 feet.
[2] The rear yard shall be used to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter.
[3] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet;
the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool/pond: 85% of the total lot area, except that if all the
parking is contained under the building, then the maximum lot
coverage shall be 80% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio: no more than 35%.
H. B-2 Limited Business.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) General and professional office buildings.
(b) Uses incidental to operating a general office building, such as
electronic data processing, cafeteria, generators, and other
similar uses.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone.
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Width: 150 feet.
(b) The minimum yard requirements of a principal building are as
follows:
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:390
[1] Front yard setback: 35 feet.
[2] The rear yard shall be used to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter.
[3] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 20 feet;
the minimum total of both side yards shall be 50 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material but excluding the water surface area of any swimming
pool or pond: 75% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio: no more than 35%.
I. B-3 Business and Apartment.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) All uses permitted in the B-1 Zone. Bulk requirements of the
B-1 Zone apply to construction under this subsection.
(b) Garden apartment buildings housing four or more dwelling
units. Bulk requirements of the A-1 Zone apply to construction
under this subsection.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. (See
§ 240-6.12.)
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Width: 150 feet.
(b) The minimum yard requirements of a principal building are as
follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 15 feet.
[2] The rear yard shall be used to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter.
[3] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet;
the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including buildings and impervious
material, but excluding the water surface area of any
swimming pool/pond: 85% of the total lot area, except that if all
the parking is contained under the building, then the maximum
lot coverage shall be 80% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio: no more than 35%.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:391
J. C-1 Commercial.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) All the uses permitted as set forth in the B-1 Zone, B-2 Zone
and B-3 Zone.
(b) Research; wholesale storage and warehousing for a minimum
of 30 days in fully enclosed buildings; garages for storage and
servicing of motor vehicles which are owned and leased to the
owner or operator who is doing the servicing, storing and
garaging; and public utility consumer service centers. Selfstorage
facilities are specifically not permitted.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone.
(3) Lot dimensions.
(a) The minimum lot dimensions are as follows:
[1] Width: 150 feet.
[2] Area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum yard requirements of a principal building are as
follows:
[1] Front yard setback: 15 feet.
[2] The rear yard shall be used to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter.
[3] Side yard setback. The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet;
the minimum total of both side yards shall be 25 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40% of the total lot area.
(d) Maximum lot coverage, including building, accessory building
and impervious material but excluding the water surface area
of any swimming pool/pond: 85% of the total lot area.
(e) Floor area ratio: 35%.
(f) Buffer requirements: as required in § 240-6.4.
K. CR Conservation/Recreation.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) Watershed and reservoir.
(b) Golf courses, outdoor tennis courts, outdoor skating rinks,
hiking trails, public parks, playgrounds, emporiums and
botanical gardens, bathing beaches, swimming pools, picnic
areas, boating facilities and similar accessory, cultural and
recreational uses, provided that the total coverage of
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:392
buildings, parking lots and driveways does not exceed 10%
of the total area. Paved golf cart driveways with a width of
less than five feet shall not be considered as driveways. Only
buildings necessary for the public accommodations of those
engaging in the above permitted uses may be constructed in
this zone.
(2) All other uses not set forth above are prohibited in this zone. Any
building or structure shall be limited to a height of 20 feet and may
not contain more than one story.
(3) Floor area ratio: no more than 33%.
L. AHO Affordable Housing Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the AHO Affordable Housing Overlay
District is to create a realistic opportunity for the construction of
low- and moderate-income housing in a suitable portion of the
Borough of Oradell, and thereby help to address the fair share
housing obligation of the Borough of Oradell under the New Jersey
Fair Housing Act ("FHA"), applicable Council on Affordable
Housing ("COAH") regulations, the settlement agreement entered
into between the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center ("FSHC")
on July 26, 2018, and the Borough's Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan. The AHO Overlay District encourages the development
of low- and moderate-income housing by allowing for inclusionary
multifamily residential; however, developers shall also have the
option of developing in accordance with the underlying CR Zone
standards.
(2) Permitted uses. The uses set forth below shall be permitted as a
development alternative to the underlying zoned uses allowed by
this chapter, but shall not replace the underlying CR zone district.
The principal permitted uses in the AHO Overlay Zoning District
are as follows:
(a) Multifamily development.
(b) Townhouse development.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include
accessory uses that are customary and incidental to the permitted
uses in the AHO Overlay Zoning District, including but not limited
to:
(a) Off-street parking in accordance with Chapter 240, Article VI.
(b) Decks, balconies and porches.
(c) Fences and walls, in accordance with Chapter 240, Article X.
(d) Ancillary recreation elements, such as a swimming pool, club
houses, tennis courts and other similar uses to only serve the
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:393
residents of the complex and in accordance with Chapter 240,
Article VII.
(e) Trash enclosures.
(f) Signs, in accordance with Chapter 240, Article XI.
(g) Outdoor lighting, in accordance with Chapter 240, Article VII.
(4) Affordable housing.
(a) All multifamily developments constructed in the AHO Overlay
Zoning District shall be required to set aside a minimum
percentage of units for affordable housing. Where units will be
for sale, the minimum set aside shall be 20%. Where units will
be for rent, the minimum set aside shall be 15%. When
calculating the required number of affordable units, any
computation resulting in a fraction of a unit shall be rounded
upwards to the next whole number.
(b) All affordable units to be produced pursuant to this section
shall comply with the Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance
at Chapter 61 of the Borough Code, as may be amended and
supplemented, the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
("UHAC")(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), or any successor
regulation, and the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, as may be amended from time to time. This includes, but
is not limited to, the following requirements for all affordable
units:
[1] Low/moderate income split: A maximum of 50% of the
affordable units shall be moderate-income units and a
minimum of 50% of the affordable units shall be lowincome
units. At least 13% of all restricted rental units
shall be very-low-income units, which shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development.
[2] Bedroom mix: If the development is not age-restricted, the
following bedroom mix shall apply:
[a] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom
units shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[b] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units
shall be two-bedroom units;
[c] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units
shall be three-bedroom units; and
[d] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:394
[3] Deed restriction period: All affordable units shall be deed
restricted for a period of 30 years from the date of the
initial occupancy of each affordable unit (the "deed
restriction period"). The affordability controls shall expire
at the end of 30 years after the date of the initial
occupancy of the respective individual affordable unit,
except, as to rental units, the affordability controls shall
remain in effect until the date on which a rental unit shall
become vacant, provided that the occupant household
continues to earn a gross annual income of less than 80%
of the applicable median income. See N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.11(b). If, at any time after the end of 30 years after
the date of initial occupancy, a rental household's income
is found to exceed 80% of the regional median income, the
rental rate restriction shall expire at the later of either the
next scheduled lease renewal or 60 days. For for-sale
units, the deed restriction shall expire only after it is
properly released by the Borough and/or the Borough's
administrative agent.
[4] Administrative agent: All affordable units shall be
administered by a qualified administrative agent paid for
by the developer.
[5] Other affordable housing unit requirements: Developers
shall also comply with all of the other requirements of the
Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance, including, but
not limited to, affirmative marketing requirements,
candidate qualification and screening requirements,
integrating the affordable units amongst the market rate
units, and unit phasing requirements. Developers shall
ensure that the affordable units are dispersed between all
of the buildings on its site, and shall identify the exact
location of each affordable unit at the time of site plan
application.
(5) Area and bulk requirements. The area and bulk requirements for
the uses allowed in the AHO Overlay Zoning District are set forth
below. The bulk regulations of the underlying zoning district shall
remain in full force and effect for development devoted exclusively
to underlying zoning district permitted uses.
(a) Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 50 acres.
(b) Density. There shall be a maximum gross density of six
dwelling units per acre.
(c) Building setbacks:
[1] From lot lines. There shall be a minimum setback of 100
feet from all lot lines.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:395
[2] From internal roads. There shall be a minimum setback of
20 feet from all internal roads.
(d) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(e) Building coverage. The total ground floor area of all principal
and accessory building shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
(6) Development standards.
(a) Building requirements.
[1] Building design. In order to provide attractiveness,
identity and individuality to dwelling units, buildings and
complexes of buildings within the entire zone and to avoid
the monotonous repetition of design elements and its
undesirable visual effects, the following design standards
shall be utilized:
[a] Consistency among building materials and colors with
the Borough's existing residential, historical and
architectural characteristics.
[b] Harmonious relationship with other on-site features
and buildings.
[c] Varying dwelling unit widths, staggering dwelling unit
setbacks and altering building heights and rooflines.
[d] No more than 30 feet of front or rear building wall
permitted without providing a break in the facade of
an acceptable method of articulation.
[e] Buildings with expansive blank walls on any facade
are discouraged. Side and rear elevations should
receive architectural treatments comparable to front
facades.
[f] Varying architectural embellishments to roofs
between dwelling units, buildings or complexes of
buildings including roof elements such as dormers,
belvederes, masonry chimneys and similar elements,
provided that such are architecturally compatible with
the style, materials, colors and details of the building.
[g] Varying decorative and architectural features at
entrances, cornices, windows and articulation
between dwelling units, buildings or complexes of
buildings, provided that such are architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of the building.
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:396
[h] Complimentary building colors and materials to be
consistent with the general theme of the development.
[i] Strategically placed windows, doors, porches and
columns with consideration of "human scale."
[j] Exterior-mounted mechanical and electrical
equipment exposed to the public view shall be
architecturally screened. Roof-mounted equipment
and projections should be painted the same color as
the roof and, where possible, located to the rear of the
building, away from the public view.
[k] Building construction shall utilize green building or
sustainable building methods to the extent practicable
to reduce the operating and maintenance costs of lowand
moderate-income households.
[2] Distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum
distance between principal structures of 50 feet, except
that where a side wall of one principal structure faces a
side wall of another dwelling structure, there shall be a
minimum distance of 25 feet; provided, however, that if an
access drive is located between principal structures, the
minimum distance shall be 50 feet.
[3] Construction. The outside walls of all buildings shall be of
fire resistant material, such as brick, stone or masonry, as
approved by the Planning Board. Interior walls separating
dwelling units shall also be constructed with fire resistant
material.
(b) Dwelling unit requirements.
[1] Minimum floor area. Each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum floor area of 500 square feet plus 150 square
feet for each habitable room exclusive of living room,
dining room or dinette, kitchen and bathrooms.
[2] Each dwelling unit shall have at least two exterior
exposures with at least one window in each exposure.
[3] Floors and ceilings and partitions between dwelling units
shall be constructed so as to have a minimum airborne
sound transmission loss classification of 50 decibels. The
Planning Board shall ascertain that reasonable measures
are taken in floor and ceiling construction to avoid
disturbing levels of impact sound.
(c) Accessory building requirements.
[1] Height. The maximum height of any accessory structure
shall be 15 feet.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:397
[2] Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum lot
line setback of the principal building and shall be at least
25 feet from a principal building and 15 feet from any
other accessory building.
[3] Design. Architectural design and materials used in the
construction of garages and other accessory structures
shall conform to the design and materials used in the
construction of the principal buildings.
(7) Off-street parking.
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for
multifamily residential housing shall be as set forth in the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(b) There shall be no below grade or underground parking
permitted in the AHO Overlay Zoning District, except that
private garages are permitted within townhouse dwelling
units.
(c) All parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Article VI of this chapter.
(d) Adequate fire and emergency access must be provided subject
to the Borough of Oradell's Fire Department.
(e) On-site parking shall not be provided for any use or to any
party other than a resident or visitor of the site, nor shall
parking areas be used for any purpose other than parking.
(f) Signage shall be provided where parking spaces are to be
reserved for residents. Visitor parking shall be signed and
painted for each space designated for such a purpose.
(g) Adequate parking facilities for accessibility to people with
mobility impairments shall be provided as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(8) Open space, landscaping, and buffers.
(a) At least 20% of the gross site area shall be devoted to open
space for passive or active recreation, or conservation.
(b) There shall be a comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a
certified landscape architect which shall detail the location,
type, size and any planting note for the proposed landscape
materials. This plan shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
(c) A landscape buffer shall be provided where a multifamily or
townhouse development abuts a single-family residential zone.
The buffer shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width, as measured
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.5
1:398
from the property line. The buffer shall provide a year-round
visual screen and minimize adverse impacts from the site on
adjacent properties. Buffers shall consist of natural vegetation
to the greatest extent practical, and may consist of fences,
planting, berms, mounds, or combinations thereof to achieve
the stated objectives as approved by the Board.
(d) Within any buffer areas, walkways, underground linear utilities
and site access drives shall only be permitted to cross said
buffers, provided their placement is designed to minimize land
disturbance within the buffer. Above- or below-ground
stormwater detention systems are not permitted within
required buffer areas. Access drives shall cross buffer areas at
a right angle or as close to a right angle as is practical to
minimize land disturbance.
(9) Lighting.
(a) Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking areas and
pedestrian walkways.
(b) All outdoor lighting, including street lamps and accent lighting,
should comply with dark sky standards intended to reduce
light pollution. Dark sky standards require that lighting is
downcast, illuminates only the intended areas, and does not
cause disabling glare that affects driver safety and reduces the
visibility of starry night skies.
(c) Lighting for a building must be contained on the property on
which the building is located.
(d) LED lighting shall be permitted in addition to all of the
conditions of the land use ordinance standards for lighting.
(10) Miscellaneous.
(a) Television antennas or dishes shall be limited to one master
antenna. Multiple antennas or dishes may be installed on the
rooftop provided they are not visible from the street level.
(b) Through-wall air-conditioning units that project beyond the
building wall are not permitted.
(c) Laundry facilities may be provided in each building. Outside
clothes drying is prohibited.
(d) All trash and recyclables shall be stored in covered containers.
They may be stored within or outside the building. If the
materials are stored outside, they must be kept in a permanent
enclosure with a latching gate in a centrally located, concealed
area approved by the Planning Board.
§ 240-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.5
1:399
§ 240-6.6. Off-street parking.
Except if specifically stated to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter, all
parking required under this chapter shall be off-street, and off-street
parking shall comply with the requirements set forth below as well as the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS):
(e) Amenities restricted to the use of the residents and their
guests are permitted subject to all applicable local and state
requirements.
(f) Buildings containing dwelling units located above the second
story and requiring a second means of egress pursuant to the
Uniform Construction Code shall not utilize an attached
external fire escape as one of the required means of egress.
(g) Internal walkways shall be required to provide a pedestrian
connection to any site development amenities, such as a
clubhouse, recreational facilities, pools, etc.
(h) Internal walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide and
shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(i) Fences shall be permitted at a maximum height of eight feet
and shall be situated and designed in accordance with Article
X.
(11) Bicycle parking requirements.
(a) A designated area within the development shall be provided for
bicycle parking. The area can be permitted inside the buildings
or outside in a protected area. Parking shall be provided in
such a way that allows for a bicycle to be properly secured, via
a bicycle rack or locker.
(b) A minimum of one bike parking space per 10 units shall be
required.
A. In the A-1 Zone, B-1 Zone, B-2 Zone, B-3 Zone, MX Zone and C-1 Zone,
parking shall be behind the rear building line.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall adhere to the pavement
specifications for Borough streets, except those parking areas
provided in connection with single-family and two-family dwellings.
All parking lots shall have the car spaces clearly marked.
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall be no less than nine feet by 18 feet.
However, if the parking lot provides more than 10 parking spaces,
then 30% of the parking spaces may be designed for compact cars.
A parking space for a compact car shall be no less than eight feet
by 16 feet. Access aisles shall be no less than 20 feet in width for
§ 240-6.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.6
1:400
angle parking greater than 60°. For angle parking less than 60°, a
fifteen-foot width aisle shall be provided.
(3) All parking areas shall be adequately drained. Curbing shall be
provided so that vehicles cannot drive onto unpaved areas.
(4) All ingress and egress roads from the property line to the parking
area shall be at least 16 feet wide if one-way, and 20 feet wide if
two-way. Any curves in access roads shall have a minimum radius of
20 feet.
(5) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be
so arranged as to reflect the light away from any other premises
and shall conform to any existing Borough lighting ordinances.
(6) All off-street parking areas designed to accommodate five or more
vehicles shall be approved by the approving board with respect to
traffic circulation and the location of parking spaces. All such
parking areas shall be painted with lines indicating traffic flow and
parking spaces.
(7) All parking areas shall be maintained so that the parking spaces
are clearly and easily recognized. Restriping of the parking spaces
so that the configuration or location of the spaces is altered shall
only be allowed if prior approval is obtained from the approving
board.
(8) Time of provision. All minimum requirements for off-street parking
shall be met at the time of construction or enlargement or change
of use of any main building or structure.
(9) No more than 10 parking spaces in a row shall be permitted. An
open space, which shall be a minimum of five feet in width and
landscaped as required by the approving board, shall separate a
row of 10 parking spaces from the next parking space.
(10) Any commercial or recreational vehicle, as defined in this chapter,
which is not registered and owned by an occupant of the building,
is prohibited from outside parking at that lot between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and anytime on Saturday and Sunday. The
only exception to this parking limitation is an automobile service or
repair center. Such vehicles may be parked during these prohibited
hours at these lots, but such exception shall be limited for any
specific vehicle to a total of 14 calendars days for any calendar
year. At these locations, while parking during these prohibited
hours and under this exception, the vehicle must be parked behind
the existing front building line. No vehicles currently violating this
subsection are permitted to continue this violation.
B. In regard to one- and two-family structures, the parking for said
structures shall be in accordance with those required for one- and twofamily
homes under this section, without regard to which zone the one-
§ 240-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.6
1:401
§ 240-6.7. (Reserved)
§ 240-6.8. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential areas.
or two-family premises are located. Driveways located in the front yard
shall be no greater than 20 feet in width and two feet from the property
line. Vehicles shall not be parked within the Borough right-of-way.
C. The following number of parking spaces shall be the minimum number
of off-street parking spaces provided for each structure which is used in
the indicated manner. In the event that a use is changed to one with a
greater off-street parking requirement, then the greater requirement
shall apply for that changed use.
(1) For a one-family dwelling structure, there shall be provided a
minimum of two spaces of off-street parking.
(2) For a two-family dwelling structure, there shall be provided a
minimum of four spaces of off-street parking.
(3) For an apartment dwelling structure, there shall be provided a
minimum of two spaces of off-street parking for each dwelling unit.
(4) For a general office building and a business or commercial use
structure, there shall be provided a minimum of one space of offstreet
parking for each 250 square feet of interior building space.
(5) For a business or office and residential mixed-use structure, there
shall be provided a minimum of two spaces of off-street parking for
each dwelling unit, plus one space of off-street parking for each
employee, plus one space of off-street parking for each 250 square
feet of interior business or office space. The total number of spaces
shall be determined by the approving board.
(6) For a structure used for a medical or health-related purpose, there
shall be provided a minimum of one off-street parking space for
each 180 square feet of interior building space.
D. No more than four passenger vehicles per one-family house or twofamily
house, as defined in this chapter, shall be parked outside on the
property anytime between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The
Police Department may grant verbal exceptions from this regulation for
a maximum seventy-two-hour period.
E. Any volunteer emergency vehicle (fire department, police department,
and ambulance) shall be exempt from the above requirements while the
vehicle is assigned to an occupant for standby or on-alert duty
exclusively for Oradell residents.
A. Commercial vehicles, as defined in this chapter, shall not be parked
outside on the property in residential zones at any time between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning and at any time
§ 240-6.6 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.8
1:402
§ 240-6.9. Parking of recreational vehicles.
on Sundays and legal holidays. This section does not apply to
commercial vehicles providing emergency services to or from that
location.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 240-6.8A shall be subject to a
fine of $100 for each offense; provided, however, that any person
violating such provision for a fourth time or more shall, upon each such
conviction, be subject to penalties as follows: a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
30 days, or both.
A. Only vehicles registered to the building occupant may be parked as
permitted under the following conditions:
(1) No recreational vehicle, boat or trailer, as defined in this chapter,
shall be parked outside between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in any zone unless parked at the rear of and immediately
behind the building on said lot but no closer than 10 feet to the
building and 10 feet to any side or rear lot line.
(2) On a corner lot, the vehicle must maintain the front yard clearance
of that zone for the portion of the homeowner's yard/property
abutting the street line.
(3) An owner or occupant of a building in any of said zones must obtain
a recreational vehicle parking permit from the Construction Code
Official. The permit shall be issued by the Construction Code
Official upon filing of an appropriate application indicating
compliance with the provisions of this section. The permit shall
expire upon the transfer of ownership of the recreational vehicle.
The application shall provide the following information:
(a) Identification of the recreational vehicle.
(b) Description of the recreational vehicle.
(c) Photograph of the recreational vehicle and parking area.
(d) Description of the buffer area.
(e) Survey of plot plan showing location of the parking area.
(f) Copy of the owner's registration and license.
(4) The recreational vehicle shall be screened from adjacent lots and
streets by a buffer consisting of shrubbery or hedges which shall be
at least six feet high and planted at sufficiently close intervals to
provide immediate effective evergreen screening throughout the
year.
§ 240-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.9
1:403
§ 240-6.10. Driveways.
(5) No recreational vehicle parked or stored in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be used for any type of commercial
or business use.
(6) No recreational vehicle shall be occupied or used for human
habitation.
B. If the owner or occupant of a building is unable to meet the
requirements of this section, an appeal may be filed to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment setting forth the need for deviation from these
requirements. The appellant shall file said appeal within 10 days of the
denial of the recreational permit by the Construction Code Official. The
appeal shall be in writing, and notice of the hearing date shall be sent
by personal service or certified mail to all property owners located
within 200 feet of the property on which the recreational vehicle is to be
parked. A fee of $75 shall be required on filing of an appeal with the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be final, subject only to the statutory right of appeal.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment's decision shall apply only to that
specific recreational vehicle [as described in detail as per Subsection
A(3) above] on that lot for which the owner/occupant applies for the
variation from these requirements. The vehicle must be parked on the
lot for a minimum of 72 continuous hours in a six-month continuous
period or the approved variation is considered abandoned and the
approval will be considered terminated.
C. A recreational vehicle, as defined in this chapter, of the occupant or
guest of the occupant may be parked, other than as specified in this
chapter, for a maximum period of 72 hours on the driveway after giving
notice and receiving written permission from the Police Department.
Only four such permits will be permitted per lot in any given calendar
year.
A. Stone driveways.
(1) There shall be required a six-inch compacted based of threequarter-
inch quarry process stone with two inches of finished clean
stone, three-eighths to three-quarter-inch stone on top, for a total
of eight inches.
(2) If no public sidewalk exists along a property, loose stone driveways
shall have a minimum ten-foot concrete apron.
B. Curbing for loose stone driveways. Shall include all sides and edges
that do not abut driveway apron, masonry or concrete walkways,
garage or any structure and shall be subject to the following criteria:
(1) Loose stone driveways shall have masonry curbing at least four
inches wide and a minimum of six inches deep.
§ 240-6.9 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.10
1:404
§ 240-6.11. Height restrictions.
(2) Final grade of the driveway curbing shall have a minimum of two
inches' clearance maintained above finished clean stone.
C. Driveways. An improved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles
from the street onto and within the parcel and/or used for parking. Such
improved area shall be constructed of stone, concrete, masonry, asphalt
or other suitable material.
D. Driveway apron. Driveway space from street line to sidewalk or to rightof-
way line if no sidewalk exists. A driveway apron must be made of
concrete.
A. For accessory buildings and height restrictions, see § 240-7.6.
B. Except in a CR Zone and as set forth in Subsection C below, the
maximum height of buildings in all districts within the Borough of
Oradell, except in B-1 and B-2, shall be 32 feet. This height calculation
shall be made by adding the height of all four corners of the building
measured from the finished grade level six feet off each corner to the
highest point on the roof (excluding chimneys) and dividing that
number by four. The result would be the height of the building.
Notwithstanding the above, the maximum height of any facade
including a parapet may not exceed 40 feet.
C. Special height restrictions shall be as follows:
(1) One- and two-family residences. If the slope from any side of the
principal building to the parallel or most nearly parallel property
line exceeds the rate of two feet for each 10 feet, the height of any
building is limited to 31 feet. This height calculation shall be made
by taking the vertical distance of a building measured from the top
of the highest point of a structure to the average finished grade
taken six feet from the building foundation, at the midpoint of each
building wall and at a point measured diagonally at 45° from each
corner. Where new grades are proposed, the grade measurement
cannot exceed a height established at more than one foot six inches
above the existing grade. The result would be the height of the
building.
(2) B-2 Zone. If the curb elevation was extended horizontally to the
center line of the building and at that point was in the upper 50% of
the first floor of the permitted building, the permitted height is 40
feet, but not more than three stories and not that set forth in
Subsection B above. The height shall be measured in accordance
with the procedures set forth in § 240-6.11B of this chapter.
D. The height shall be calculated based upon the existing or historic grade
of the property, whichever shall result in the greatest height. In no
event shall the regrading of a property eliminate a height variance.
§ 240-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.12
1:405
§ 240-6.12. Uses prohibited in all zones.
A. The following uses are prohibited in all zones. This list is inclusive, but
not limited to the following:
(1) Poolrooms, billiard halls and establishments commonly known as
"video arcades" or "amusement arcades."
(2) Drive-in restaurants or refreshment stands commonly called "snack
bars," "dairy bars," "hamburger stands" or "hot dog stands" where
customers and patrons are served food, soft drinks, ice cream or
similar confections for their immediate consumption at counters,
stools or bars outside the confines of the building or structure in
which the business is conducted or for consumption in automobiles
parked upon the premises, whether brought to the automobiles by
the customers or patrons or by waiters or waitresses employed by
the operator. The above shall not be construed to prohibit the
operation of refreshment stands at parks, beach clubs, swimming
clubs, golf clubs, athletic fields or other similar recreation areas or
the temporary operation of refreshment stands at properly licensed
circuses, bazaars and other social functions.
(3) Wholesale laundries and dyeing establishments.
(4) Lumber or coal yards, junkyards, automobile wreckers, automobile
graveyards and scrap processors.
(5) Blast furnaces, crematories or metal foundries.
(6) Automobile body shops or automobile paint shops.
(7) Hotels, motels, boardinghouses and bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(8) Massage parlors, tattoo parlors or stores that sell or rent adult
videos, books or similar materials. This chapter does allow for
massages only within the confines of a commercial building by a
professional duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to administer
such massages. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-29]
(9) Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited in all establishments
except for banks.
(10) The sale of recreational marijuana and/or the paraphernalia that
facilitates the use of recreational marijuana. [Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 18-11]
B. Moreover, no land or building in any zone shall be used or occupied in
any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or
vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold or
dampness; electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid
refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition or element in such
§ 240-6.12 ORADELL CODE § 240-6.12
1:406
manner or in such amount as to adversely affect the reasonable use of
the surrounding area or adjoining premises.
§ 240-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6.12
1:407

ARTICLE VII
General Requirements and Special Regulations
§ 240-7.1. Lot coverage.
The maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings or structures in
required areas of front, rear and side yards and setbacks shall be as
provided in Article VII for zones in which the lot is located.
§ 240-7.2. Yards.
The area required in a yard or setback shall be open and unobstructed,
except for the following:
§ 240-7.3. Area requirements.
A. Driveways.
B. Ordinary projections of windowsills and belt courses not to extend more
than four inches.
C. Cornices and other ornamental fixtures not to extend more than 12
inches. Roof overhangs which shall not extend more than 24 inches.
D. Ground-mounted air conditioners, provided that they are not installed
in the front yard and provided further that they do not extend more than
four feet into any side or rear yard and no closer than seven feet to the
property line. Any existing unit located in the front yard may be
replaced at its current location, provided that the ground-mounted unit
is screened by mature shrubbery. Rooftop air-conditioning/mechanical
units shall be screened from view.
E. Generators (backup or standby) shall be located in the rear or side yard
of the main building or structure only, provided that they do not extend
more than five feet from the building or structure and a minimum of 10
feet from any property line. The maximum decibel level shall be 72
decibels at normal load, and test cycle shall only be conducted Monday
through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
F. Accessory structures and uses meeting the requirements of this
chapter.
G. Fences meeting the requirements of this chapter.
H. Swimming pools and ponds meeting the requirements of this chapter.
I. Front steps which do not extend farther than four feet, and walkways.
A. The yard lot coverage and lot area regulations required by this chapter
shall be considered minimum regulations for each and every building or
structure existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter and
for any building or structure hereafter erected.
§ 240-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7.3
1:409
§ 240-7.4. Uniformity of dwelling exteriors prohibited.
§ 240-7.5. Determination of percentage of lot coverage.
All accessory buildings shall be added to the principal buildings in
determining the percentage of coverage of the lands.
§ 240-7.6. Accessory structures, etc.
B. Adoption of this chapter shall have no effect upon lots which were
illegally or improperly subdivided without proper approval of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board of the Borough of
Oradell. No owner of a lot or lots improperly subdivided shall obtain
greater rights by reason of the passage of this chapter than that which
that party already had prior to the adoption of this chapter.
A. No building permit shall hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be
erected in a housing development consisting of two or more houses if
the dwelling to be erected is substantially alike or uniform in exterior
design and appearance with any existing dwelling situated on the same
or opposite sides of the street within 300 feet of the dwelling then in
existence or for which a building permit has been issued or is pending.
The distance herein specified shall be construed to mean the distance
between the street property lines of the respective properties.
B. Dwellings within such specified distances from each other shall be
considered alike or uniform in exterior design and appearance if they
have the following characteristics:
(1) The same basic dimensions are used without substantial change in
orientation of the houses on the lots.
(2) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
(3) The size, type and location of windows and doors in the front
elevation are without substantial differentiation.
A. Accessory structures shall be limited as follows:
(1) The total of all accessory structures for one- and two-family
dwellings shall not exceed a total of 600 square feet.
(2) A detached garage shall be limited to a maximum of 600 square
feet with a maximum height of 15 feet.
(3) Any additional accessory structure shall be limited to a maximum of
125 square feet with a maximum height of nine feet.
(4) If there is more than one accessory structure on the property, there
shall be a minimum separation of 10 feet between accessory
structures.
§ 240-7.3 ORADELL CODE § 240-7.6
1:410
§ 240-7.7. Nonconforming uses.
(5) The lot shall be limited to a maximum of two accessory structures
where only one of them may be a shed or a garage.
(6) Any detached subordinate structure(s) less than four feet in height
and a total of 10 square feet shall not be considered an accessory
structure.
(7) There shall be a limit of three parking bay garages (combination of
detached and attached) on any one residential property.
(8) All accessory structures shall require a zoning permit.
(9) Any accessory structure 100 square feet or more shall require a
building permit.
B. Location of accessory buildings as follows:
(1) All accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard as follows:
(2) An accessory building in all zones shall be at least 10 feet
(measured on a straight line) from any building situated on the
same lot.
(3) At least two feet from all lot lines.
(4) In the case of any interior lot fronting upon two or more streets, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach
either 25 feet or the minimum setback for the zone, whichever is
greater, upon that part of the lot depth nearest each street.
(5) To determine the location of an accessory building in the case of a
corner lot fronting upon two or more streets, divide the lot into four
equal quarters. No accessory building shall be erected in any
quarter which adjoins a street.
(6) Garages shall be at least five feet from all lot lines.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no building
permit shall be granted for the construction of an accessory building
until such time as a building permit shall have been granted for the
construction of the main building upon said premises. If construction of
the main building does not precede or take place concurrently with
construction of the accessory building, the Construction Official shall
have cause to revoke the building permit for the accessory building. No
certificate of occupancy shall be granted for the accessory building
until a certificate of occupancy has been granted for the main building.
A. Continuance of nonconforming use.
(1) Any nonconforming use or structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter may be continued upon the premises
or the building so occupied or used.
§ 240-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7.7
1:411
(2) Any lawful or nonconforming use subject to a condition or
conditions of limitation as to terms or duration may continue
subject to such condition or conditions or the end of the term or
duration to which said nonconforming use was subject.
B. Restoration or repair on partial destruction.
(1) Any nonconforming commercial and/or multifamily residential use
or structure existing as of the effective date of this chapter may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof,
provided that the estimated cost of repair or restoration does not
exceed 1/2 the actual value of the building, exclusive of
foundations, immediately prior to the destruction or damage.
(2) Any nonconforming single-family residential use or structure
existing as of the effective date of this chapter may be restored or
repaired to its original predestruction exterior design at its original
location in the event of total or partial destruction.
(3) In the event of partial destruction of a structure involved in a
nonconforming use, the owner and/or occupant shall, within 90
days after such event, give notice, in writing, to the Construction
Official of the Borough of Oradell, of his intention to restore or
repair the premises and, within 90 days after the date of said
notice, commence and diligently proceed to completion of the
work.
C. Extensions, enlargements and discontinuance.
(1) No existing structure or premises devoted to a nonconforming use
as permitted by this chapter shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered unless such use is changed to
a use permitted in the district in which such building or premises is
located.
(2) No nonconforming use or structure which shall have been
discontinued or abandoned for a period exceeding 12 months shall
be resumed.
(3) Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the modernization
of existing nonconforming structures; provided, however, that such
modernization does not entail any extension, enlargement, addition
or change of the nonconforming use.
(4) No nonconforming building or structure shall be enlarged,
extended or increased. However, in residential zones, a
nonconforming single-family dwelling or a single-family dwelling
on a nonconforming lot may be enlarged, extended or increased if:
(a) Said enlargement, extension or increase by itself conforms
with all requirements of this chapter, and the dimensions and
setback of said enlargement, extension or increase, when
§ 240-7.7 ORADELL CODE § 240-7.7
1:412
§ 240-7.8. Lands abutting Hackensack River.
§ 240-7.9. Outdoor display of goods not permitted.
No goods, merchandise or other personal property, whether in storage, in
transit or available for sale or displayed for sale in the usual course of trade
or business, shall be maintained other than within an enclosed building,
except for the following which shall be permitted:
§ 240-7.10. Outdoor lighting.
aggregated with the existing building, does not create or
increase any dimensional or setback violation of this chapter;
and
(b) The area of said enlargement, extension or increase does not
exceed the maximum building or lot coverage standard or floor
area ratio permitted in that zone.
A. No buildings or structures shall be erected on any lands abutting the
Hackensack River with a setback of less than 75 feet from the high tide
mark of the Hackensack River.
B. The Planning Board shall review all site plans which involve
improvement on lands which are within 75 feet of the Hackensack River
with respect to finished grades, landscaping and treatment of the
riverbank and protection of the Hackensack River where certain
projects are to be constructed.
A. Garage sales (see Chapter 137).
B. Outdoor sales by special permission of Mayor and Council.
C. Gasoline station:
(1) Limited to one tire rack display.
(2) Related automobile accessories not to exceed a volume of 50 cubic
feet.
A. All lighting shall conform with the Illuminating Engineering Society
Handbook, most recent edition, and the American National Practice for
Roadway Lighting (RP-8) approved by the American Standards
Institute, recent edition.
B. For specifications on light fixtures, see Oradell Development Standards,
Exhibit 98A-2113.
C. The average maintained illumination and the average level-to-minimum
point ratio of illumination shall conform with the following:
§ 240-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7.10
1:413
Classification
Average Maintained
Illumination
(footcandles)
Average Level to
Minimum Point
Ratio (:1)
Interior streets (R) 0.4 8
Access drives (R) 0.4 8
Access drives (C) 0.6 6
Parking areas (R) 0.4 6
Parking areas (I) 0.6 4
Intersections 1.0 to 2.0 4
Sidewalks (R) 0.2 8
Sidewalks (C) 0.6 6
Sidewalks (I) 0.6 6
(R) = Residential
(C) = Commercial
(I) = Industrial
D. The luminaire light distribution shall be designated as a "cutoff" type.
E. Mounting heights shall not exceed 14 feet above grade. Lower heights
shall be used for walkways.
F. The source of light shall be metal halide, or other material approved by
the Planning Board.
G. All luminaires shall be shielded to eliminate glare, especially on any
other property and public streets of the site. Lamps shall be recessed in
the luminaire.
H. The maximum illumination at any point on adjacent properties shall not
exceed 0.2 footcandle.
I. In business, office and/or research and industrial areas, circuits shall be
arranged so that at least 50% of all lighting (alternate luminaires) shall
be turned off after business hours, when only lights necessary for
security purposes shall be left on.
J. The average maintained illumination for security purposes shall be 0.4
footcandle.
K. Provisions shall be made for "cutoff" illumination of loading docks,
entrances and other special areas where greater illumination may be
required. Each special area shall be on a separate circuit which shall be
turned off when the area is not in use.
L. All wires and cable shall be underground.
§ 240-7.10 ORADELL CODE § 240-7.10
1:414
§ 240-7.11. Swimming pools and ponds.
M. The lighting plan shall be designed by a professional lighting designer,
who shall certify that the lighting plan conforms with these standards. A
separate detailed lighting plan with luminaire manufacturer details and
illumination diagrams and specifications shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for review.
N. The Planning Board may modify the above requirements where there is
sufficient evidence that said requirements are inapplicable,
unnecessary or unreasonable.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, construct or install a
swimming pool or pond in the Borough of Oradell without first having
complied with the provisions of this chapter or having obtained a permit
therefor in the manner hereafter provided.
B. Applications for such a permit shall be made to the Construction Official
and shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of the following:
(1) Plans and specifications or proper descriptive brochures.
(2) Plot plans showing property lines of the premises upon which the
swimming pool is to be constructed or installed should be prepared
and signed by a land surveyor or licensed engineer of the State of
New Jersey and should show accurately all existing houses and
structures thereon, abutting streets and properties, the location
and dimensions of the proposed pool and its auxiliary structures,
including a description of the enclosure or fence to be used. In
addition, said plot plan must show all existing and proposed
elevations and methods of drainage in and around the pool area.
C. The Construction Official shall file the duplicate set of plans and
specifications with the Board of Health for public swimming pools only,
prior to the issuance of a permit.
D. Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
E. The Construction Official shall issue a permit for the construction and
installation of a swimming pool or pond if the same complies with the
regulations and standards established by this chapter and the current
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
F. The Construction Official shall, within 20 days after receiving an
application for a permit, act upon the same as follows. He shall:
(1) Approve the applications submitted and cause a permit to be
issued;
(2) Require an amendment to the application to assure proper
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and then cause a
permit to be issued; or
§ 240-7.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7.11
1:415
(3) Reject the application when it is determined that the permit should
not be issued. Appeal shall be available to the applicant pursuant to
§ 240-4.8 if the rejection is based upon zoning consideration. When
a question of sanitation is involved, such appeal should be to the
Board of Health.
G. No private swimming pools or ponds shall be constructed, installed,
located, maintained or operated on any premises unless a residence
building is also located thereon, or unless said premises is part of a
residence curtilage, and then only in the rear yard of said premises. No
private swimming pool shall be constructed, installed, located,
maintained or operated within 10 feet of any dwelling nor within 10 feet
of the rear property line and 15 feet of any side line.
H. No swimming pool or pond shall be permitted to drain into a public
street. A swimming pool drain shall be connected to the sanitary sewer
according to New Jersey regulations. However, any overflow water from
rain may be dispersed onto the owner's property.
I. Whenever any swimming pool or pond, by reason of mechanical defects
or failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, is a hazard to
the health of users thereof, the Health Officer may summarily close
such pool and keep such pool closed until no further hazard to users of
the same exists, subject to the right of appeal to the Board of Health by
the owner of such pool, which appeal shall not stay the action of the
Health Officer.
J. Lights used to illuminate any pool or pond shall be so arranged and
shaded as to reflect light away from the adjoining premises in
accordance with § 240-7.10.
K. The owner of any swimming pool, portable pool, wading pool or pond
within the Borough of Oradell shall allow the Construction Official,
Health Officer or other authorized official access to the pool and
appurtenances for the purpose of the inspections to ascertain
compliance with this chapter at all reasonable times.
L. The Construction Official shall issue a certificate of approval to the
owner of the property after the Uniform Construction Code and any
other requirements have been complied with and a certification by the
Borough Engineer as to the correctness of the elevations has been
received.
M. It shall be unlawful for any person to cover a swimming pool or pond
with what is known as a "bubble-type cover" or to enclose a swimming
pool unless the enclosure is of the same architectural design and
materials as the residence building on said premises and the plans for
said enclosure shall be first approved by the Planning Board of the
Borough.
§ 240-7.11 ORADELL CODE § 240-7.11
1:416
N. The surface of a swimming pool must be at least four inches above the
existing grade and constructed as to prevent return of surface water to
the pool.
O. A pond may not exceed 100 square feet in surface area, except those
that are part of a stormwater management plan or provide detention
and/or retention for the property.
§ 240-7.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7.11
1:417

ARTICLE VIII
Conditional Uses
§ 240-8.1. Intent of conditional uses.
Whereas certain uses, activities, structures and buildings are considered
necessary to serve the needs and convenience of the community and, at the
same time, recognizing that such uses may be or become detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare if located and operated without
proper consideration being given to the existing conditions and character
of the community and surrounding neighborhood, such uses and activities
may be permitted in certain specified areas under the terms of this chapter
and pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 240-8.2. Procedure and standards of review.
Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use, applications shall be
made to the Planning Board, which shall grant or deny the application after
public hearing within 95 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Notice of
the hearing shall include reference to all matters being heard, including site
plan and/or subdivision, and the Planning Board shall review and approve
or deny any applicable subdivision or site plan simultaneously with the
conditional use application. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time period shall constitute approval of the application. In
reviewing the application, the Planning Board shall review the number of
employees or users of the property and the requirements set forth in this
chapter, and shall give due consideration to elements that would affect the
public health, welfare, safety, comfort and convenience, such as, but not
limited to, the proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel
patterns and access, pedestrianways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage,
sewage treatment, potable water supply, utilities and structural location(s)
and orientation(s). Each conditional use shall be considered as an individual
case. In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof
shall be on the developer, even though a conditional use shall be a permitted
use in the district in which it is located. Prior to making its decision, the
Board shall be satisfied that the conditional use is reasonably necessary for
the convenience of the public in the location proposed.
§ 240-8.3. Application details.
The application shall follow the submission requirements and the fees and
escrows for site plan review as outlined in this chapter. The fees and escrow
requirements for a conditional use application under this section shall be
the same as for a site plan application, and the procedures for approval of a
conditional use shall be the same as those for site plan approvals.
§ 240-8.4. Specific standards for certain conditional uses.
§ 240-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:419
A. Community residences, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, shall be
permitted in all residential districts of the Borough and shall be subject
to the requirements of single-family dwelling units in such districts,
subject to the following exceptions:
(1) Any such residence having more than six persons, excluding
resident staff, shall require a conditional use permit, to be granted
by the Planning Board, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. No
such permit shall be issued if:
(a) The proposed residence is located within 1,500 feet of an
existing such residence or shelter;
(b) The number of persons, other than resident staff, residing at
existing community residences or community shelters exceeds
50 persons or 0.5% of the population of the Borough,
whichever is greater;
(c) The proposed residence or shelter is to be located in a district
other than residential; or
(d) The proposed residence or shelter fails to comply with:
[1] The minimum requirements for firesafety, sanitary
facilities and structural safety as established by the
current edition of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code;60
[2] All applicable Borough health ordinances;
[3] The minimum current requirements of the barrier-free
design regulations as established by the government
agencies having jurisdiction thereover.
(2) The application for such a conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by a detailed site plan, drawn to scale and certified by
a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, detailing all
dimensions of the lot, including yard areas; size of proposed
residence or shelter to be constructed or converted; number, type
and location of rooms; proposed number of residents; proposed
number of resident staff and location of staff rooms and facilities;
proposed number and location of parking spaces for staff members
and visitors; drainage facilities; and any other relevant information
that may be requested by the Planning Board.
(3) There shall be at least one parking space for each proposed
resident and staff member.
(4) The Planning Board shall have the power to impose landscaping,
shrubbery, buffer and safety device requirements that may be
necessary or expedient as a result of the configuration of the lot
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 240-8.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-8.4
1:420
and its location with respect to surrounding properties and
thoroughfares.
B. Automobile service stations and automobile repair shops may be
permitted only in B-1 and B-2 Zones and shall require a conditional use
permit. No such permit shall be granted unless the proposed station
complies with the following requirements:
(1) Lot size. The lot or parcel of land so to be used shall have a street
frontage of at least 100 feet and an average depth of at least 125
feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Buildings. The walls of any building shall be set back at least
50 feet from any residential zone boundary or existing
residential property, at least 25 feet from any adjoining
property line and at least 40 feet from a street right-of-way
line.
(b) Gasoline pumps. All fuel and oil pumps and other apparatus
shall be so located as to permit safe and convenient traffic
circulation. Every gasoline or oil tank, pump or other device,
appliance or apparatus shall be located at least 40 feet from a
street right-of-way line or property line and at least 50 feet
from a residential zone boundary or existing dwelling.
Canopies covering gasoline pumps or pump stands may be
permitted with the approval of the municipal board hearing the
application. Canopies shall be permitted, provided that any
proposed canopy is consistent in color, shape and size with the
building and gasoline pumps located on the site. In addition,
any proposed canopy shall be designed so as to be no greater
in size than is reasonably necessary to provide shelter from the
weather to customers whose vehicles are being serviced at the
gasoline pumps.
(c) Paved areas. All paved areas within the property shall be at
least five feet from a property line, 10 feet from a street rightof-
way line and 25 feet from a residential zone boundary or
existing residential use and shall be bounded by concrete
curbing at least six inches above the surface.
(d) Driveways. Entrance and exit driveways shall be at least 30
feet in width with a three-foot radius at the curbline. There
shall be a safety zone between driveways of at least 30 feet,
and the driveway shall be at least 10 feet from adjoining
property lines. Driveways shall be at least 100 feet from an
intersection of street lines. No more than two driveways shall
be permitted for each 200 feet of street frontage.
(3) Location. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land to
be used as an automobile service station shall be at least 300 feet
§ 240-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:421
from the boundary line of property which is used as, or upon
which is erected, a public or private school playground, church or
other place of worship, hospital, public building or place of public
assembly, theater or other building or structure used or intended
to be used for public entertainment, public playground or civic
center, firehouse or fire station. The distance shall be measured in
a straight line from the center line of streets forming the shortest
route from a point opposite the nearest side boundary line of the
public entrance to a point opposite the nearest boundary line of the
service station or garage lot. No automobile service station shall
be located within 2,000 feet of another service station or existing
public garage.
(4) Landscaping. A five-foot planted strip, suitably landscaped, shall be
provided between curb cuts and along all property lines. All
unpaved areas shall be attractively landscaped with grass lawns,
trees and shrubs or other vegetation or material as may be deemed
suitable by the Planning Board.
(5) Parking. Adequate parking for service vehicles and automobiles of
employees and patrons shall be provided. Not less than three or
more than five patron parking spaces shall be provided for each
service bay.
(6) Prohibited uses:
(a) No new or used automobile sales shall be conducted on the
premises, except by special permit issued by the Borough
Clerk, which will allow the sale of no more than two vehicles at
any one time.
(b) No merchandise shall be sold or kept for sale except petroleum
products and auto accessories reasonably necessary for the
safe, lawful or convenient operation of motor vehicles.
(c) No servicing of vehicles shall be permitted outdoors except for
emergency repairs and unless the entire service of that specific
vehicle can be completed within one hour.
(d) Commercial/retail mini-marts.
C. Antennas.
(1) Objective. The objective of this subsection is to regulate antennas
for safety and aesthetic reasons. Antennas may cause a safety
hazard if not positioned and secured properly. The conditions set
forth in this subsection are intended to address these safety
concerns.
(2) Approval of antenna as conditional accessory use.
(a) In all zones, a building permit shall not be required for the
construction, erection or alteration of an antenna one meter or
§ 240-8.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-8.4
1:422
less in length or width or depth or one meter or less in
diameter. In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, a building permit shall
not be required for the construction, erection or alteration of
an antenna two meters or less in length or width or depth or
two meters or less in diameter.
(b) Except as provided herein, no antenna shall be constructed,
erected or installed in the Borough unless and until a building
permit is issued by the Building Inspector, following the
procedures set forth herein.
(c) Upon proper application and hearing as provided herein, one
antenna requiring a building permit shall be permitted as a
conditional accessory use in any residential or business district
in the Borough, provided that the Planning Board finds and
determines that the following conditions have been met:
[1] The antenna surface area shall be no more than 12 square
feet.
[2] The equivalent diameter of the dish shall be no more than
four feet.
[3] The height of the antenna, including its base or mounting
structure, measured vertically from the ground to the
highest point of the antenna when positioned for
operation, shall be no more than six feet.
[4] Any antenna shall be mounted on a base affixed to the
ground and shall be erected on a secure foundation. No
antenna may be erected or mounted on another structure
or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, a roof or
wall.
[5] Any antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of the lot
for which it is to be installed and shall comply in all
respects with the minimum requirements for the rear yard
and side yards of the zone in which such lot is situated.
[6] Any antenna shall be located in such a position on the lot
and screened in such a way as to minimize noise as may be
perceived from the street or streets adjacent to the lot and
from adjacent properties. Plants and trees equal to or
greater in height than the antenna itself shall be planted to
provide maximum screening.
[7] All power, control and signal cables from the antenna to
the structure which it is designed to serve shall be
installed underground and shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Borough Building Code.61
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 240-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:423
[8] Any antenna shall be designed only for the reception of
signals for the use, benefit and enjoyment of the occupants
of the structure on the lot on which the antenna is
proposed to be installed.
[9] No more than one antenna shall be permitted as an
accessory for any primary use.
(3) Application procedure.
(a) No building permit shall be issued for the construction,
erection or installation of an antenna unless a conditional use
approval therefor has been granted by the Planning Board. As
set forth in this section, in all zones, a building permit or
conditional use approval shall not be required for the
construction, erection or installation of an antenna one meter
or less in length or width or one meter or less in diameter. In
the B-1 and B-2 Districts, a building permit or conditional use
approval shall not be required for the construction, erection or
installation of an antenna two meters or less in length or width
or two meters or less in diameter.
(b) For a conditional use approval for an antenna, the procedure
shall be as follows:
[1] An application shall be submitted to the Planning Board
Administrator, in writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied
by the Planning Board, furnishing the name and address of
the owner and applicant and an identification, by street
number and lot and block designation, of the property
involved.
[2] The application shall be accompanied by 17 copies of a
survey of the property prepared by a New Jersey licensed
engineer or land surveyor depicting the boundaries of the
lot and all existing structures and improvements on the
property. There shall be further shown or marked on the
survey, and drawn to scale, the proposed location of the
antenna on the property.
[3] The application shall also be accompanied by 17 copies of
a drawing showing the dimensions of the antenna and the
planting or screening as required hereunder.
[4] The fee for such application shall be as set forth in the Fee
Ordinance, Chapter 115.
(c) Upon filing of a completed application for an antenna as a
conditional accessory use, the Planning Board shall conduct a
hearing in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
§ 240-8.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-8.4
1:424
(d) On such hearing, the applicant shall give notice in accordance
with the provisions of this code.
D. Private tennis courts. Private tennis courts shall require conditional use
approval and may be permitted in accordance with the following
conditions:
(1) The tennis court shall not be used for commercial purposes.
(2) The tennis court shall be an accessory use, not a principal use, and
shall only be located within a residential zone.
(3) The tennis courts shall not be erected in the side or front yards.
(4) The tennis courts shall be set back from side and rear property
lines a minimum of the height of backstops and sidesteps, but not
less than the distance of the required side yard. Said backstops and
sidesteps shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
(5) A buffer area shall be provided between the tennis court and any
adjoining properties, in accordance with the standards and
specifications of § 240-6.4 of this chapter.
(6) No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection
with any tennis court after 10:00 p.m., and lights used to illuminate
any tennis court shall be so arranged and shaded to reflect light
away from the adjoining premises.
(7) All lighting shall conform to the outdoor lighting requirements of
this chapter.
E. Restaurants. Restaurants are permitted in the B-1 Zone and Mixed-Use
Development Zone as a conditional use. A restaurant may be permitted
on the following conditions:
(1) A restaurant permitted under this subsection, as well as permitted
by the Outdoor Dining Ordinance (Ordinance No. 107962, is defined
as a commercial establishment in which food and beverages are
prepared and sold.
(2) A restaurant establishment must provide an area for refuse
storage. Such refuse storage area shall be located in the rear of the
building, shall be screened on four sides, and shall be at least five
feet from the property line.
(3) The restaurant shall provide adequate access facilities for
pedestrian traffic from public sidewalks, so as to assure safety and
to avoid congestion on public sidewalks. If the restaurant provides
parking for patrons, this provision shall apply to vehicular access
as well as pedestrian access.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Cafes, Outdoor.
§ 240-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:425
(4) All entrances and exits shall be clearly visible from the street and
sidewalk.
(5) An adequate loading and servicing area shall be provided and shall
not interfere with traffic circulation.
(6) The restaurant establishment shall comply with all applicable
building and fire codes.
(7) Signs shall comply with Article XI of this chapter.
(8) The application for such a conditional use shall be accompanied by
a site plan, drawn to scale and certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect, detailing the dimensions and location of all
tables, seats, cooking, sanitary facilities and all requirements of
this chapter. When adequate on-site space is available for the
exclusive use of an applicant, the applicant shall provide one offstreet
parking space for every 2 1/2 seats.
(9) The above shall not prohibit a restaurant from permitting
customers to supply their own wine or beer in an indoor restaurant
subject to ABC regulations.
F. Houses of worship are conditional uses in all zones, shall require
conditional use approval and may be permitted in accordance with the
following conditions:
(1) Bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1.5 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
(e) Minimum side yards: 50 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(g) Maximum building height provided in that zone: 32 feet.
(h) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(i) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
(j) Minimum buffer width: 50 feet.
(2) External lighting with proper shielding for adjacent and/or
surrounding properties is provided in accordance with the
commercial lighting and outdoor lighting (§ 240-7.10) provisions of
this code.
§ 240-8.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-8.4
1:426
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
§ 240-6.6A(1) and A(3) through A(10). One off-street parking space
shall be provided for each 100 square feet of interior building
space. On a mid-block lot, no front yard parking shall be allowed,
and on a corner lot, no front or side yard parking shall be allowed
on the yards that abut the street.
(4) The facility may not also serve as a residence.
(5) No commercial activity shall be allowed, including leasing of the
facility; provided, however, that the facility may be used for
nonprofit activities which are accessory or incidental to the
primary use, including the operation of a day-care center for
children or adults and wedding receptions, and the hours of
operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. The
proposed use shall in no way adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the surrounding
property owners/occupants.
(6) Any condition not specifically addressed above shall conform to the
applicable zoning codes of the zone in which it is proposed.
(7) The proposed use shall provide seating in conformance with the
current Fire Protection Code.63
G. Public, private and parochial child-care centers and schools (nursery
through secondary) not operated for profit shall require conditional use
approval and may be permitted in accordance with the following
conditions:
(1) The facility shall be certified by the appropriate licensing authority
of the State of New Jersey.
(2) Bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 225 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
(e) Minimum side yards: 50 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: as specified in the applicable zone.
(h) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(i) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 121, Fire Prevention.
§ 240-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:427
(j) Minimum buffer width: 50 feet.
(3) External lighting with proper shielding for adjacent and/or
surrounding properties is provided in accordance with the
commercial lighting and outdoor lighting (§ 240-7.10) provisions of
this code.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
§ 240-6.6A(1), A(3) through A(10) and C.
(5) On a mid-block lot, no front yard parking shall be allowed, and on a
corner lot, no front or side yard parking shall be allowed on the
yards that abut the street.
(6) Hours of operation shall be confined to the period between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The facility shall be closed on Saturday and
Sunday.
(7) The facility may not serve as a residence or allow any overnight
activities.
(8) No commercial activity shall be allowed.
(9) Any condition not specifically addressed above shall conform to the
applicable zoning codes of the zone in which it is proposed.
(10)No facility shall be approved if it is within 1,000 feet of a similar
facility.
H. Nonprofit libraries, museums and public buildings, except Boroughowned,
shall require conditional use approval and may be permitted in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Floor area ratio (FAR), coverages, lot sizes, height, and front, side
combined and rear yard setbacks for the applicable zone shall be
met.
(2) Buffer areas and landscaping dimensions as required for
commercial properties adjacent to residential zones shall be met.
(3) External lighting with proper shielding for adjacent and/or
surrounding properties is provided in accordance with the
commercial lighting and outdoor lighting (§ 240-7.10) provisions of
this code.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
§ 240-6.6A(1), A(3) through A(10) and C(4). On a mid-block lot, no
front yard parking shall be allowed, and on a corner lot, no front or
side yard parking shall be allowed on the yards that abut the street.
(5) The facility may not serve as a residence or allow any overnight
activities.
§ 240-8.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-8.4
1:428
(6) Any commercial activity must be ancillary to the operation of the
facility (less than 10% of the floor area).
(7) Any condition not specifically addressed above shall conform to the
applicable zoning codes of the zone in which it is proposed.
(8) The minimum lot size shall be 1/2 acre.
I. Funeral homes shall require conditional use approval and may be
permitted only in the B-1 and B-2 Zones, in accordance with the
following conditions:
(1) Floor area ratio (FAR), coverages, lot sizes, height, and front, side
combined and rear yard setbacks for the applicable zone shall be
met.
(2) Buffer areas and landscaping dimensions as required for
commercial properties adjacent to residential zones shall be met.
(3) External lighting with proper shielding for two adjacent and/or
surrounding properties is provided in accordance with the
commercial lighting and outdoor lighting (§ 240-7.11) provisions of
this code.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
§ 240-6.6A(1) and A(3) through A(10). One off-street parking space
shall be provided for each 100 square feet of interior building
space. On a mid-block lot, no front yard parking shall be allowed,
and on a corner lot, no front or side yard parking shall be allowed
on the yards that abut the street.
(5) The facility shall be certified by the appropriate licensing authority
of the State of New Jersey.
(6) No facility shall be approved if it is within 1,000 feet of a similar
facility.
(7) The minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres. If a lot is situated in more
than one zone, the entire acreage may be computed in the
calculation of minimum lot area so long as the structure housing
the funeral home and the parking area is entirely within the
applicable (B-1 or B-2) zone.
(8) Buildings may include a single residence, the residence of the
owner, manager or a full-time employee of the facility. The floor
space dedicated to the residence portion of the facility shall not be
included in the one-hundred-square-foot off-street parking
calculation.
§ 240-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8.4
1:429

ARTICLE IX
Affordable Housing Zone
§ 240-9.1. Purpose.
In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development
fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301
et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable
Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules. This article establishes standards for
the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of development fees pursuant
to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article
shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development
fees.
§ 240-9.2. Basic requirements.
The Borough of Oradell shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees and Oradell has received thirdround
substantive certification from COAH or a judgment of compliance.
§ 240-9.3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent-affordable development.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Funds paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH's rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building permit
may be obtained utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value will be determined at project completion by the municipal
Tax Assessor.
§ 240-9.4. Residential development fees.
A. Residential developers shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized assessed
value for any eligible residential development, provided no increased
density is permitted.
§ 240-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9.4
1:431
§ 240-9.5. Nonresidential development fees.
§ 240-9.6. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions.
§ 240-9.7. Collection of fees.
Fifty percent of the development fee will be collected at the time of issuance
of the building permit. The remaining portion will be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible
B. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized.
A. Nonresidential developers shall pay a fee of 2% of the equalized
assessed value for any eligible nonresidential development.
B. If an increase in floor area ratio is approved pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor area realized (above what is
permitted by right under the existing zoning) will incur a bonus
development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for
nonresidential development. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base floor area for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest floor area permitted by
right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
A. Affordable housing developments shall be exempt from development
fees. All other forms of new construction shall be subject to
development fees unless exempted below.
B. Developer of new nonresidential structures, except as excluded herein,
and new residential structures, shall pay a development fee in the
manner prescribed herein.
C. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the imposition of a municipal development fee shall be exempt from
development fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
D. Developers that expand an existing nonresidential structure and
expand a residential structure where it results in additional dwelling
units shall pay a development fee. The development fee shall be
calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
improved structure.
E. Developers of any church, library, school, college, governmental facility,
hospital for humans, or nursing home shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
§ 240-9.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-9.7
1:432
for paying the difference between the fee calculated at building permit and
that determined at issuance of certificate of occupancy.
§ 240-9.8. Contested fees.
Imposed and collected development fees that are challenged shall be placed
in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of Oradell. If all or
a portion of the contested fees are returned to the developer, the accrued
interest on the returned amount shall also be returned.
§ 240-9.9. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 240-9.10. Use of funds.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
in Valley National Bank for the purpose of depositing development fees
collected from residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls. All development fees
paid by developers pursuant to this article shall be deposited into this
fund.
B. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Oradell shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality,
Valley National Bank, and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.16(b).
C. No funds shall be expended from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH.
All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any activity
approved by COAH to address the municipal fair share. Such activities
include, but are not limited to: rehabilitation, new construction, RCAs
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.4(d), ECHO housing,
purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used
for affordable housing, purchase of housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, or administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Oradell for
past housing activities.
C. After subtracting development fees collected to finance an RCA, a
rehabilitation program or a new construction project that are necessary
to address the Borough of Oradell affordable housing obligation, at
least 30% of the balance remaining shall be used to provide
§ 240-9.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9.10
1:433
§ 240-9.11. Monitoring.
The Borough of Oradell shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in the annual monitoring report related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, and funds from the sale
of units with extinguished controls, and the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall
be completed on forms designed by COAH.
affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households in
affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of
the affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to those households earning
30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, and
rental assistance.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the third-round municipal Fair Share
Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income. The use of development fees in this manner shall
entitle the Borough of Oradell to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:94-4.22.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Borough of Oradell may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
E. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
each year, exclusive of the fees used to fund an RCA, shall be expended
on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for
municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or
implement a new construction program, a Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a
rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues collected
from development fees shall be expended for such administrative
expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Development fee
administrative costs are calculated and may be expended at the end of
each year or upon receipt of the fees.
§ 240-9.10 ORADELL CODE § 240-9.12
1:434
§ 240-9.12. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Borough of Oradell to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
Borough of Oradell has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the Borough
of Oradell fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development
fees, it may resume the imposition and collection of development fees
only by complying with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:94-6. The Borough
of Oradell shall not impose a development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final approval after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance, nor will the Borough of Oradell
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The
Borough of Oradell will not expend development fees after the expiration of
its substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 240-9.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9.12
1:435

ARTICLE X
Fences
§ 240-10.1. Fence requirements and prohibitions.
A. No fence shall be constructed, installed or replaced without a zoning
permit, except for a pool barrier fence, which needs only a building
permit. [Amended 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07]
B. Height restrictions. [Amended 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07]
(1) No fence panel, picket or slat shall be in excess of six feet in height.
The total height of the top of the fence panel, picket or slat shall not
include any slight undulations of the ground. An allowance of six
inches from the bottom or any fence panel, picket or slat is
permitted, provided that 80% of the fencing does not exceed a
height of six feet two inches above the ground. This maximum
height is intended to allow a six-foot-tall fence panel to be installed
up to two inches above the ground, regardless of any undulations of
the ground up to six inches above the ground when the ground does
undulate. No fence post, including any decorative finial, shall be in
excess of six feet six inches.
(2) In the case of an interior lot, no fence panel, picket or slat shall be
erected in the required front yard in excess of three feet in height.
On a corner lot, no fence panel, picket or slat in excess of three feet
in height shall be erected within the required front yard setback of
all street lines. The total height of the top of the fence panel, picket
or slat shall not include any slight undulations of the ground. An
allowance of six inches from the bottom or any fence panel, picket
or slat is permitted, provided that 80% of the fencing does not
exceed a height of three feet two inches above the ground. This
maximum height is intended to allow a three-foot-tall fence panel to
be installed up to two inches above the ground, regardless of any
undulations of the ground up to six inches above the ground when
the ground does undulate. No fence post, including any decorative
finial, shall be in excess of three feet six inches.
(3) No fence shall be erected on a wall or retaining wall or within three
feet from the wall or retaining wall, which, when measured from
the top of the wall or retaining wall to the top of the fence the
highest point, exceeds four feet.
C. No fence shall be built or constructed over a stream, brook or any
drainage area so as to interfere with the free flow of water when said
water is at its maximum height in said stream, brook or drainage area.
Any fence located in a nonresidential zone shall be finished on both
sides.
§ 240-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-10.1
1:437
D. All fences shall be built or constructed in such a manner as to permit
the finished side of such fence to face either adjacent properties or the
street, as the case may be.
E. No fence shall be built or constructed of barbed or razor wire, or topped
with metal spikes, or made of cloth, string, rope, wire, canvas, poultry
netting, or constructed of any material or in any manner that may be
dangerous to persons or animals. No chain-link or "cyclone" fence shall
be permitted in the front yard setback.
F. In any zone on any corner lot, no fence, sign or structure, planting, line
of site, or other obstruction to vision higher than 28 inches shall be
erected or maintained along street lines within 25 feet of the
intersection of any street lines.
§ 240-10.1 ORADELL CODE § 240-10.1
1:438
ARTICLE XI
Signs and Awnings
§ 240-11.1. General rules and regulations.
Except for those signs meeting the requirements of § 240-11.2A, B, C or D,
no sign, awning or canopy shall be erected without a permit issued by the
Construction Official, which permit shall only be issued for signs, awnings
or canopies that comply with the following rules and regulations:
A. No sign shall be erected or replaced upon the roof of a building.
B. A sign may be affixed to a parapet; provided, however, that no part of
the sign so affixed shall extend more than three feet above the roof deck
of the building or from the base of the parapet.
C. Where a nonconforming sign exists on the property, all applications for
additional signs shall first be reviewed by the Sign Committee of the
Planning Board and then require the approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
D. Window signs shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the window, and
no window sign shall be more than two feet in height. If there is more
than one sign in any window, then said signs shall be grouped together
but shall not, as a group, cover more than 20% of the square footage of
said window. Telephone numbers, if included, shall not exceed five
inches in height. No window sign or group of signs shall be permitted
above the first floor of any building unless the user of the space
occupies the area above the first floor only. No such sign shall be
illuminated. All civic or charitable organization signs shall be confined
to two feet in height and considered temporary and shall be subject to
§ 240-11.2M of this chapter. Civic or charitable organization signs shall
not be included in the 20% coverage permitted for window signs.
E. No sign shall consist of more than four colors, inclusive of black and
white.
F. If a sign which is conforming is destroyed, it may be rebuilt or repaired
to its original condition without obtaining a permit. The Construction
Code Official and Zoning Officer must be notified in writing of the
restoration of the conforming sign.
G. No sign shall be illuminated by lighting of intermittent or varying
intensity nor by channel light. Lights shall not be so arranged they line
the perimeter of any window.
H. Business signs may be illuminated but shall not be painted with or
composed of neon, fluorescent, phosphorescent, LED, or similar
material. Illuminated signs shall have sources of reflective light
shielded in such a manner that the same are not visible from the street
or adjoining properties.
§ 240-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11.1
1:439
I. All signs and all external lighting used in connection with the operation
of any business shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Construction Official, with the consent and advice of
the Chief of Police, may authorize lighting specifically designed for the
safety and the protection of properties otherwise subject to this section,
which lighting, when so authorized, shall be exempt from the provisions
hereof.
J. Permitted lighting for illuminated shall be limited to that concentrated
upon the face of the sign. No internally illuminated or backlit signs shall
be permitted. All outdoor lighting shall conform to the standards
established for outdoor lighting under this chapter. All bulbs
illuminating the sign must be working. If a bulb is not illuminated, then
all the bulbs illuminating the sign must be turned off. Flashing bulbs are
not permitted.
K. Signs in residential areas shall not exceed a maximum size of one
square foot and may be illuminated only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 10:30 p.m., except that the sign of a physician, surgeon or dentist
shall not have any time restriction. Such lighting shall be arranged so
as to prevent glare.
L. No billboards are permitted.
M. Pennants, buntings, or "grand opening" signs are permitted, subject to
the approval of the Construction Official, for a consecutive period of no
more than 30 days and for no more than 30 days in one calendar year.
Said signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. No pennants or buntings
shall be displayed upon public property, streets, or rights-of-way. The
United States flag, the New Jersey State flag, the county flag and the
municipal flag may be displayed. In addition, flags of other states of the
United States and other sovereign nations may also be displayed.
However, when such referenced flags are displayed on a flagpole on
residential property within the Borough of Oradell, such flagpole shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Flagpoles shall not exceed the overall maximum height level of 25
feet as measured from the top of the highest point of the flagpole to
the average finished grade of the flagpole.
(2) No flagpole shall be erected closer to any roadway located adjacent
to a residence than the midpoint of the extended line created by the
terminal point of the municipal right-of-way located most proximate
to any structure located on the property and the structure itself.
N. No signs shall be permitted which compete for attention with, or may
be mistaken for, a traffic signal.
O. No sign shall extend more than eight inches beyond the face of a
building or fascia to which it is attached.
§ 240-11.1 ORADELL CODE § 240-11.1
1:440
§ 240-11.2. Permitted signs.
The following signs shall be permitted in all zones of the Borough:
P. No sign shall be permitted on a property unless it is related to the
occupancy of that property. It is the responsibility of the owner to
remove all signs which do not relate to an occupancy of the property.
Q. Company logos may be permitted on a commercial sign only after
specific approval of the Board having jurisdiction over the site plan
approval for the project, if applicable.
R. No vehicle or mobile sign shall be used to circumvent those regulations.
S. No sandwich signs or similar temporary signs are permitted.
T. Change of occupancy. Upon termination of an occupancy of any
premises, it shall be the duty of the owner of such premises to require
that any signs used in connection with that occupancy be removed from
the premises within five days after termination of said occupancy.
U. No revolving or moving sign shall be permitted.
V. No paper signs will be permitted on doors.
W. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no freestanding
signs shall be permitted.
X. No sign shall be permitted on any antenna, except for the
manufacturer's logo.
A. A nonilluminated nameplate, with the name of the principal occupant or
the street number or name of a private dwelling, with an area of not
more than one square foot.
B. A single informational sign with an area of not more than one square
foot, which may include, but not be limited to, "exit," "enter," "beware of
dog," "house protected," or "use back door." No commercial name or
logo is permitted on an informational sign.
C. A single-faced sign or bulletin board for a church, school, library, club
or other public or quasi-public building or use, with an area of not more
than 24 square feet and a maximum length of 6 1/2 feet. Such signs may
be illuminated but shall be arranged so as to prevent glare. Such signs
shall not be lighted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. A nonilluminated temporary sign for announcing or advertising for
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, religious or similar drive,
movement or event, for four nonconsecutive periods (not exceeding 30
days per period) in any calendar year. The total area of all such signs on
a lot shall not exceed 24 square feet or six feet in length.
E. Signs for sale or lease of premises; "open house" signs.
§ 240-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11.2
1:441
(1) A single nonilluminated temporary sign for advertising the
immediate premises for sale or lease, which is located upon the
premises and which may have an area of not more than four square
feet in surface. Said sign shall not remain for more than 90
consecutive days for commercial premises and not more than 180
days for residential premises and must be set back 10 feet from the
street property line.
(2) A single nonilluminated temporary sign conforming to the size and
locational restrictions set forth in Subsection E(1) of this section
advertising an "open house" at the immediate premises for sale or
lease, which sign shall be posted only on the day(s) on which an
open house is actually being conducted and for a period not
exceeding eight hours on such day.
F. A nonilluminated temporary political sign regarding any government
election, whether national, state, county or local, which shall not
exceed six square feet in area.
G. Wall signs for retail use shall be limited to one illuminated or
nonilluminated sign on the principal front facade of the building,
provided that, where a retail use is located on a corner lot, it may have a
second sign on the wall facing the side street not exceeding 50% of that
permitted on the principal front facade. The front facade sign shall not
exceed a size of 1.5 square feet for each linear foot of the front facade of
the building or 24 square feet, whichever is less. The lettering on retail
signs shall be limited to the principal name of the company and its
principal product of sale or occupation.
H. In the event of multiple use of a retail building, one sign shall be
permitted for each such use on the first floor of the front facade. The
sign for each such retail use shall not exceed 24 square feet or 1.5
square feet of sign area for each linear front foot of the building,
whichever is less. Where a retail use is located on a corner, such use
may have a second sign on the wall facing the side street, which second
sign shall not exceed 50% of that permitted on the principal front
facade.
I. Wall signs for office buildings, laboratories or nonretail commercial
uses shall have the same requirements as the signs for retail uses
covered under this article, with the exception that its lettering shall be
limited to the names of the occupants, a numerical sign indicating the
street address of the building and the name of the building. Also,
buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet of front facade can increase
their sign size to 5% of the area of the front facade or a size of 100
square feet, whichever is less.
J. Ground signs for office buildings, laboratories, nonretail commercial or
retail uses are permitted with the limitation of one double-face
illuminated or nonilluminated sign allowed per building at a location at
least 10 feet back from the street property line and of a size not to
§ 240-11.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-11.2
1:442
exceed 18 square feet and/or nine feet in length. The top of the sign
shall not exceed six feet above the average grade at the sign location.
The lettering on such sign shall be limited to the name of the building
or of the occupant and its principal product of sale or its occupation.
Multiuse buildings will be permitted to list their occupants; however, no
increase in size from a single occupancy will be permitted.
K. Directory signs are permitted. The total area shall not exceed eight
square feet. The directory sign shall not be included in computing the
footage of ground and/or facade signs.
L. A double-faced or single-faced entrance/exit sign shall be permitted for
any building. The square-feet area of the sign will not be deducted from
the allowed square footage permitted for the ground and wall signs for
property. Such signs shall be uniform in size, comply with the standards
of the "Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices" and shall, at a
minimum, meet the following requirements:
(1) Size. The size shall be two feet in height; four feet in length; 12
inches in depth.
(2) Lettering shall be limited to only the name of the principal
occupant and the word "Entrance" or "Exit."
(3) Coloring. Black letters on a white background shall be employed.
(4) Illumination. The sign must have a reflective surface or illumination
which shall conform to the standards established for outdoor
lighting under this chapter.
(5) Height. The height of the sign from mean ground level shall not
exceed four feet.
(6) Location. The sign shall be placed on the far side of the entrance
driveway relative to the direction of the traffic flow and shall be
located on the owner's property with no required setback from the
property line.
M. Canopy and awning signs shall be permitted, provided that the
proposed canopy or awning is consistent in color, shape and size with
the building to which it is annexed and is consistent with the character
of any existing canopy or awning signs in the neighborhood, and further
provided that the metal or rigid frame portion of the sign shall not
extend more than five feet from the face of the building and must be a
minimum of seven feet in height from the base of the door. In no event
shall any canopy or awning consist of more than four colors, inclusive of
black and white. The lettering on a canopy sign shall be limited to the
name, type of business and address of the occupant only, which shall be
included in determining the color and other sign calculations. In the
event that a building has more than one canopy, then all canopies shall
be uniform in color, shape and design.
§ 240-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11.2
1:443
§ 240-11.3. Intent; administration.
N. Service station, automobile repair shop or public garage signs.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the
contrary, a gasoline service station or a public garage may display:
(a) One freestanding or pylon sign advertising the name of the
station or garage and for the principal product sold on the
premises, including any special company or brand name,
insignia or emblem, provided that such sign shall not exceed
32 square feet in total sign area and shall not be hung closer
than five feet to the property line and not less than 10 nor more
than 20 feet above the ground, and/or one sign on the building.
(b) One temporary sign attached to the wail of the building and
specifically advertising special seasonal servicing of
automobiles, provided that said sign does not exceed seven
square feet in area.
(c) Directional signs or lettering displayed over individual
entrances, doors or bays, limited to one sign, not exceeding 12
inches in height and the total of which shall not exceed six
square feet, for each entrance or bay.
(d) Customary lettering or insignias which are not a structural
part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of
the gasoline sold, a lead warning sign, a price indicator and
any other sign required bylaw, not exceeding a total of three
square feet on each pump.
(e) One nonilluminated credit card sign, not exceeding two square
feet in area, to be placed on or near the gasoline pump.
(2) Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to create a
permitted use for a gasoline service station.
(3) The construction of a canopy over gasoline pumps or pump islands
shall be in conformance with this article and the requirements set
forth in § 240-8.4B.
A. It is the intention of this article to classify signs and awnings as an
accessory to the building. Thus, all signs and awnings shall be designed
to maintain and be consistent with the aesthetic design of the structure
and the character of the neighborhood, in addition to identifying the
structure and the services rendered therein.
B. All sign and awning applications shall be submitted to the Construction
Official and shall depict on a drawing all the sign or awnings data
necessary to evaluate compliance with this article, including size,
colors, the method of illumination of any materials of the sign and a
location drawing showing the full facade of the building on which any
§ 240-11.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-11.3
1:444
proposed wall sign is to be placed. A copy of said application shall
also be submitted to the Planning Board for aesthetic review and
recommendation by a three-person Sign Subcommittee of the Planning
Board, two members of which shall constitute a quorum.
C. A site plan bearing the seal of a New Jersey engineer or architect must
be submitted with each ground sign application, indicating thereon the
location of the ground sign and setback measurements from the street
lines.
D. All signs or awnings shall be properly maintained so as to be free of any
unsightly condition, unkempt appearance or safety hazard that
adversely affects the aesthetic quality of the surrounding
neighborhood.
§ 240-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11.3
1:445

ARTICLE XII
Subdivision of Land
§ 240-12.1. Submission of sketch plat.
A. Any subdivider of land within the Borough of Oradell shall, prior to
subdividing or resubdividing land, as defined in this chapter, submit to
the Administrative Official, at least 10 working days prior to the regular
meeting of the applicable board, the original and 17 copies of a sketch
plat of the proposed subdivision for purposes of classification and
preliminary discussion. All sketch plats shall indicate all property
owners and addresses within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision, and
those owners shall be properly notified pursuant to statute.
B. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by the applicable
board, a notation to that effect will be made on the sketch plat. A public
hearing shall not be required prior to classification and approval of a
minor subdivision, unless the applicable Board shall determine that the
classification and approval of the subdivision as minor may
detrimentally affect adjacent property. The plat will then be forwarded
to the applicable Board applicable Board Secretary and Borough
Engineer for their signatures and returned to the subdivider within two
weeks following the next regular meeting of the local board. No further
local board approval shall be required. A plat requiring Zoning Board of
Adjustment approval shall be processed by that Board.
C. Before the Administrative Official returns any approved sketch plat to
the subdivider, the Official shall furnish one copy to each of the
following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Zoning Officer.
(5) Tax Assessor.
(6) County Planning Board.
(7) Tax Collector.
D. Either a deed or a plat map drawn in compliance with the applicable
statutes shall be recorded or filed by the subdivider with the County
Recording Officer within 190 days from the date of return of the
approved sketch plat. If any final plat is not filed within this period, the
approval shall expire.
E. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat, which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedures in § 240-15.2.
§ 240-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12.2
1:447
§ 240-12.2. Submission of preliminary plat.
A. At least 17 blueprints of the preliminary plat, together with 17
completed application forms for preliminary approval, shall be
submitted to the Administrative Official of the appropriate Board 10
working days prior to the applicable Board meeting at which
consideration is desired. At the time of filing, a fee and a deposit as
specified in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 115, for each lot in the
subdivision, shall be paid the Administrative Official. A fee shall be paid
to the Administrative Official to cover costs in connection with
providing the names and addresses of the property owners required to
be notified of the public hearing. The filing fee shall be retained and the
balance of the deposit shall be applied to costs of publication,
inspection, engineering and legal fees, and the updating of the Tax
Map. Any balance after deducting the foregoing expense shall be
returned to the subdivider, and if the amount is insufficient to cover
such costs, the subdivider shall maintain an escrow balance or trust
equal to that required by the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 115. Any failure
to maintain the minimum escrow balance shall permit the Construction
Official to issue stop-work orders. The Administrative Official shall
notify the Secretary of the applicable Board of the receipt of a
preliminary plat at its next regular meeting.
B. The subdivider shall notify, by certified mail or personal service, at least
10 working days prior to the hearing, all owners within 200 feet of the
property to be subdivided, as the names of such owners appear on the
municipal tax record. Said notice shall note the time and place of
hearing, a brief description of the property involved, a list of maps and
other documents to be considered and a summary statement of the
matters to be heard. The applicant shall cause notice of the hearing to
be published in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least 10 working days prior to the
hearing.
C. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Building
Department, prior to the hearing, to the following persons and
agencies:
(1) Administrative Official.
(2) County Planning Board.
(3) Borough Engineer.
(4) Board of Health.
(5) Such other municipal, county or state officials and agencies as
directed by the applicable board.
D. The subdivider shall be required, at the time of the public hearing, to
submit to the applicable Board an affidavit that the procedures required
by the New Jersey statutes and the Subdivision of Land Ordinance of
§ 240-12.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-12.2
1:448
the Borough of Oradell have been fully complied with in all respects and
shall include in the affidavit the following:
(1) That the subdivider is the owner of the property sought to be
subdivided or has written permission to represent the owner. A
copy of the deed and written permission of the owner shall be
attached to said affidavit.
(2) That the subdivider has notified all persons entitled to notification,
setting forth the names and addresses of such persons.
(3) A copy of said notice shall be attached to and made a part of the
affidavit.
(4) That the required notice of the public hearing has been published
in an official newspaper, with a copy of said publication to be
attached to the affidavit, and the date of said publication.
(5) That the Building Department has forwarded copies of the
preliminary plat to all persons required under Subsection C above.
(6) That the names and addresses of the property owners were
obtained from the Building Department.
E. The applicable Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90 days
after submission to the Building Department but in no case before the
expiration of the twenty-day period within which the County Planning
Board may submit a report on said subdivision. In all cases, the
recommendations of the County Planning Board shall be given careful
consideration in the final decision of the local applicable Board. If the
County Planning Board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37, its action shall be noted on the plat, and, if disapproved, two
copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If
either the applicable board or County Planning Board disapproves a
plat, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of applicable board within 90 days of its submission. If approval
is required by any other officer or public body, the same procedure as
applies to submissions and approval by the County Planning Board shall
apply.
F. If the applicable board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a notation
to that effect shall be made on the plat, signed by the applicable board
chairman, and shall be returned to the subdivider for compliance with
final approval requirements.
G. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant these following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
(1) The general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
§ 240-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12.2
1:449
§ 240-12.3. Submission of final plat.
(2) Said applicant may submit on or before the expiration date the
whole or a part or parts of said plat for final approval.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Construction Official for
forwarding to the applicable board for final approval within three years
from the date of preliminary approval. The Construction Official shall
immediately notify the secretary of the applicable board upon receipt of
a final plat, and the applicable Board shall act upon the final plat within
45 days after the date of submission for final approval to the
Construction Official or within such further time as the subdivider shall
agree to.
B. The original tracing, one sepia copy, 17 blueprints and 17 of the
application forms for final approval shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer at least 10 working days prior to the date of a
regular applicable board meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is
approved without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all
changes or modifications required by the applicable board.
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by:
(1) A statement by the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities in exact location and elevation identifying
those portions already installed and those to be installed.
(2) Proof that the subdivider has installed all improvements in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter or that a
performance guaranty has been posted with the Building Official in
a sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements, inspections, engineering and legal fees.
(3) A site plan approved by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Deeds of dedications for all easements, streets or rights-of-way.
D. Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board for
its action prior to final approval.
E. Upon final approval, the applicable Board shall file copies of the
approved site plan with the Borough Clerk, Borough Engineer and
Building Official, and copies of the final plat shall be filed with the
following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Construction Official.
(4) Tax Assessor.
§ 240-12.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-12.3
1:450
§ 240-12.4. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information, or some other
similarly accurate base, and shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet to enable
the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or include the
following information:
§ 240-12.5. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The preliminary plat shall be
designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor or professional
engineer. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(5) County Planning Board.
(6) Official issuing certificates of approved lots.
F. The final plat, after final approval, shall be filed by the subdivider with
the County Recording Officer within the time required by the Municipal
Land Use Law. If any final plat is not filed within this period, the
approval shall expire.
G. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer
unless it has been duly approved and signed by the officials of the
Borough of Oradell and the county as required by the Municipal Land
Use Law.
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures within the portion to be subdivided and all
existing structures within 200 feet of the portion to be subdivided.
C. The names of all adjoining property owners within 200 feet from the
property to be subdivided, as disclosed by the most recent municipal
tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
B. The tract name, the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, the date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(1) The name and address of the record owner or owners.
(2) The name and address of the subdivider.
(3) The name and address of the person who prepared the map.
§ 240-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12.5
1:451
§ 240-12.6. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn, by a New Jersey Professional Land Surveyor
or Professional Engineer, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet
and in compliance with all provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. The final
plat shall be accompanied by the following or shall show:
C. The acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
D. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative
cross-sections and center-line profiles for all proposed new streets.
E. The location of existing and proposed property lines; also the location of
existing streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts,
drainpipes, any natural features, such as wooded areas and rock
formations, and all streets, roads, streams and wooded areas within 200
feet of the subdivision.
F. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, communication,
data, water, gas and electricity) showing feasible connections to
existing or any proposed utility systems. When an individual water
supply and/or sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such
system must be approved by the appropriate local, county or state
health agency. When a public sewage disposal system is not available,
the developer shall have percolation tests made and shall submit the
results with the preliminary plat. Any subdivision or part thereof which
does not meet with the established requirements of this chapter or
other applicable regulations shall not be approved. Any remedy
proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by the
appropriate local, county or state health agency.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
A. The date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. The tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1.
§ 240-12.5 ORADELL CODE § 240-12.6
1:452
§ 240-12.7. Installation of improvements prior to final approval.
E. The minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. The location and description of all monuments.
G. The names of the owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. Certification by an engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the
details of the plat.
I. Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Cross-sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Borough
Engineer, shall be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
M. A certificate from the Borough Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to
date.
A. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the
ultimate installation of the following:
(1) Streets.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbs and/or gutters.
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Streetlighting.
(6) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be located so as not to interfere with
utilities or sidewalks, shall be at least 2.5 inches in diameter as
measured six inches from the ground, and shall be such types as
permitted by the Shade Tree Committee or Department of Public
Works. A minimum of one tree shall be planted per building lot
frontage. Said trees shall be planted pursuant to specifications,
standards and regulations adopted by the Shade Tree Committee
or Department of Public Works.
(7) Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall
be redistributed as to provide at least four inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
§ 240-12.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12.7
1:453
§ 240-12.8. Design standards/conformance required.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
§ 240-12.9. Streets.
(8) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with said
statute.
(9) Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers.
B. All such installations shall be properly connected with an approved
system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
C. All improvements required by the Borough Council and applicable
Board shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough
Engineer. The developer shall notify the Borough Engineer at least 24
hours prior to the commencement of any construction. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved.
A. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will
encourage good development patterns within the municipality. Where
either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted,
the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon.
B. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master
Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be
shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and shall
be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the
following design standards.
A. The arrangements of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than 50 feet.
C. Grades of streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
D. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°.
E. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with
a curve having a radius of not less than 25 feet.
§ 240-12.7 ORADELL CODE § 240-12.9
1:454
§ 240-12.10. Blocks.
§ 240-12.11. Lots.
F. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
G. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on streets.
H. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 100 and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet.
I. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
J. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street.
K. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall
be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
L. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide for a convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the applicable board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and shall be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
§ 240-12.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12.11
1:455
§ 240-12.12. Maintenance of easements; natural features.
§ 240-12.13. Transfer or sale of unapproved lots; violations and
penalties; civil actions.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the applicable Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Maintenance of easements.
(1) In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements
shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the
companies or municipal departments concerned.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse of such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose.
B. Natural features, such as streams, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. If the streets in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said
land in the subdivision would meet requirements for a building permit
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been
used in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, but only if the
municipality has an applicable board or committee thereof with
power to act and which meets regularly on a monthly or more
frequent basis, and whose governing body has adopted standards
and procedures in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 et seq.
B. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense, if any.
§ 240-12.11 ORADELL CODE § 240-12.13
1:456
ARTICLE XIII
Site Plan
§ 240-13.1. Approval required; exceptions.
When an application for a building permit is made, preliminary site plan
approval must be obtained before the issuance of such permit. The
exceptions are:
§ 240-13.2. Preliminary site plan approval.
An application for approval of a site plan shall contain all the data and
information required in § 240-13.3.
§ 240-13.3. Details of preliminary site plan plat.
The site plan plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and shall be designed by a licensed
New Jersey surveyor or a licensed New Jersey professional engineer. The
plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
A. One- or two-family dwellings, or an accessory use thereof.
B. Repairs or improvements to any premises that do not change the
exterior dimensions of the structure or the use of the premises.
A. All lot hue dimensions, elevations and contours, at five-foot intervals on
10% slopes and at two-foot intervals on lesser slopes.
B. Building setback, side line and rear yard distances.
C. The location of all buildings.
D. The location of off-street parking areas, with dimensions, showing
parking spaces, loading docks, off-street loading space, access and
egress drives, traffic circulation and location and description of any
lighting in connection with the parking area.
E. The location and description of all proposed lighting and signs.
F. The type of surface paving, curbing and sidewalks.
G. All landscaping, fences, walls or similar facilities, and open spaces, as
well as the buffer areas which shall be provided for the purpose of
isolating the activities conducted on the site from adjoining residentialzoned
areas, if any. The location of all shade trees to be provided in
accordance with this chapter shall be shown. A detailed landscaping
plan showing the number and type of plantings shall be submitted. The
plans shall also show the size of plantings as proposed as well as the
anticipated height of the planting at mature growth.
§ 240-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13.3
1:457
H. The location of all structures within 200 feet of the property lines, and
curb cuts within 125 feet of the property lines.
I. Size, height, location and arrangement of all proposed buildings and
structures, including building plans, showing front, side and rear
elevations. A description of the structure or structures, including the
architect's rendering, and a description of all facing materials to be
used. Facing materials shall be brick, stone and other approved
material.
J. A written description of the proposed use sufficient detail to indicate
the effects of those operations in producing traffic congestion, noise,
glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards.
K. The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed rights-of-way,
easements, community areas, buffer zones and other encumbrances
which may affect the lot or lots in question and the location, size and
description of any lands to be conveyed to the Borough. There shall also
be submitted a copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are
intended to cover all or any part of the site.
L. Location of all water mains, fire hydrants, potable water systems, storm
drainage facilities and sanitary sewer lines existing and proposed.
M. The name, title and address of the applicant and the owner and the
name, address and title of the person preparing the plan or maps and
appropriate seal of the professional participating in the preparation of
same. Maps shall include a place for the signatures of the Chairperson
and Secretary of the approving authority, as well as a place for the
signature and seal of the Borough Engineer. The municipal Tax Map lot
and block numbers of the lot or lots, or portion thereof, the tax sheet
number and key location map for all properties shall be on the map or
plan. The map shall include all dates of preparation and revised dates,
as the case may be.
N. Indication of proposed traffic access and ways showing alignment and
visibility and safety considerations.
O. Location and width of proposed driveways and curb cuts.
P. Parking layout showing number of stalls in each block and any required
buffer area.
Q. A three-column table indicating in the left column the requirements of
this chapter, in the middle column the existing conditions of the
property, and in the right column the proposed development. The
following table shall be used:
§ 240-13.3 ORADELL CODE § 240-13.3
1:458
§ 240-13.4. Minor site plan.
Code Allowance
or Requirement
Existing
Development
Proposed
Development
Zone Code per
§ 240-6.2:
Lot area:
Lot width:
Lot depth:
Structure height:
Stories:
Floor area:
Floor area ratio:
Front yard:
Side yard:
Combined side yard:
Rear yard:
Building coverage:
Lot coverage:
Buffer zone
dimensions:
Off-street parking
spaces:
Distance to nearest
residential zone line:
Number of
employees at
building:
List of required
variances:
R. Such other information and data as may be required by the applicable
board in order to determine that the details of the site plan are in
accord with the standards of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Borough, and further that the building or use will not be detrimental to
the public interest.
A. Definition. A "minor site plan" shall mean a development plan that does
not involve a planned unit development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement that is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42 and which contains the information reasonably required in
order to make an informed determination as to whether the
requirements established by this chapter for approval have been met. A
§ 240-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13.4
1:459
§ 240-13.5. Final site plan application.
An application for approval of a final site plan shall contain all the data
and information required by § 240-13.3. An application for final site plan
approval shall also be accompanied by:
§ 240-13.6. Joint site plan application.
Where the approving board deems it appropriate, a combined preliminary
and final application may be submitted simultaneously.
§ 240-13.7. Minimum standards for site plan approval.
"minor site plan" shall additionally mean a site plan for a development
or building alteration requiring less than 10 parking spaces as required
by this chapter, containing less than 2,500 new or additional square feet
of floor area and not having more than 50% lot coverage. The approving
board, upon receipt of a site plan application, shall, by a vote of a
majority of its members, decide whether or not to treat said application
as a minor site plan.
B. The approving Board may waive public notice of a public hearing for
application for development if it finds that such application conforms to
the definition of a minor site plan.
C. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the site
plan by the approving board, provided that the approving board may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-41 and
40:55D-53.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditioned or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval is
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval.
A. A letter containing a list of all items to be covered by a performance
guaranty (cash or certified check), the quantities of each item, the cost
of each of them and the total amount of all items.
B. A letter from the Borough Engineer stating that the required
improvements have been installed to the Engineer's satisfaction in
accordance with the applicable Borough specifications and that the
performance guaranty is adequate to cover the cost of the remaining
improvements.
C. A letter from the developer's New Jersey licensed professional engineer
stating that the final plat plan conforms to the preliminary plan as
submitted and approved. The developer shall be liable for additional
engineering fees incurred by the Borough where such certification is
found to be incorrect.
§ 240-13.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-13.7
1:460
A. In reviewing a site plan application, the approving board shall ascertain
that the following minimum standards are complied with:
(1) That the provisions of this chapter with respect to height, minimum
lot areas, mandatory open spaces, floor area ratio and the like are
complied with.
(2) That adequate provision is made for off-street parking in
accordance with the ordinances of the Borough of Oradell and that
adequate traffic circulation and protection to adjoining properties
are provided.
(3) That adequate provision is made for disposal of stormwater, as
approved by the Borough Engineer, so that no runoff onto any
adjacent property shall occur.
(4) That the location, design or construction of any building is not
likely to involve risks of traffic congestion, public safety or hazard.
(5) That the design or construction of any building will not be so
markedly incongruous with the character of the neighborhood as to
materially affect the value of adjacent or nearby property.
(6) That all other applicable provisions of the ordinances of the
Borough of Oradell are met.
(7) That the applicant has obtained necessary approvals of any federal,
state, county or municipal agencies, or that the Planning Board's
approval is conditioned upon the applicant obtaining such
necessary approvals.
(8) That the proposed plan is suitable as to appearance and nature of
use in relation to the district in which it is located and that the
impact of the proposed use upon other properties in the area is
considered.
(9) That consideration is given to the environmental protection for the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(10) That the landscaping plan as submitted by the applicant is suitable
and that shade trees are provided for as set forth in any regulation
of the Borough Shade Tree Committee or Department of Public
Works.
(11) That a landscape plan prepared by a New Jersey licensed
landscape architect/professional is submitted for review and
approval, and that open spaces as well as buffer areas are provided
for the purpose of isolating the activities conducted on the site from
adjacent residential areas, if any.
(12) That all raw materials, fuels, finished products, machinery and
equipment, including but not limited to motor vehicles, vents,
prefabricated chimneys and ducts, that are used in the operation or
§ 240-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13.7
1:461
maintenance of the premises are located entirely within an
enclosed building, provided that same may be located on the roof
or in the side or rear yards of the premises if they are adequately
screened so that they are not visible from the street or adjacent
residential premises.
B. The approving board shall give consideration to such other elements or
aspects of the site plan and proposed use as may relate to the design of
the plan, the general environment of the area or the health, safety and
general welfare of the public, and in so doing, may refer the application
to such other agencies as may be desirable for report and
recommendation.
§ 240-13.7 ORADELL CODE § 240-13.7
1:462
ARTICLE XIV
Guaranties
§ 240-14.1. Performance and maintenance guaranties required.
Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site plan
approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, the approving board may require and shall accept, in
accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter, for the purpose of
assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:
§ 240-14.2. Extension of time limits for installation of
improvements.
A. The furnishing of a performance guaranty acceptable to the Borough's
Chief Financial Officer in favor of the Borough in the amount of 120% of
the cost of installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4, for improvements which the approving board may deem
necessary or appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments as shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.,64 water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other onsite
improvements and landscaping. The Borough Engineer shall
prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by the
performance guaranty, which itemized cost estimate shall be appended
to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
B. Provision for a maintenance guaranty, to be posted with the governing
body for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in the amount of 15% of the cost of the improvement,
which cost shall be determined by the Borough Engineer according to
the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. In the event
that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be,
shall be required by the municipality for such utilities or improvements.
A. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to the amount of 120% of the cost of the
installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough Engineer
64.Editor's Note: Said statute was repealed 2011, c. 217. See now N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 240-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-14.2
1:463
§ 240-14.3. Completion of improvements.
according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4
as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
B. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the municipality
may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof;
complete such improvements. Such completion or correction of
improvements shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
A. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the governing body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Borough Clerk and the Borough Engineer, prepare, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this article, a list of
all incomplete or unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a
request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the
Borough Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have
been completed and which improvements remain incomplete in the
judgment of the obligor. Thereupon, the Borough Engineer shall inspect
all improvements covered by the obligor's request and shall file a
detailed list and report, in writing with the governing body, and shall
simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days
after receipt of the obligor's request.
B. The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for,
the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to
be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory,
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be
made in the performance guaranty relating to the completed and
satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to Subsection A of this article.
C. The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guaranty relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
§ 240-14.2 ORADELL CODE § 240-14.3
1:464
appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this article. This
resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the
list and report prepared by the Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of
the resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall be released from
all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, with respect to those
approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of performance guaranty posted may
be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
D. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
municipality or approving authority as part of the performance
guaranty, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guaranty pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the
full amount of the performance guaranty.
E. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
F. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements, provided that the Borough may require of
the developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to
exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $1,000
or 10% of the cost of improvements, which cost shall be determined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
§ 240-14.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-14.3
1:465

ARTICLE XV
Effect of Approval of Subdivision and Site Plans
§ 240-15.1. Minor site plan and minor subdivision approval.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan or subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after
the date of approval.
§ 240-15.2. Preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval of major subdivision or site plan applications shall
be for a period of three years from the date on which the resolution is
adopted and shall confer upon the applicant the rights set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49.
§ 240-15.3. Final approval.
Final approval of major subdivision or site plan applications shall be for a
period of two years from the date on which the resolution is adopted and
shall confer upon the applicant the rights set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 240-15.4. Extension.
The municipal Board granting approval may grant extensions to the time
limits pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Act.65
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 240-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-15.4
1:467

ARTICLE XVI
Soil Moving
§ 240-16.1. Storage of removed topsoil; transport of unused topsoil.
§ 240-16.2. Final layer of topsoil required.
No owner of land shall deposit or cause to be deposited any soil upon his
land without providing for a final layer of topsoil at least four inches in
depth to be placed thereon.
§ 240-16.3. Examination and inspection of land.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any officer,
agent or employee of the Borough authorized to enforce this chapter shall
have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil moving
operations are being conducted to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 240-16.4. Permit required.
No owner, developer or person shall move or cause, allow, permit or suffer
to be moved any soil in, upon or from any lot in the Borough, nor shall any
owner, developer or person raise or lower or cause to be raised or lowered
the grade of any land unless and until a permit therefor shall first have been
approved by the Planning Board if over 100 cubic yards or the Construction
Official is less than or equal to 100 cubic yards and obtained from the
Construction Official of the Borough, as per the following calculations:
A. Persons excavating and developing said lands shall store topsoil from
the land within the boundaries of the land and shall remove therefrom
only that topsoil which may be permitted by the Planning Board as
herein provided; and the topsoil or balance thereof shall be spread
uniformly over the land.
B. All soil permitted to be removed from the premises must be transported
in such a manner that the same shall not be caused to spill on the
roadways of the Borough. In the event that soil is spilled upon any
Borough road, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or
his agent shall cause such soil to be removed by the Borough sweeper
at a charge of $100 per man hour during normal working hours and
$200 per man hour at other times, plus $150 per equipment hour, which
cost shall be certified to the Mayor and Council and the Construction
Official and, upon approval by resolution of the Mayor and Council,
shall be charged against the performance bond posted by the applicant.
A. Under 30 cubic yards.
(1) One thousand dollars escrow (Borough Engineer review and
inspection, balance will be refunded).
(2) Survey (three copies) showing stormwater management (type of
system, location, measurements).
§ 240-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16.4
1:469
§ 240-16.5. Filing of applications; fees.
§ 240-16.6. Information required on application.
B. Thirty cubic yards up to 100 cubic yards.
(1) One thousand dollars escrow (Borough Engineer review and
inspection, balance will be refunded).
(2) Site plan (three sets by a licensed engineer showing stormwater
system, location, soil calculation, grades, etc.).
C. One hundred cubic yards and above.
(1) Application to the Planning Board for a soil moving permit, fees for
application.
(2) Site plan (three sets by a licensed engineer showing stormwater
system, location, soil calculation, grades, etc.).
D. The permit required under the provisions of this section shall be
designated a soil permit. The Borough of Oradell shall have first option
receive any soil removed from a site or building lot at no cost to the
Borough and to designate the placement of soil within the Borough.
A. Applications shall be filed with the Planning Board or Borough
Engineer, as the case may be, in duplicate, together with a fee payable
to the order of the Borough of Oradell.
B. Fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
A. The applications for soil permits shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the land.
(2) A description of the land as to size and location.
(3) The lot and block numbers of the lands, as shown on the current
Assessment Map of the Borough.
(4) The reason for moving, removing, or adding the soil.
(5) The type and quantity of soil to be moved, removed or added.
(6) The location to which the soil is to be moved, removed or added.
(7) The dates of commencement and completion of the movement,
removal or addition of the soil.
(8) The final condition in which the land shall be placed.
(9) A map of the premises showing the contour lines and the present
and proposed slopes of land.
§ 240-16.4 ORADELL CODE § 240-16.6
1:470
§ 240-16.7. Consideration and review of application.
The Planning Board shall consider and review each application for a soil
permit within 45 days after its submission in proper form. Notice of the time
and place of the Planning Board's consideration of the application shall be
given by letter to the applicant.
§ 240-16.8. Right of applicant to be heard and present evidence.
The applicant shall have the right to present testimony and evidence in
support of the application.
§ 240-16.9. Planning Board review criteria.
The Planning Board, in considering and reviewing an application for a soil
permit and in determining its decision, shall be guided by the general
purpose of municipal planning and shall take into consideration the
following factors in particular:
§ 240-16.10. Issuance of permit; refusal; appeals.
(10) The present and proposed surface water drainage.
(11) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board may hereafter
require.
(12) A certification that the soil is "clean and not contaminated" under
ISRA or any successor standards.
(13) A performance bond in the amount of $750.
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. Surface water drainage.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
A. If an application for a soil permit is approved by the Planning Board or
Borough Engineer, as the case may be, the Construction Official shall
issue the soil permit forthwith and with such special conditions as the
Planning Board or Borough Engineer, as the case may be, deem
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the same authority to grant
soil moving permits for applications which it has jurisdiction over.
§ 240-16.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16.11
1:471
§ 240-16.11. Records to be kept.
A record of all soil permits issued shall be kept by the Building Department.
§ 240-16.12. Form of permit.
The form of the soil permit shall be prescribed by the Construction Official.
§ 240-16.11 ORADELL CODE § 240-16.12
1:472
ARTICLE XVII
Administration
§ 240-17.1. Enforcement by Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter, and all rules, conditions and requirements
adopted or specified pursuant thereto, shall be enforced by the
Construction Official, his duly authorized agents and subcode officials, who
shall be known as the "Zoning Officer." Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
any property owner or resident of the Borough, the Borough itself or any
board or agency of the Borough from availing themselves of any lawful
remedy in preventing or abating any violation of any provision of this
chapter.
§ 240-17.2. Duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 240-17.3. Permits.
A. The Zoning Officer or his duly authorized assistant shall have the right
to enter any building or enter upon any land at any reasonable hour as
is essential in the execution of his duties, provided that:
(1) The Zoning Officer or his duly authorized assistant shall display
proper identification upon commencing an inspection.
(2) Inspections shall be commenced in the presence of the owner or his
representative or tenant, whenever reasonably possible, provided
that any representative or tenant shall be over the age of 18.
B. The Zoning Officer shall maintain files and records of all applications
for building permits and plans submitted therewith and for certificates
of occupancy issued by him, with notations of all special conditions
involved. He shall keep a record of every identifiable complaint of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and of the action taken
consequent to each such complaint. These files and records shall be
public records, open to public inspection.
C. The Zoning Officer shall report to the governing body, monthly, on the
period since has last previous report summarizing all zoning permits
and certificates of occupancy issued by him. The governing body may
request and shall be furnished with information regarding all
complaints of violations and the action taken by him consequent
thereto.
A. Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the Zoning Official prior
to the construction, erection or alteration of any building or structure,
as defined in this chapter or in any part thereof A building permit issued
in accordance with the Building Ordinance of the Borough66 shall
satisfy the purposes of a zoning permit, provided that it conforms to all
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 240-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-17.3
1:473
§ 240-17.4. Violations and penalties.
such further conditions and requirements set forth in this chapter. The
fee for each such zoning building permit shall be as set forth in the Fee
Schedule.67
B. All requests for zoning permits shall be made, in writing, by the owner
or the owner's authorized representative and shall contain a statement
of the use or intended use of the building, structure or land and shall be
accompanied by, among other things which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, Planning Board or Zoning Office shall require, a plan and
elevation of the survey or plot plan drawn to scale of one inch equals 10
feet or one inch equals 20 feet, showing the proposed building in its
exact relation to lot and street lines and all other improvements on the
lot in a scale not to exceed 1:20.
C. No zoning permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of
any building upon a lot without access to a street.
D. No zoning permit shall be issued for any building where the site plan of
such building is subject to approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, until the appropriate Board approves the site plan
and any required approvals of county and state agencies have been
obtained.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued for a building to be use for any
conditional use in any zone where such use is allowed only by approval
of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, unless and until such approval has been duly granted by the
appropriate board.
F. The zoning permit application and all supporting documentation shall
be made in duplicate. Upon the issuance of a zoning permit, the Zoning
Officer shall return one copy of all filed documents to the applicant.
G. The Zoning Officer shall, within 20 working days after the filing of a
complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a
zoning permit. If a zoning permit is denied, the Zoning Officer shall
state, in writing, to the applicant the reasons for such denial.
H. Every zoning permit shall expire if the work authorized has not
commenced within one year after the date of issuance. If no zoning
amendments or other codes or regulations affecting subject property
have been enacted and there has been no publication of notice of a
hearing on such amendment or code or regulation in the interim, the
Zoning Officer may authorize, in writing, the extension of the above
periods for an additional one year.
A. Any owner, lessee, contractor, agent or other person who uses or
maintains, or causes to be used or maintained, any building or premises
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Fees.
§ 240-17.3 ORADELL CODE § 240-17.4
1:474
or part thereof in the Borough for any purposes other than the uses
permitted therefor in this chapter, or who erects, enlarges or alters,
or causes to be erected, enlarged or altered, any building or any part
thereof in the Borough, except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, or who otherwise violates or causes to be violated any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalties
as follows: a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both.
B. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter shall exist shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 240-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-17.4
1:475

ARTICLE XVIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 240-18.1. Miscellaneous provisions.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan
Review Ordinance or any other ordinance of the Borough of Oradell which
contains provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and
are hereby to the extent of such inconsistency repealed.
§ 240-18.2. Effect on prior applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued. Time for the Board to consider and decide each
such pending application shall be the shortest period of time as permitted
under this chapter or the prior ordinance and statute.
§ 240-18.3. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file
a copy of this chapter with the clerks of every adjacent municipality and
with the County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also
file with said County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of the
municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision, Zoning and Site
Plan Review Ordinances.
§ 240-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-18.3
1:477
Chapter 241
LIBRARIES, PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS
§ 241-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for use of library property.
§ 241-2. Return of materials upon notification; time limit.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the Oradell Library or a member library of the
Bergen County Cooperative System (hereinafter referred to as "member
library") that is borrowed under an Oradell library card after 30 days have
elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last
address furnished.
§ 241-3. Damage to or destruction of library materials and property.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording,
audiovisual material, furniture, equipment or other article or any part
thereof which is borrowed from, owned by or is in the custody of such
member library. No person shall intentionally damage any library property.
§ 241-4. Compliance with library procedures required.
No person shall use or remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material, computer
related material, or other article from a member library building without
complying with the rules and regulations and procedures of the library for
borrowing such items or articles.
§ 241-5. Furnishing of false information.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or other article from said library.
§ 241-6. Conditions for filing of complaint in Court.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court
for a violation of the provisions of this chapter. If the violation involves
the failure to return materials, then a complaint may be filed under the
following conditions:
A. A certified letter, return receipt requested, shall be sent by the library
administration as a final notice after 12 weeks have elapsed since the
original due date, informing the borrower that unless the material
§ 240-18.3 ORADELL CODE § 241-6
1:478
§ 241-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations and
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of $250 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the judge before whom
such conviction is obtained.
Chapter 245
(RESERVED)
Chapter 254
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115. Taxicabs — See Ch. 255.
§ 254-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
borrowed is returned and/or any fines paid within 30 days a summons
will be issued under the provisions of this chapter.
B. In the case of a minor, the letter of complaint shall be directed to the
parents or guardians of the minor involved. A parent or guardian or
other person having legal custody of a minor shall be responsible and
liable for the failure of the minor to return library material or property
and for any damage or destruction of library material or property by the
minor.
A. DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine within the Borough,
whether or not such person is also the owner thereof.
B. OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any limousine is
registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles, or who
appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
C. PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, or
any other such entity.
D. LIMOUSINE — An automobile or motor car with a carrying capacity of
not more than nine passengers, not including the driver, commonly
called a limousine, engaged in the business of carrying passengers for
hire, which is held out, announced, or advertised to operate or run or
which is operated or run over any of the Borough streets and which is
§ 241-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-1
1:479
§ 254-2. Licenses required.
§ 254-3. Application requirements.
§ 254-4. Insurance requirements.
Each application for a limousine owner's license shall be accompanied by
a policy of insurance, with the premium prepaid thereon, written by an
insurance company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of the state, which has been submitted to the Borough Clerk and
hired by charter or for a particular contract, or by the day or hour
or other fixed period, or to transport passengers to a specified place
or places, or which charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance
between the operator and the passenger. Nothing in this chapter
contained shall be construed to include taxicabs.
A. The license required by this section shall be known as a "limousine
owner's license."
(1) No person shall operate a limousine business which is sited and
located within the Borough unless said person has obtained a
limousine owner's license for each limousine used in such business.
(2) The total number of limousine owner's licenses that may be issued
and outstanding at any time pursuant to and in conformity with this
chapter shall be fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council
by resolution, but shall not be greater than five.
B. Limousine driver's license. No person shall transport any passenger for
hire in any limousine licensed under this chapter unless such person
shall have secured a license for said purpose pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. The license required by this section shall be known as a
"limousine driver's license."
A. Limousine owner's license. Each application for a limousine owner's
license shall state:
(1) The character and description of the vehicle proposed to be
licensed, including the make, model, year, engine serial number,
color, state registration number, number of doors of said vehicle,
and the number of persons said vehicle can carry as passengers.
(2) The correct name, residence and business address of the owner
thereof.
B. Limousine driver's license. Each application shall state any record of
traffic violations over the preceding five years, and be accompanied by
a certificate of a physician stating that he has examined the applicant
within 60 days and has found the applicant to be physically fit for the
safe operation of a limousine.
§ 254-1 ORADELL CODE § 254-4
1:480
approved by the Borough Attorney as to form and sufficiency, in an amount
as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14.
§ 254-5. Power of attorney.
Each application for a limousine owner's license shall be accompanied by a
duly executed and acknowledged power of attorney wherein and whereby
the applicant shall appoint the Chief Fiscal Officer of the Borough as his
true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any
process of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured
by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed in
accordance with § 254-4 above.
§ 254-6. Processing of limousine license applications.
The processing of limousine owner or driver license applications shall be
charged to the Chief of Police. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by
the Police Department and shall file with his application two recent
photographs of himself, of the size that could be attached to his license.
One of the photographs shall be filed with the application in the Police
Department Bureau of Criminal Identification. Said applicant will be
investigated as to his character and reputation and if said applicant is
denied a license, he will forfeit the fee for the application. The Chief
of Police shall prepare an application form requesting submittal of the
information required under this chapter for the issuance of a limousine
license. The Mayor and Council shall approve by resolution the application
form.
§ 254-7. License fees; duration.
§ 254-8. Suspensions and revocations.
A. Fees. The application fee and annual fee for licenses issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 115.
B. Duration. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on July 1 of
each year.
A. The Chief of Police shall revoke any limousine owner's license upon a
determination that there is not in full force and effect the insurance
policy in the collectible amounts as specified in this chapter.
B. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license together with
statements of the reason therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of
his license by the Police Chief suspending or revoking such license. Said
license shall be reviewed for reinstatement at the expiration of the
period for which the license was issued.
§ 254-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-9
1:481
§ 254-9. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council may by resolution make such general rules and
regulations and such special rulings and findings as may be necessary for
the proper regulation and control of the operation of limousines in the
Borough of Oradell and enforcement of this chapter, in addition thereto and
not inconsistent therewith, the Borough Council may alter, amend, repeal
and publish same.
§ 254-10. Suspension or revocation of limousine owner's license or
limousine driver's license.
§ 254-11. Maintenance of vehicles.
No licensee under this chapter shall operate or cause to be operated any
vehicle which is not at all times clean and in good repair.
A. The Chief of Police may refuse to issue or renew or may revoke or
suspend any license issued hereunder if the applicant or licensee or his
agent or employee:
(1) Fails to qualify or violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
the regulations and rules adopted by the Borough Council relative
to the use and regulation of limousines.
(2) Has been convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
B. No license issued hereunder shall be revoked or suspended unless the
Chief of Police shall hold a hearing concerning such revocation or
suspension, which hearing may be held upon five days notice to the
applicant.
C. Hearing before the Chief of Police.
(1) At the hearing before the Chief of Police, the applicant or licensee
may be present in person or represented by counsel.
(2) The testimony of the hearing shall be recorded on audio tape or
stenographically transcribed.
(3) Upon being satisfied that the applicant or licensee is guilty of the
violations charged, the Chief of Police may deny the application for
a license, or suspend or revoke the license granted, and in case of
such suspension or revocation of such license, the applicant or
licensee shall not be entitled to the return of any portion of the
license fee paid to the Borough.
(4) An applicant or licensee may appeal to the Borough Council from
an adverse decision of the Chief of Police. The applicant or licensee
appearing shall pay for and serve upon the Borough Council nine
copies of the transcribed record of the hearing before the Chief of
Police and shall submit nine copies of a memorandum setting forth
the grounds of appeal.
§ 254-9 ORADELL CODE § 254-11
1:482
§ 254-12. Lost property.
Immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment, every driver
of a limousine must carefully search such limousine for any property lost or
left therein, and any such property discovered must be reported in writing
to the Police Department with brief particulars and descriptions of such
property, within 24 hours after the findings thereof, unless sooner claimed
or delivered to the owner.
§ 254-13. Solicitation of fares and cruising.
A. "In need of repair" shall include but is not limited to the following:
(1) That the glass (windows and/or windshield) is cracked, chipped or
scratched, or that the glass in the mirrors is cracked.
(2) That the horn does not function properly so as to produce a sound
audible for 200 feet.
(3) That the emergency brake does not hold the vehicle when parked
on a grade.
(4) That the foot brake does not hold the vehicle when parked on a
grade and that it does not have sufficient reverse pedal.
(5) That the headlights, taillights, stop lights and directional lights do
not turn on and off when operated by the controls in the vehicle, or
are otherwise broken or defective.
(6) That the windshield wipers do not rotate back and forth with
sufficient pressure when turned on and do not stop when turned off
by the controls in the vehicle.
(7) That the tires have damage, ply separation, breaks or cuts and do
not have at least 2/32 of an inch tire tread.
(8) That the defroster does not function properly so as to produce a
temperature in excess of 50° F.
B. The owner and operator of each limousine operating in the Borough of
Oradell shall present the limousine to the Chief of Police or other
designated police officer so that it may be inspected to determine
whether it complies with the provisions of this chapter.
A. No licensee under this chapter or other person interested in or
connected with any vehicle licensed under this chapter shall cruise on
the Borough streets with any limousine for the purpose of soliciting
passengers.
B. No licensee under this chapter shall permit any licensed vehicle, when
disengaged, to stand in any public street or place other than to be
waiting for a passenger in front of any building or place.
§ 254-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-14
1:483
§ 254-14. Obtaining passengers by misleading or false statements.
No owner or driver of any such limousine shall induce any person to employ
him by knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either as
to time or place of the arrival or departure of any train, or other regularly
scheduled mode of transportation, or as to the location of any hotel, public
place or private residence within the Borough, nor shall any such owner or
driver deceive any person or make false representation to him, or convey
any passenger to any other place or over any street other than that to which
the passenger may have instructed the driver to go.
§ 254-15. Records.
The owner of each limousine so licensed shall keep or cause to be kept a
written daily record of each trip made by said limousine showing the date,
time and place the cab was engaged, the place and time of discharge of the
passengers, the number of passengers carried, the fare received, distance
carried, a statement of receipts and expenditures, and the limousine
driver's license number of the person driving the cab on the trip. Such
records shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the
Borough of Oradell, or the Borough Council at their discretion. There
shall also be reported to the Chief of Police the happening of an accident
involving such limousine or the loss of property left in the limousine by a
passenger within 24 hours after such event.
§ 254-16. Fines and penalties.
§ 254-17. Effect of conviction.
The conviction of a licensee for a violation hereunder shall not prevent the
Borough from taking action to suspend or revoke the license of the person
so convicted as herein provided.
§ 254-18. Construction; when effective.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Oradell, be punished for each
offense by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or both.
B. Any corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than $500.
C. Any person who aids, assists or abets in the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties herein
provided for.
A. Should any section or provision of this chapter be held invalid in any
proceedings, the same shall not affect any other section or provision of
this chapter except insofar as the section or provision so held invalid
shall be inseparable for the remainder of any such section or provision.
§ 254-14 ORADELL CODE § 254-18
1:484
Chapter 255
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Limousines — See Ch. 254.
§ 255-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the Borough streets with a
taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the taxicab to
the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along the streets
of the Borough for any purpose other than transporting a passenger going
to a definite destination by the most direct route in response to a call for
a taxicab by a prospective passenger, or returning by the most direct route
to the taxicab's home terminus after discharging a passenger, or going to
or from the terminus to the driver's home by the most direct route, shall be
prima facie evidence of cruising.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within the Borough whether or
not such person is also the owner thereof.
OPERATE A TAXICAB — Accepting one or more passengers for hire
anywhere within the Borough and transporting such passenger or
passengers along any Borough streets. The operation of a taxicab as above
described by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner thereof, as well as by the person actually driving the same. The
transportation of any person other than the owner or driver in any motor
vehicle bearing the sign therein or thereon using the words "taxi," "taxicab,"
"cab" or "hack," shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered
with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles, or who appears in such
records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, or any
other such entity.
TAXICAB — An automobile or motor car, commonly called taxi, cab or hack,
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced, or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the Borough streets and which accepts passengers in the Borough for
transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. This ordinance shall take effect after final passage and publication in
accordance with law.
§ 254-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-1
1:485
the Borough. Nothing therein contained shall include or apply to "autobus"
as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16-23 or to a "limousine" licensed by the Borough
of Oradell.
§ 255-2. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses to be known as
"taxicab owner's license" and "taxicab driver's license" respectively.
§ 255-3. Licenses required.
§ 255-4. Application requirements.
A. Taxi owner's license. The license required by this subsection shall be
known as a "taxi owner's license."
(1) No person shall operate any taxicab unless the said vehicle is
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No person shall operate a taxicab business in the Borough unless
said person has obtained a taxi owner's license for each taxicab,
cab, hack, automobile or other motor vehicle used in such business
which is sited and located within the Borough.
(3) The total number of taxi owner's licenses that may be issued and
outstanding at any time pursuant to and in conformity with this
chapter shall be fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council
by resolution but shall not be greater than 10.
B. Taxi driver's license. No person shall transport any passenger for hire in
any taxicab, cab, hack, automobile, or other motor vehicle or drive or
operate any such vehicle designed for the transportation of passengers
for hire, unless such person shall have secured a license for said
purpose pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The license required
by this subsection shall be known as a "taxi driver's license."
A. Taxi owner's license. Each application for a taxi owner's license shall
state:
(1) The character and description of the vehicle proposed to be
licensed, including the make, model, year, engine serial number,
color, state registration number, number of doors of said vehicle,
and the number of persons said vehicle can carry as passengers.
(2) The correct name, residence and business address of the owner
thereof.
B. Taxi driver's license. Each application shall state any record of traffic
violations over the preceding five years, and be accompanied by a
certificate of a physician stating that he has examined the applicant
within 60 days and has found the applicant to be physically fit for the
safe operation of a taxicab.
§ 255-1 ORADELL CODE § 255-5
1:486
§ 255-5. Insurance requirements.
§ 255-6. Power of attorney.
Each application for a taxi owner's license shall be accompanied by a duly
executed and acknowledged power of attorney wherein and whereby the
applicant shall appoint the Borough Clerk as his true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed in accordance with
§ 255-5 above.
§ 255-7. Processing of taxi license applications.
The processing of taxi owner or driver license applications shall be charged
to the Chief of Police. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Police
Department and shall file with his application two recent photographs
of himself, of the size that could be attached to his license. One of the
photographs shall be filed with the application in the Police Department's
Bureau of Criminal Identification. The said applicant will be investigated
as to his character and reputation and if said applicant is denied a license,
he will forfeit the fee for the application. The Chief of Police shall prepare
an application form requesting submittal of the information required under
this chapter for the issuance of a taxi license. The Mayor and Council shall
approve by resolution the application form.
A. Each application for a taxi owner's license shall be accompanied by a
policy of insurance, with the premium prepaid thereon, written by an
insurance company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of the state, which has been submitted to the Borough
Clerk and approved by the Borough Attorney as to form and sufficiency.
B. Such policy shall be conditioned for payment of a sum of not less than
$300,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to,
or the death of any one person, and a sum of not less than $500,000, to
satisfy all claims for damage by reason of bodily injury to or the death of
all persons, resulting from accident by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance or use of the vehicle to be licensed; and a sum
of not less than $1,000 to satisfy all claims for damages to property of
any one person resulting from such accident, and a sum of not less than
$50,000 to satisfy all claims for damages to property for all persons, on
account of any such accident by reason of the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of such vehicle. Upon filing of the required
insurance policy, the Borough Clerk shall issue a certificate in duplicate
indicating compliance.
C. Such policy shall provide for the payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of the said vehicle or any fault in respect thereto,
and shall be for the benefit of any person suffering loss, damage or
injury as aforesaid.
§ 255-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-8
1:487
§ 255-8. Issuance of licenses.
§ 255-9. License fees; duration.
§ 255-10. License cards and badges.
A. Taxi owner's licenses.
(1) Taxi owners' licenses shall be issued upon the payment of the
appropriate fee.
(2) No taxi owner's license shall be issued until the vehicle proposed to
be licensed shall have been inspected and approved in writing by
the Chief of Police.
(3) No taxi owner's license shall be issued for any vehicle with less
than three doors, at least two of which shall be for the exclusive use
of passengers.
(4) The correct name, business address and taxi license number issued
by the Chief of Police shall be displayed on both sides of the taxicab
in letters no smaller than three inches nor more than six inches in
height.
B. Taxi driver's license.
(1) Taxi driver's licenses shall be issued upon the payment of the
appropriate fee.
(2) No taxi driver's license shall be issued to any person under the age
of 18 years nor to any person who is not a citizen of the United
States, or not licensed by the New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicles to operate a motor vehicle.
A. Fees. The application fee and annual fee for licenses issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 115.
B. Duration. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on July 1 of
each year.
A. Taxi owner's license card.
(1) Taxi owners' license cards shall be issued in duplicate and shall
recite that the owner of the taxicab or other vehicle licensed, has
complied with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 6, inclusive together with amendments and
supplements thereto. There shall also be stated thereon the name
of the insurance company and the number and date of expiration of
the policy required to be filed in connection with the application for
said license. There shall also appear on the license cards a
description of the vehicle licensed, giving the make, year, engine
number and state registration number of the same.
§ 255-8 ORADELL CODE § 255-10
1:488
§ 255-11. Suspensions and revocations.
§ 255-12. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council may by resolution make such general rules and
regulations and such special rules and findings as may be necessary for the
proper regulation and control of the operation of taxicabs in the Borough
of Oradell and enforcement of this chapter, in addition thereto and not
inconsistent therewith, the Borough Council may alter, amend, repeal and
publish same.
§ 255-13. Display of card showing fares.
No license under this chapter shall transport or allow to be transported for
hire any passenger in any vehicle unless there is displayed in said vehicle
in a conspicuous place at all times a printed card showing the fare rates
set forth in the approved license application, in letters and figures of not
(2) The duplicate taxi owner's license shall be filed with the Division of
Motor Vehicles of the Department of Law and Safety of the State of
New Jersey.
(3) The original taxi owner's license card shall be posted and displayed
at all times in a conspicuous place within the vehicle licensed.
B. Taxi driver's license card.
(1) Taxi driver's license cards shall contain on the face thereof a small
photograph of the licensee, and the other photograph filed with the
application shall be retained by the Police Department as part of
the application records.
(2) The taxi driver's license card shall be posted and displayed at all
times in a conspicuous place within the vehicle operated by the
licensee.
C. License badges. There shall be issued to every holder of a taxi driver's
license under this chapter a license badge, which shall be visibly worn
by the licensee at all times during which he is engaged in the
transportation of passengers for hire. In case such license badge is lost,
a duplicate thereof may be procured from the Police Department upon
payment of the actual cost for such duplicate badge.
A. The Chief of Police shall revoke any taxi owner's license upon a
determination that there is not in full force and effect the insurance
policy in the collectible amounts as specified in this chapter.
B. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license together with
statements of the reason therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of
his license by the Police Chief suspending or revoking such license. Said
license shall be reviewed for reinstatement at the expiration of the
period for which the license was issued.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-13
1:489
less than 1/2 inch in height, which card shall also bear the state registration
number of such vehicle and the number of the license issued hereunder for
such vehicle and also the name of the owner thereof.
§ 255-14. Suspension or revocation of taxicab owner's license or
taxicab driver's license.
A. The Chief of Police may refuse to issue or renew or may revoke or
suspend any license issued hereunder if the applicant or licensee or his
agent or employee:
(1) Fails to qualify or violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
the regulations and rules adopted by the Borough Council relative
to the use and regulation of taxicabs.
(2) Has been convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
(3) Failed or fails to render reasonable prompt safe or adequate
taxicab service.
(4) Shall discontinue operation of any taxicab for a period of 60 days
unless an extension is granted by the Chief of Police and approved
by the Borough Council.
B. No license issued hereunder shall be revoked or suspended unless the
Chief of Police shall hold a hearing concerning such revocation or
suspension, which hearing may be held upon five days notice to the
applicant.
C. Hearing before the Chief of Police.
(1) At the hearing before the Chief of Police, the applicant or licensee
may be present in person or represented by counsel.
(2) The testimony of the hearing shall be recorded on audio tape or
stenographically transcribed.
(3) Upon being satisfied that the applicant or licensee is guilty of the
violations charged, the Chief of Police may deny the application for
a license, or suspend or revoke the license granted in case of such
suspension or revocation of such license, the applicant or licensee
shall not be entitled to the return of any portion of the license fee
paid to the Borough.
(4) An applicant or licensee may appeal to the Borough Council from
an adverse decision of the Chief of Police. The applicant or licensee
appearing shall pay for and serve upon the Borough Council nine
copies of the transcribed record of the hearing before the Chief of
Police and shall submit nine copies of a memorandum setting forth
the grounds of appeal.
§ 255-13 ORADELL CODE § 255-15
1:490
§ 255-15. Exterior words.
Every taxicab shall have conspicuously located on the exterior thereof, the
word "taxi" or "cab" or "taxicab" which shall be illuminated during darkness.
§ 255-16. Fares.
§ 255-17. Maintenance of vehicles.
No license under this chapter shall operate or cause to be operated any
vehicle which is not at all times clean and in good repair.
A. The taxicab rates of fare for taxicabs operating in the Borough of
Oradell shall be the following:
(1) For the first 4/9 of a mile: $2;
(2) For each additional 1/9 of a mile: $0.25;
(3) For waiting time: $15 per hour.
(4) Any taxicab company may offer a voluntary discount to any senior
citizen of the age of 65 or over in an amount to be determined by
said company. In order to have the benefit of such discount, any
senior citizen must show an appropriate senior citizen card issued
by Bergen County or some other similar appropriate discount.
B. The Mayor and Council may, from time to time, following a public
hearing for which notice shall be given at least 10 days in advance, set
the fare for which licensed taxicabs may charge under the provisions of
this chapter. Such facts shall be displayed on the outside of each
licensed taxicab in letters not less than two inches high on both the
right and left door. Any violation of the provisions for rates of fare or
any attempt to charge a greater rate than fixed by this chapter or any
amendment thereto, shall render the offender liable to a revocation of
the taxicab license. Nothing contained in this provision or any provision
of this chapter shall prevent a taxicab owner from entering into an
agreement with any person to transport any individual or group on a
regular basis at a special rate which is different from the rate set forth
by the Mayor and Council.
A. "In need of repair" shall include but is not limited to the following:
(1) That the glass (windows and/or windshield) is cracked, chipped or
scratched, or that the glass in the mirror is cracked.
(2) That the horn does not function properly so as to produce a sound
audible for 200 feet.
(3) That the emergency brake does not hold the vehicle when parked
on a grade.
§ 255-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-17
1:491
§ 255-18. Meters.
§ 255-19. Lost property.
Immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment, every driver
of a taxicab must carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or
(4) That the foot brake does not hold the vehicle when parked on a
grade and that it does not have sufficient reverse pedal.
(5) That the headlights, taillights, stop lights and directional lights do
not turn on and off when operated by the controls in the vehicle, or
are otherwise broken or defective.
(6) That the windshield wipers do not rotate back and forth with
sufficient pressure when turned on and do not stop with turned off
by the controls in the vehicle.
(7) That the tires have damage, ply separation, breaks or cuts and do
not have at least 2/32 seconds of an inch tire tread.
(8) That the defroster does not function properly so as to produce a
temperature in excess of 50° F.
B. The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Borough of
Oradell shall present the taxicab to the Chief of Police or other
designated police officer so that it may be inspected to determine
whether it complies with the provisions of this chapter.
A. No licensee under this chapter shall transport or allow to be
transported for hire any passenger in any vehicle unless there is
installed and at all times in good working condition in said vehicle a
taximeter or the equivalent thereof, of standard make, by which the fare
or charge for hire of said vehicle is mechanically and accurately
calculated and registered and on which taximeter said charge is plainly
indicated, the meter being installed in such a place in the vehicle that
the charge indicated thereon may be plainly seen by all passengers.
B. No meter shall be used or permitted to be used which is in such a
condition as to be over 5% inaccurate to the prejudice of any passenger.
C. Said meter shall be illuminated after sundown by a suitable light so
arranged as to throw a continuous steady light thereon while in
operation and carrying passengers so that the meter may be clearly
discernible and read by a passenger in the rear seat.
D. Said meter shall be sealed and a colored sticker, different in color at
each inspection, shall be placed on the taximeter after each inspection.
No person shall use or permit to be used any vehicle equipped with a
meter, the case of which is unsealed or upon which the seat is broken.
E. All taximeters as set forth in this section shall be under the jurisdiction
and control of the Police Department of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 255-17 ORADELL CODE § 255-19
1:492
left therein, and any such property discovered must be reported in writing
to the Police Department with brief particulars and descriptions of such
property, within 24 hours after the finding thereof, unless sooner claimed or
delivered to the owner.
§ 255-20. Passengers.
§ 255-21. Solicitation of fares and cruising.
§ 255-22. Obtaining passengers by misleading or false statements.
No owner or driver of any such taxicab shall induce any person to employ
him by knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either as
to time or place of the arrival or departure of any train, or other regularly
scheduled mode of transportation, or as to the location of any hotel, public
place or private residence within the Borough, nor shall any such owner or
driver deceive any person or make false representation to him, or convey
any passenger to any other place or over any street other than that to which
the passenger may have instructed the driver to go.
§ 255-23. Records.
The owner of each taxicab so licensed shall keep or cause to be kept a
written daily record of each trip made by the said taxicab showing the date,
time and place the cab was engaged, the place and time of discharge of the
passengers, the number of passengers carried, the fare received, distance
carried, a statement of receipts and expenditures, and the taxicab driver's
A. No person other than the licensed taxi driver and one passenger of the
vehicle shall ride or sit in the compartment of said vehicle reserved for
the driver.
B. No licensee under this chapter shall refuse to carry or transport any
orderly person upon the payment of the application rate of fares unless
the vehicle is then engaged by another person.
A. No license under this chapter or other person interested in or
connected with any vehicle licensed hereunder shall solicit customers
in a noisy or offensive manner nor in any manner whatsoever in any
place other than a public hack stand.
B. No licensee under this chapter shall permit any licensed vehicle, when
disengaged, to stand in any public street or place other than at a
designated taxicab stand; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prevent a driver from waiting for a passenger in front of any building or
place.
C. No vehicle other than one licensed under this chapter and prepared to
accept passengers at request, shall stand at any public hack stand.
D. No person shall cruise on the Borough streets with any taxicab for the
purpose of soliciting passengers.
§ 255-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:493
license number of the person driving the cab on the trip. Such records shall
be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the Borough of Oradell,
or the Borough Council at their discretion. There shall also be reported to
the Chief of Police the happening of an accident involving such taxicab or
the loss of property left in the taxicab by a passenger within 24 hours after
such event.
§ 255-24. Cash receipt book.
The operator of each taxicab shall at all times have available a suitable cash
receipt book to write out, sign and give to any passenger requesting the
same, a written receipt in the amount of the fare paid.
§ 255-25. Other laws.
§ 255-26. Fines and penalties.
§ 255-27. Effect of conviction.
The conviction of a licensee for a violation hereunder shall not prevent the
Borough from taking action to suspend or revoke the license of the person
so convicted as herein provided.
§ 255-28. Construction; when effective.
A. Other automobile laws applicable. Nothing in this chapter contained
shall exempt any person owning or operating a taxicab from complying
with the laws relating to the ownership, regulation and operation of
automobiles in this state.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Oradell, be punished for each
offense by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or both.
B. Any corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than $500.
C. Any person who aids, assists or abets in the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties herein
provided for.
A. Should any section or provision of this chapter be held invalid in any
proceedings, the same shall not affect any other section or provision of
this chapter except insofar as the section or provision so held invalid
shall be inseparable for the remainder of any such section or provision.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication in
accordance with law.
§ 255-23 ORADELL CODE § 255-28
1:494
Chapter 260
TELEVISION FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 260-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — [Amended 10-7-1986 by Ord. No. 737A; 8-21-2001 by Ord.
No. 1127]
§ 260-2. Permit required; form; fees; regulations.
The taking of still, motion or digital pictures, either on film, videotape
or any other form, type, method or medium of photographic or
electronic recording by a person or person(s) other than the owner
of the property being filmed, taped or otherwise recorded, for which
said persons taking said pictures have or will compensate said property
owner, or compensate the designee of said property owner;
A.
The taking of still, motion or digital pictures, either on film, videotape,
or any other form, type, method or medium of photographic or
electronic recording, intended, in whole or in part, for commercial use
of viewing on television, in theaters, or for advertising purposes other
than the advertising of the property for sale or lease; or
B.
The assembling and setting up on private and/or public property,
including but not limited to the property which is being filmed,
videotaped or otherwise recorded, of all equipment needed for the
filming, videotaping or other forms of recording referenced in
Subsection A or B of this definition above, as well as the removal of the
same upon completion.
C.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Oradell
without first obtaining a permit, which permit shall set forth the
location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall take
place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Construction Official, and
the application for the permit shall be in a form approved by the
Construction Official, accompanied by a fee and filed at least five
working days prior to the date of filming, along with a cash bond to
cover any expenses the Borough might incur as the result of the filming,
the balance, if any, to be returned by the Borough of Oradell. If the
television filming is to take place on Borough property or will affect the
§ 255-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:495
§ 260-3. Requirements for permit.
use of the Borough property, then the application for the permit shall
be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of filming. [Amended
12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837; 12-7-1993 by Ord. No. 993]
C. Fees for permit for filming and the amount of a cash bond to cover
expenses shall be as indicated in Chapter 115, Fees. [Added
12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
D. A permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for
two days within a period of not more than 10 days beginning on the date
of issuance of the permit. If the filming does not take place on the dates
specified in the permit due to inclement weather or other good cause,
the Construction Official may issue a new permit at no additional fee.
E. No more than one permit for each resident may be issued in any one
calendar year. [Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 1136]
A. No permit shall be issued for filming within the Borough of Oradell
unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides insurance coverage for bodily injury for any one person in
the amount of $100,000 and for any aggregate occurrence in the
amount of $500,000.
(2) Specifies in writing that the Borough of Oradell will be indemnified
and saved harmless from any and all liability or damages.
(3) Where filming takes place on private property, obtains permission
of the owner in writing.
(4) Agrees to comply with all lawful directives issued by the Oradell
Police Department, Fire Department and all other departments
where deemed necessary and has prepaid all costs associated with
such directives, including but not limited to the cost of the
presence of such police personnel which may be required. Any
vehicles used in connection with or relating to the filming shall not
be parked in any driveway nor shall the aggregate length of all such
vehicles exceed the length of the lot frontage of the property on
which the filming is occurring. All such vehicles must be parked in
front of the property on which the filming is to take place.
[Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 1136]
B. The holder of a permit shall be responsible for the removal, upon
completion of filming, of all debris and equipment, or upon the
expiration of the permit, whichever comes first.
C. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday, and shall
commence not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall be completed not later
than 7:00 p.m. Notwithstanding any provision of Chapter 260 to the
contrary, no filming shall take place on any "holiday," which for the
§ 260-2 ORADELL CODE § 260-3
1:496
§ 260-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
concerning the Borough of Oradell and any of the Borough activities.
§ 260-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-21-2001 by Ord. No.
1127]
Any person found guilty by the Municipal Court of violating any provision of
this chapter shall, for each day that filming takes place without the permit
required under this chapter, be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than
$2,000.
Chapter 266
TOWING AND STORAGE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275. Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
purposes of this Chapter 260 shall mean any federal, state or local
holiday or any date during the school year on which the public schools
of the Borough of Oradell are closed. [Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord.
No. 1136]
D. No permit applied for shall issue unless first authorized by the
Construction Official or his or her designee, the Chief of Police or his or
her designee, and the Borough Administrator or his or her designee.
The Construction Official must refuse to issue a permit when the report
by the Oradell Police Department is to the effect that said filming would
endanger the public health, safety or welfare. Any person aggrieved by
the decision may appeal to the Mayor and Council by filing said appeal
within 10 days after the adverse decision. Said appeal shall be heard
and decided by the Mayor and Council within 30 days after being filed.
[Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 1136]
E. The Mayor and Council may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter.
F. The applicant shall notify the Construction Official at least 24 hours
before filming in order to give the Official sufficient opportunity to
notify the affected departments so that they may have an authorized
representative inspect the site.
G. The owner of the property on which the filming is to occur shall, not
later than 24 hours before such filming is to commence, give written
notice to all residents within 200 feet of the property on which the
filming is to occur of the date(s) and time(s) on which the filming is to
occur. [Added 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 1136]
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:497
§ 266-1. License required.
§ 266-2. Exceptions.
§ 266-3. Term of license.
License shall be issued for one calendar year commencing January 1 or as
an interim license for any unexpired term of a license, expiring the next
succeeding January 1 at 12:00 midnight.
§ 266-4. Application for license.
A. No towing operator shall operate within the Borough of Oradell for
police requested towing services and/or storage services unless the
towing operator has obtained a license issued by the Borough.
B. The requirement for a license shall commence as of January 1 following
the adoption of this chapter and shall be required to be renewed each
year thereafter on or before January 1 of that year.
C. There shall not be more than five licenses issued under this chapter
which shall be in effect at one time.
A. Owner-requested service. No license shall be required for the on-site
repair and/or towing or storage of any vehicle when the request is
received by the towing operator from the owner prior to a police
request or if the owner or operator of a vehicle requests the police
contact a tow company of their choice.
B. Towing from private property. No licensee shall be required by the
police to tow any vehicle from private property without the consent of
the owner except on the express instruction of the police in the event of
an emergency.
A. Form; required information. An application for a license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain all information
necessary to evidence the applicant's identity and legal address,
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the ability to
perform the towing services and storage services contemplated by this
chapter.
B. Filing. Application shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, together with a
certified check for the application fee of $250. The Borough Clerk shall
give 30 days' public notice in an official newspaper of the Borough of
the date on which the license applications are to be received pursuant
to this chapter. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
C. Rotating list. The Borough shall accept and place on its rotating list of
towing operators the first five towing operators which submit
§ 260-5 ORADELL CODE § 266-4
1:498
§ 266-5. Investigation and licensing authority. [Amended 5-23-2017
by Ord. No. 17-03]
completed application forms and which comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
D. The licensee must be of good business character and reputation.
E. A licensee must have at least three years' experience, as a sole
proprietor, partner or as an employee in the towing of vehicles, in order
to be considered for the issuance of a license.
F. The licensee shall submit proof of ownership by record title of the
required tow truck and flatbed tow truck. A copy of the registration for
each vehicle and copies of current and valid insurance policies and
cards shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk.
A. All applications shall be investigated and evaluated by the Borough
Police Chief or his designee regarding the applicant's background and
qualifications, and a report of the Police Chief's findings and
recommendations shall be submitted to the governing body within 30
days of the receipt of said application. All applicants shall execute
releases for information to be obtained by the Police Chief to complete
the investigation and evaluation.
B. All applications are subject to review and approval by the governing
body of the Borough of Oradell. Only those applicants that are
responsible and qualified pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be approved. All approved applicants shall be required to execute
contracts with the Borough of Oradell to provide the towing and storage
services referred to herein.
C. All billings for towing and storage services shall be itemized for the
services actually rendered pursuant to the fee schedule as set forth
herein. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available to the public at the
towing operator's place of business during normal business hours.
D. The towing operator shall have the ability to apply for junk titles and to
arrange and dispose of junk cars.
E. The towing operator shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the Borough of Oradell for any and all suits; judgments; costs;
expenses, including attorney's fees and claims on account of breach of
contract; damaged property; or personal injuries, including death,
arising out of or in any way connected with the towing and storage
services to be provided.
F. The governing body hereby designates the Police Department,
generally, and the Chief of Police, in particular, or his designee, as the
supervising authorities to enforce the provisions of this article as well
as the rules and regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 266-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:499
G. Refusal to tow an abandoned or stolen motor vehicle or at the scene of a
motor vehicle accident may result in the disqualification of the towing
operator, and a report of said refusal shall be furnished to the Chief of
Police and the Borough Clerk by the investigating officer at the scene of
the accident as soon as possible.
H. If the licensee summoned is unable to respond within the time
constraints specified in this chapter, he or it shall so notify the
individual requesting the service and the Police Department and shall
advise as to the reason for the delay and when the licensee will be able
to respond.
I. The towing operator operating pursuant to the license issued
hereunder shall not employ, either directly or indirectly, any personnel
or employees of the Borough of Oradell.
J. The Borough of Oradell Police Department shall maintain a log record
of calls to the licensed towing operator, and said record shall be
available for inspection by any licensed tow operator upon reasonable
notice.
K. An individual whose motor vehicle has been towed and/or stored has
the right to retrieve any of his or her personal possessions therefrom,
even when said motor vehicle is within the possession of the towing
operator. "Personal property" shall be defined to mean anything that is
not permanently attached to the motor vehicle so as to be an integral
part thereof. An individual seeking the retrieval of any personal items
shall arrange with the towing operator to obtain said items and shall be
required to execute a receipt therefor. The towing operator shall
maintain copies of all such receipts.
L. The Borough of Oradell reserves the right to review the qualifications of
any personnel employed by the towing operator at any time.
M. The towing operator and any of his or its employees are independent
contractors, and they do not represent nor are they employed by the
Borough of Oradell.
N. The towing operator shall, at all times, be responsible for the conduct of
his or its employees and shall be liable to the Borough of Oradell and
the owners of any motor vehicles towed or stored by the towing
operator for any injuries, damages or costs incurred as a result of the
conduct of said employees.
O. The towing operator shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning the hiring of employees, their wages, hours and
terms of employment.
P. The Borough of Oradell is not liable for any of the services performed by
the contractor unless those services are performed for municipal
vehicles. The contractor shall proceed directly against the individual
owner of the motor vehicle for all fees and charges incurred.
§ 266-5 ORADELL CODE § 266-5
1:500
§ 266-6. Towing and Storage Services. [Amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
§ 266-7. Revocation of license.
Q. The towing operator shall maintain a record of all vehicles towed,
including the date towed, where the vehicle was stored, when the
vehicle was released and the fees charged, together with any and all
other services rendered. Said records shall be maintained at the
principal place of business of the towing operator as set forth on the
application, and said records shall be maintained for a minimum of
three years.
A. Each of the first five approved licensees shall be placed on a list of
rotating basis by the Chief of Police. A calendar shall be prepared
designating each day on the calendar as the day that a licensed tow
truck operator is responsible. A licensed towing company may
substitute another company for the date scheduled for the towing
company if the substitute company is on the licensed towing list.
[Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
B. The licensed tow company must be available to tow cars on a twentyfour-
hour-a-day basis. If the company on duty is not available on a
particular day, then the next listed company will be called.
Nonavailability on the date scheduled, without a substitute company,
will be considered a violation of the license.
C. A licensed towing company will be responsible for cleaning any debris
left at the accident scene.
D. A response time of 15 minutes will be expected from each licensed
towing company called by the Police Department. If the towing
company on duty fails to respond within the time period, the next listed
licensed towing company will be called. Failure to respond within the
stated time frame will be considered a violation of the license.
E. All licensed towing companies will provide road service calls as
required by the Police Department. Such calls shall include jumpstarting
vehicles, changing tires and opening locked vehicles. The fee
for these services shall be at a fair rate.
A. General. The Chief of Police shall have the right to suspend any license
issued under this chapter upon the determination that there have been
two violations of the licensed towing company guidelines and
regulations.
B. The Chief of Police shall be the sole administrator of this list, and any
violations or complaints concerning any licensed tow truck company
shall be addressed to the Chief of Police.
C. Any licensee suspended shall cause the company to be removed from
the list for one year from the date of the suspension. The licensed tow
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-7
1:501
§ 266-8. Required equipment.
§ 266-9. Storage and garage facilities.
§ 266-10. Licensee personnel.
§ 266-11. Tow truck and storage charges.
The Borough and its police shall not be liable to a licensee with respect to
services rendered to any owner pursuant to the license or otherwise. The
company which has been suspended may reapply to be on the rotating
list on January 1 of the year after the suspension has been lifted.
A. A licensed tow truck company, when filing an application for and at all
times while holding a license under this chapter, shall own or lease and
have available for use in the performing of the services required by this
license the following equipment:
(1) Tow truck.
(2) Flatbed tow truck.
B. Tow truck lettering. All tow trucks shall be properly lettered on both
sides in accordance with law.
C. Maintenance. All equipment used by the licensee in performing its
obligation under the license shall be maintained in good and safe
condition and may be inspected for such condition by the police at any
time, wherever located. Any deficiency in such condition reported by
the police to the licensee shall be promptly corrected, and any failure to
correct may be cited as a violation of the license pursuant to this
chapter.
A. Each licensee shall provide, at a minimum, indoor storage for three
vehicles and outdoor secure storage for a minimum of five vehicles.
B. The required storage area shall be located within 2.5 miles of the
Borough's boundaries. The hours of recovery of vehicles shall be from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.,
Saturdays and holidays. Facilities shall be kept clean and in good order
to accommodate persons who may enter facilities with respect to any
vehicles stored therein.
A. Each tow truck driver of a licensee must have an appropriate valid New
Jersey driver's license with no restrictions or conditional endorsements,
except conditions requiring glasses. Each driver shall be of good moral
character, mentally alert, and present a neat appearance at all times.
B. All tow truck drivers and other personnel of a licensee shall be fully
trained and knowledgeable in tow truck and storage operations and
equipment.
§ 266-7 ORADELL CODE § 266-11
1:502
licensee shall look only to the owner of such vehicle for payment of service
charges or any other compensation.
§ 266-12. Insurance requirements.
§ 266-13. Indemnity.
The application of a towing operator for a license pursuant to this chapter
shall include an agreement by the towing operator that, upon the issuance
of a license, the licensee shall indemnify the Borough against all claims
of third parties relating to towing services, storage services or any other
roadside services provided by the licensee.
§ 266-14. Supplementary rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police may issue rules and regulations from time to time on the
operation of the towing services and storage facilities to implement but not
exceed the purposes of this chapter.
§ 266-15. Transfer or assignment of license.
The license required by this chapter shall not be transferred or assigned
without prior written consent of the Chief of Police.
§ 266-16. Rates.
A. The licensee shall have in effect, prior to application, and at all times
during the term of the license, the following insurance:
(1) Automobile. Bodily injury, liability, property damage combined
single limit: $500,000.
(2) Premises liability. Bodily injury, liability, property damage
combined single limit: $500,000.
(3) Umbrella (excess third-party liability): $1,000,000.
(4) Garage keeper/legal liability per location: $1,000,000.
(5) Garage keeper's liability: $1,000,000.
(6) Worker's compensation: in accordance with New Jersey State
Requirements.
B. The licensee shall supply a certificate of insurance to the Borough Clerk
describing every policy of insurance identifying the Borough as
additional insured. Each such certificate of insurance shall contain a
provision that no cancellation of the policy shall become effective until
after the expiration of 15 days' written notice of such proposed
cancellation is forwarded by the insurance company to the Borough
Clerk.
A. The maximum rates chargeable under this chapter are as follows:
§ 266-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-16
1:503
Chapter 270
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Committee — See Ch. 22.
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 92, Art. VI.
Yard and autumn leaf waste — See Ch. 290.
§ 270-1. Purpose; authorization.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the planting, maintenance,
control, protection and improvement of shade trees and shrubbery along
public streets and roads and public places within the Borough of Oradell
and to vest in the Shade Tree Committee the authority to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, subject to the approval of the governing body.
(1) Towing charges. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
(a) Days.
[1] First mile or less is $100.
[2] Each additional mile is $3.
(b) Nights, weekends and New Jersey State holidays.
[1] First mile or less is $125.
[2] Each additional mile is $3.
(2) Storage charges.
(a) Inside building storage facility charges shall be $40 per day,
per space.
(b) Outside secured storage facility charges shall be $25 per day,
per space.
(c) Outside unsecured storage facility charges shall be $15 per
day, per space.
B. The licensee shall charge only one-day storage for each twenty-fourhour
period to commence from the time on the ticket tow sheet.
C. The above charges are subject to the New Jersey State sales tax, and
the same shall be added to said amounts.
D. The above charges shall be on file with the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 266-16 ORADELL CODE § 270-2
1:504
§ 270-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, company, agency,
corporation or combination thereof.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utility companies, poles,
wires, cables, subsurface conduits, pipes, manholes and appurtenant
facilities of such companies installed in a street.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — A public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
STREET — Any public street of the Borough; municipal parks, county roads,
if the County Shade Tree Committee assents.
TREE — Shade and ornamental trees and shrubs in the Borough.
§ 270-3. Permit required; Committee approval.
§ 270-4. Prohibited acts.
No person shall do any of the following acts to any trees or shrubbery within
the jurisdiction of the chapter without first obtaining a permit from the
Public Officer, who shall consult with the Shade Tree Committee prior to
issuing any such permit:
A. No person shall plant, cut down and/or trim any tree or shrubbery
within any Borough right-of-way or on any Borough-owned lands
without first obtaining a permit approved by the Public Officer, who
shall consult with the Shade Tree Committee68 prior to issuing any such
permit.
B. No property owner shall plant any trees or shrubbery within 10 feet of
the Borough right-of-way without first obtaining the approval of the
Public Officer, who shall consult with the Shade Tree Committee prior
to issuing any such approval. The purpose of this provision is to ensure
free access, presently and in the future, to the public for use of Borough
rights-of-way.
C. No fee shall be required for issuance of a shade tree permit.
A. Prune, cut, climb with spikes, damage, break or remove or kill.
B. Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with roots.
C. Spray with chemicals.
D. Fasten any wire, rope, sign or other device to any tree.
68.Editor's Note: For the Shade Tree Committee, see Ch. 92, Committees, Art. VI.
§ 270-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-4
1:505
§ 270-5. Blanket permit issuance.
Upon the yearly receipt of proof from a utility company that trained and
qualified persons are responsible, a blanket permit may be approved for
work within the area of jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Committee of the
Borough of Oradell. This work is subject to inspection by the Public Officer.
§ 270-6. New and added construction.
All new or added construction shall be subject to the above regulations.
Upon receiving a building permit, it is understood that the builder or
property owners will cooperate with the Shade Tree Committee of the
Borough of Oradell. Any new structure, home, business, industry or
improvement to existing structures is not complete until properly planted,
that is:
E. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree or
shrub.
F. Spread or apply any injurious chemicals, including salt, around the root
area of any tree or shrub.
G. Remove soil, either for trucking or otherwise, within two feet of any
tree.
H. Construct new sidewalks and/or driveways with any materials within
two feet of a tree.
I. Excavate within two feet of a tree.
J. Allow trees and shrubbery on private property to obstruct walkways or
streets and obscure vision of persons using same. Owners of private
properties shall prune trees and shrubbery in such a manner that
branches will hang not less than eight feet over sidewalks and 13 feet
over roadways. Shrubbery on private property shall be pruned back in
such a manner to prevent branches from obstructing, hindering or
harming pedestrians.
K. Plant trees or shrubs.
A. Where advisable, shade trees are to be planted, but not closer than 40
feet, on center, with a minimum of two per lot, within property
designated as reserved to the Borough of Oradell by easement or other
reservation.
B. Parking lots must have areas set aside for shade trees and/or
evergreens and shrubs, or both, and planting for screening where
advisable.
C. Trees shall be two inches or more in diameter and of the kinds
designated by the Committee.
§ 270-4 ORADELL CODE § 270-7
1:506
§ 270-7. Interference.
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the
Committee, Public Officer or any authorized agent of the Committee in the
performance of their lawful duties.
§ 270-8. Enforcement.
All inspections, regulations and enforcements of violations of the provisions
of this chapter shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Committee and the Public Officer, who shall cause complaints to be issued
in the Municipal Court for a violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 270-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction by the Municipal Court, be fined a sum not
to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that any violation shall continue
shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 275
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280. Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 275-1. Abandonment on private lots or yards prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to
cause, allow or permit vehicles to be abandoned or junked on private lots
or yards or anywhere in the open on premises owned by said person, firm,
partnership or corporation.
§ 275-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN THE OPEN — A vehicle not housed in a structure composed of four walls,
roof and doors completely shielding the vehicle from view.
PRIVATE LOTS OR YARDS — Includes any land which is privately owned
within the Borough of Oradell.
§ 275-3. When vehicle considered abandoned or junked.
For the purpose of this chapter, a vehicle shall be considered abandoned
or junked if it is in such defective condition as to be unable to be moved
§ 270-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3
1:507
under its own power or if it does not show proper license plates and/or an
inspection certificate as required by the laws of New Jersey.
§ 275-4. Notice to remove vehicle.
When a violation is ascertained, the owner of said property and the owner
of said vehicle, if ascertainable, shall be given 10 days' written notice by the
Police Department to remove said vehicle from the property or to submit
in writing, to the Police Committee justification for retention of the vehicle.
The Police Committee shall have the authority to make final determination,
after a hearing, as to the disposition of the vehicle in each case.
§ 275-5. Hearing; petition required.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Police Committee, provided that
such person shall file in the office of the Borough Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt
of such petition, the Police Committee shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was
filed, provided that upon application of the petitioner, the Police Committee
may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such
ten-day period, if, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
§ 275-6. Police Committee to sustain; modify or withdraw notice.
After such hearing, the Police Committee shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice, depending upon its finding as to whether the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with. If the Police Committee sustains or
modified such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to § 275-4 of this chapter shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
within 10 days after such notice is served.
§ 275-7. Removal by Borough; cost.
After the issuance of any order for removal, the Borough of Oradell is
hereby authorized to go upon said property and remove said abandoned or
junked vehicle and charge the property owner with the reasonable cost of
said removal.
§ 275-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall violate said chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine, which fine shall include the cost
§ 275-3 ORADELL CODE § 275-8
1:508
of removal as part of said fine, in an amount not exceeding $200 or be
confined to the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Magistrate of the Municipal Court.
Chapter 280
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 75.
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 165.
Parking on public and private property — See
Ch. 195, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:509

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 280-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 280-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Oradell are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 280-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
10-15]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $54 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-3
1:511

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 280-4. Traffic control signals.
§ 280-5. Speed limits.
§ 280-6. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 280-29), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 280-7. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 280-30), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 280-8. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 280-31), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 280-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication,) at intersections in the Borough, at those locations described in
Schedule VI (§ 280-32), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 280-10. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 280-33),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of these streets described in Schedule I (§ 280-27), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 280-28), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
§ 280-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-10
1:513
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designations.
§ 280-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 280-34), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 280-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 280-35), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 280-13. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 280-36), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 280-14. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 280-37),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated
and numbered as indicated.
§ 280-15. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII (§ 280-38), except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 280-10 ORADELL CODE § 280-15
1:514
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 280-16. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 280-17. Overnight parking.
No vehicles shall be parked or placed on any street in the Borough between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. for a period exceeding two hours.
§ 280-18. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 280-39), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 280-19. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XIV (§ 280-40), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 280-20. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 280-41) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 280-21. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVI (§ 280-42) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 280-22. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVII (§ 280-43) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 280-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-23
1:515
§ 280-23. Midblock crosswalks.
The locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 280-44), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as crosswalks.
§ 280-24. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 280-45), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 280-25. Handicapped parking on roadways. [Amended 12-23-2008
by Ord. No. 08-15]
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 280-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as handicapped parking only.
§ 280-26. Bus shops.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 280-47), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 280-23 ORADELL CODE § 280-26
1:516
ARTICLE IV
Schedules
§ 280-27. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Kinderkamack Road and Oradell Avenue
Kinderkamack Road and Ridgewood Avenue
Oradell Avenue and Prospect Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue and Prospect Avenue
Soldier Hill Road and Forest Avenue
§ 280-28. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-5, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Forest Avenue 40 Entire length in Borough
Kinderkamack Road 40 From the center of Lotus Avenue to
the Emerson Borough border
Kinderkamack Road 35 From the River Edge Borough border
to the center of Lotus Avenue
Marginal Road
[Added 12-20-1994
by Ord. No. 1019]
25 From New Milford Avenue to the
border with the Borough of River
Edge
Oradell Avenue 25 From Forest Avenue to east boundary
of Bergen Catholic High School Zone
(during school recess or during
opening or closing hours)
Oradell Avenue 35 From Forest Avenue to Prospect
Avenue
Oradell Avenue 35 From center of Hackensack River
Bridge to Grant Avenue
Oradell Avenue 30 From Prospect Avenue to the center
of the Hackensack River Bridge
Oradell Avenue
[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 10-5]
30 Kinderkamack Road to Grant Avenue
§ 280-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-28
1:517
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Soldier Hill Road 35 From Forest Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Spring Valley Road 35 Entire length in Borough south of
Ridgewood Avenue
§ 280-29. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-6, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 280-30. Schedule IV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-7, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Kinderkamack Road Entire length in Borough
§ 280-31. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-8, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Borough Hall
parking lot
North Left 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Church Street
Brookside
Avenue
West Left All Kinderkamack
Road
Burns and Roe
Office Complex
north and
center
driveways (177
feet north of
Park Place and
358 feet north
of Homestead
Place)
West Left All Kinderkamack
Road
§ 280-28 ORADELL CODE § 280-31
1:518
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Burns and Roe
Office Complex
south driveway
(224 feet north
of Homestead
Place)
West Right All Kinderkamack
Road
Center Street
[Added
8-21-2007 by
Ord. No.
07-20]
West Left 7:45 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Prospect Avenue
Church Street
[Amended
3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 1106]
East Left 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Kinderkamack
Road
Church Street
[Added
8-21-2007 by
Ord. No.
07-20]
West Left 7:45 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Prospect Avenue
Grant Avenue
[Added
12-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 912;
amended
4-7-1992, by
Ord. No. 954;
5-18-1999 by
Ord. No. 1093]
South Right
through
Saturday
7:00 a.m. to to
7:00 p.m.,
Monday
First Street
Kinderkamack
Road
North Right All Burns and Roe
Office Complex
center driveway
(314 feet north of
Homestead Place)
Kinderkamack
Road
North Right All Mack Office
Complex center
driveway (416 feet
north of East
Drive)
Kinderkamack
Road
North Left All Martin Avenue
§ 280-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-31
1:519
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Kinderkamack
Road
South Left All Burns and Roe
Office Complex
north driveway
(204 feet south of
Park Place)
Kinderkamack
Road
South Left All Burns and Roe
Office Complex
south driveway
(224 feet north of
Homestead Place)
Kinderkamack
Road
South Left All Mack Office
Complex north
and south driveways
(421 feet
south of
Homestead Place
and 450 feet north
of East Drive)
Legion Way West Left 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday
Kinderkamack
Road
Mack Office
Complex north
driveway (421
feet south of
Homestead
Place)
West Left All Kinderkamack
Road
Mack Office
Complex south
driveway (350
feet north of
East Drive)
West Right All Kinderkamack
Road
Martin Avenue East Left All Kinderkamack
Road
Veldran Avenue West Left All Kinderkamack
Road
§ 280-32. Schedule VI: Right Turns on Red Signal. [Amended
10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1041]
A. Right turn on red signal is prohibited at all times. In accordance with
the provisions of § 280-9, no persons shall at any time make a right turn
§ 280-31 ORADELL CODE § 280-32
1:520
when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at intersections in the
Borough in the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Forest Avenue North Oradell Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North Oradell Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South Oradell Avenue
New Milford Avenue
[Added 12-19-2000
by Ord. No. 1121]
West Kinderkamack Road
Oradell Avenue East Kinderkamack Road
Oradell Avenue West Forest Avenue
Oradell Avenue West Kinderkamack Road
B. Right turn on red signal is prohibited during certain times. In
accordance with the provisions of § 280-9, no persons shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, onto: [Amended
9-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1073; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1073A];
3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 05-05; 5-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-5;
9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-11]
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Kinderkamack Road North Ridgewood Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South Ridgewood Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue East Kinderkamack Road
Ridgewood Avenue East Prospect Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue West Kinderkamack Road
Ridgewood Avenue West Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue North Ridgewood Avenue
Prospect Avenue South Ridgewood Avenue
Oradell Avenue East Prospect Avenue
Oradell Avenue West Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue North Oradell Avenue
Prospect Avenue South Oradell Avenue
C. Right turn on red signal is prohibited during certain times. In
accordance with the provisions of § 280-9, no persons shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. onto: [Added 9-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1073;
amended 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1073A]
§ 280-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-32
1:521
§ 280-33. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-10, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the rear right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Limits
Forest Avenue Entire length in Borough
Grant Avenue Entire length in Borough
Kinderkamack Road Entire length in Borough
Oradell Avenue From Forest Avenue to Kinderkamack Road
Oradell Avenue From Kinderkamack Road to Grant Avenue
Prospect Avenue From Oradell Avenue to Soldier Hill Road
Prospect Avenue From Ridgewood Avenue to Oradell Avenue
Pyle Street From Lake Avenue to Borough line
Ridgewood Avenue From Kinderkamack Road to Forest Avenue
Soldier Hill Road From Kinderkamack Road to Forest Avenue
Spring Valley Road Entire length
§ 280-34. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Amaryllis Avenue East/West Summit Avenue
Atlantic Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
1110]
North/South Martin Avenue
Beechwood Road
[Added9-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-8]
East/West Loretta Drive
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Oradell Avenue East Prospect Avenue
Oradell Avenue West Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue North Oradell Avenue
Prospect Avenue South Oradell Avenue
§ 280-32 ORADELL CODE § 280-34
1:522
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Beechwood Road [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
East/West Prell Lane
Bellis Parkway East/West Summit Avenue
Camden Street [Added
9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
1117]
North/South Martin Avenue
Center Street East/West Maple Avenue
Cooper Avenue East/West Prospect Avenue
Cooper Avenue [Added
7-21-1998 by Ord. No.
1083]
East/West John Street
Elizabeth Street East/West Winne Avenue
Elm Street [Added
9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
11-6]
North/South Bergen Boulevard
Elm Street [Added
9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
11-6]
North/South Centre Street-New Milford
Elm Street South New Milford Avenue
Essex Street [Added
9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
1117]
North/South Martin Avenue
John Street North/South Cooper Avenue
John Street North/South Martin Avenue
John Street North/South Schaefer Avenue
Loretta Drive [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
North/South Beechwood Road
Loretta Drive [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
North/South Merritt Drive
Madison Avenue West New Milford Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added
9-7-1999 by Ord. No.
1096]
North/South Center Street
Martin Avenue East/West Prospect Avenue
Merritt Drive [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
East/West Loretta Drive
§ 280-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-34
1:523
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Merritt Drive [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
East/West Prell Lane
Midland Road East/West Summit Avenue
Morris Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
1110]
North/South Martin Avenue
O'Connell Place North Battel Place
O'Connell Place South Henniger Place
Prell Lane [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
North/South Beechwood Road
Prell Lane [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
North/South Merritt Drive
Richardson Court [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
1110]
South Hasbrouck Boulevard
Ridgewood Avenue East/West Maple Avenue
Schaefer Avenue [Added
10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
1133]
East/West John Street
Schaefer Avenue East/West Prospect Avenue
Seminole Street North/South Amaryllis Avenue
Seminole Street North/South Midland Road
Seminole Street North/South Woodland Avenue
Spring Valley Road North Henniger Place
Summit Avenue South Battel Place
Sussex Street [Added
9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
1117]
North/South Martin Avenue
Woodland Avenue East/West Summit Avenue
§ 280-35. Schedule IX: Yield intersections. [Amended 10-4-1994 by
Ord. No. 1014; 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
§ 280-34 ORADELL CODE § 280-35
1:524
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Atlantic Street North/South Martin Avenue
Birchtree Lane South Lotus Avenue
Morris Street North/South Martin Avenue
Pershing Avenue North/South Bergen Boulevard
Taylor Avenue North/South John Street
§ 280-36. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-13, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Kinderkamack Road at Burns
and Roe Office Complex north
and south driveways
Northbound right on
Kinderkamack Road
Right turn only
Kinderkamack Road at Burns
and Roe Office Complex center
driveway
Southbound left on
Kinderkamack Road
Left turn only
Kinderkamack Road and
Homestead Place
Northbound left on
Kinderkamack Road
Left turn only
Kinderkamack Road at Mack
Office Complex south driveway
Northbound right on
Kinderkamack Road
Right turn only
Kinderkamack Road at Mack
Office Complex center driveway
Southbound left on
Kinderkamack Road
Left turn only
Kinderkamack Road and Park
Place
Northbound left on
Kinderkamack Road
Left turn only
Oradell Avenue and
Kinderkamack Road
Eastbound left on
Oradell Avenue
Left turn only
Prospect Avenue and Oradell
Avenue
Left on Prospect
Avenue
Left turn only
Ridgewood Avenue and
Kinderkamack Road
Eastbound left on
Ridgewood Avenue
Left turn only
§ 280-37. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-14, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 280-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-37
1:525
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Pyle Street (entire
length)
-- --
§ 280-38. Schedule XII: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 280-15, trucks in excess of the
gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets
or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on
such street:
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Center Street 4 (except
school
buses)
From Kinderkamack Road to
Prospect Avenue
Church Street 4 (except
school
buses)
From Kinderkamack Road to
Prospect Avenue
Demarest Avenue
[Added 12-19-2017
by Ord. No. 17-09]
5 From Oradell Avenue to Elm
Street
Elm Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-09]
5 From Oradell Avenue to New
Milford Avenue
First Street 4 From Grant Avenue to Oradell
Avenue
Grove Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-09]
5 From Oradell Avenue to Elm
Street
Maple Avenue [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-09]
5 From Oradell Avenue to
Brookside Avenue
Park Avenue 4 From Prospect Avenue to
Kinderkamack Avenue
Prospect Avenue 4 From Martin Avenue to Soldier
Hill Road
Pyle Street 4 From Lake Avenue to Borough
line
Richardson Court 4 Entire length in Borough
Second Street 4 From First Street to Oradell
Avenue
§ 280-37 ORADELL CODE § 280-38
1:526
§ 280-39. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Amended
7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-7; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11]
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-18, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Argyle Street North From Kinderkamack Road to
Beverly Road
Bergen Boulevard North/South From Grant Field to Richardson
Court
Berkshire Street South From Kinderkamack Road to
Beverly Road
Beverly Road
[Repealed
10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 906]
Center Street North From Maple Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Center Street [Added
4-4-1995 by Ord. No.
1025]
South From Kinderkamack Road to a
point 15 feet west of the firehouse
driveway except, only, vehicles
owned or operated by members of
the Oradell Fire Department.
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 193 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 212 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Third Street 4 From First Street to Oradell
Avenue
B. School buses and vehicles making deliveries or providing services to
locations on the roadways set forth in this schedule are exempt from
said weight limits. [Added 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-09]
§ 280-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-39
1:527
Name of Street Side Location
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 271 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 291 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 344 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 368 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 10
feet east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 391 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 445 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 471 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 571 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 592 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
§ 280-39 ORADELL CODE § 280-39
1:528
Name of Street Side Location
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 655 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Center Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
South 675 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the southerly side of
Center Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 64 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 86 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 106 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 217 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 236 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 268 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 299 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
§ 280-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-39
1:529
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 389 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 410 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 517 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 535 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Church Street [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North 550 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Prospect
Avenue on the northerly side of
Church Street and continuing 8 feet
east
Demarest Avenue East/West North from Elm Street to end
Ellen Place South West from Kinderkamack Road to
end
Elm Street East/West From Grove Street to New Milford
Avenue
Grove Street Road
[Added 10-17-2000
by Ord. No. 1118]
South From Elm Street for a distance of
300 feet
Kinderkamack Road East From Reis Avenue to New Milford
Avenue
Kinderkamack Road East From Borough of River Edge to
Argyle Street
Kinderkamack Road West From New Milford Avenue to
Brookside Avenue
Kinderkamack Road West From Reis Avenue to Borough of
River Edge
Lake Avenue North/South From Pyle Street to Kinder-kamack
Road
§ 280-39 ORADELL CODE § 280-39
1:530
Name of Street Side Location
Marginal Road [Added
12-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 1019]
East/West From New Milford Avenue to its
end at the River Edge border
Oradell Avenue
[Amended
10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 906]
North From a point 200 feet east of
Prospect Avenue center line to
Seminole Street
Oradell Avenue
[Amended
10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 906]
South From a point 200 feet east of
Prospect Avenue center line to a
point 200 feet west of Prospect
Avenue center line
Oradell Avenue [Added
4-2-1991 by Ord. No.
925]
North/South From Forest Avenue to a point 50
feet east of Deerfield Court
Oradell Avenue [Added
12-18-1990 by Ord.
No. 910]
North/South From a point 200 feet east of
Summit Avenue to a point 200 feet
west of Summit Avenue
Park Avenue North West from Kinderkamack Road for
225 feet
Park Avenue [Added
2-6-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
South From Prospect Avenue to the end of
Park Avenue
Park Avenue South West of Kinderkamack Road for 145
feet
Prospect Avenue East/West From a point 200 feet north of
Oradell Avenue center line to a
point 200 feet south of Oradell
Avenue center line
Prospect Avenue
[Added 10-3-1995 by
Ord. No. 1041]
East From 25 feet north of Church
Street to 250 feet south of Oradell
Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue North From Prospect Avenue to
Kinderkamack Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue North From a point 100 feet east of
Wanamaker Avenue to Forest
Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue South From Kinderkamack Road to Maple
Avenue
Veldran Avenue North/South From Kinderkamack Road to New
Jersey and New York Railroad
Company right-of-way
§ 280-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-39
1:531
Name of Street Side Location
Waite Place [Added
10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 906]
North East from Beverly Road to the dead
end
Waite Place [Amended
10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 906]
South East from Kinderkamack Road to a
point 50 feet west of the dead end
Westervelt Place East Within 155 feet of intersection with
Lake Street
Westervelt Place West Within 50 feet of intersection with
Lake Street
§ 280-40. Schedule XIV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-19, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Brookside Avenue South From Kinderkamack Road to
Maple Avenue
Kinderkamack Road East South from Brookside Avenue to
Borough line
Kinderkamack Road East From a point 300 feet south of
Ridgewood Avenue to a point 150
feet north of Ridgewood Avenue
Kinderkamack Road West South from Lake Avenue to
Borough line
Kinderkamack Road West From a point 300 feet north of
Ridgewood Avenue to a point 200
feet south of Ridgewood Avenue
Kinderkamack Road
[Added 6-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 1035]
East/West From the Emerson Borough line
south to a point 130 feet south of
Oradell Avenue
New Milford Avenue North/South Entire length in Borough
Oradell Avenue North From Kinderkamack Road to
Conrail (New Jersey and New
York Railroad) tracks
Oradell Avenue North/South West from Kinderkamack Road
for 350 feet
Oradell Avenue South East from Kinderkamack Road
for 110 feet
Prospect Avenue East/West From a point 125 feet south of
Ridgewood Avenue to a point 125
feet north of Ridgewood Avenue
§ 280-39 ORADELL CODE § 280-40
1:532
Name of Street Side Location
Ridgewood Avenue North/South From Carolina Drive to Leonard
Young Street
Ridgewood Avenue North/South West from Kinderkamack Road
for 450 feet
Ridgewood Avenue North/South From Morris Street to Spring
Valley Road
Ridgewood Avenue South From Kinderkamack Road to
Maple Avenue
Soldier Hill Road South East from Forest Avenue for 350
feet
Summit Avenue
[Added 12-18-1990
by Ord. No. 910]
East/West From a point 150 feet south of
Oradell Avenue to a point 150
feet north of Oradell Avenue
§ 280-41. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-20, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Center Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ school days
East from Prospect Avenue
for 585 feet
Church Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ school days
East from Prospect Avenue
for 460 feet
Elm Street East 8:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./ school days
From Grand Street to
Center Street
Elm Street West 8:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./ school days
From Grand Street to
Grove Street
Grand Street
[Added
12-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 1134]
South 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.; 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m./
school days
From Elm Street to New
Milford border
Harrison Street
[Added
12-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 1134]
North 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.; 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m./
school days
From Elm Street to New
Milford border
§ 280-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-41
1:533
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lower Lot
[Added
4-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-2]
East 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m.
It shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle with or
without a parking permit,
for a period exceeding 1
hour, except for up to 7
parking spaces to be
designated by the Chief of
Police, to be reserved for
parking for employees of
the Oradell Free Public
Library; and except for 10
spaces which shall be
reserved for residents
attending the Senior
Center on the first and
third Tuesday of each
month between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Lower Lot
[Added
4-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-2]
West 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m.
It shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle for a period
exceeding 3 hours unless
such vehicle bears a valid
resident permit.
Prospect Avenue
[Added
8-21-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-16]
North 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./school days
East of intersection of
Prospect Avenue and
Center Street for 107 feet
§ 280-42. Schedule XVI: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-21, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Center Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ school days
East from Prospect
Avenue for 585 feet
Church Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ school days
East from Prospect
Avenue for 460 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Amended
12-3-1991 by
Ord. No. 949]
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 5:00
p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
of Maple Avenue
From a point 110 feet
east of Kinderkamack
Road to a point 25 feet
west
§ 280-41 ORADELL CODE § 280-43
1:534
§ 280-43. Schedule XVII: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 12-18-1990
by Ord. No. 911; 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 918]
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-22, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Argyle Street North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Beverly Road to
Windsor Road
Argyle Street South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to Beverly Road
Bellis Parkway
[Added
7-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
18-05]
All 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
Entire length
Bergen
Boulevard
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Elm Street to
Richardson Court
Berkshire
Street
North 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to Beverly Road
Berkshire
Street
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Beverly Road to
Windsor Road
Beverly Road East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Borough of River
Edge to Waite Place
Brookside
Avenue [Added
5-16-2000 by
Ord. No.
1107]
North 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to Genther
Avenue
Center Street North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Genther Avenue
§ 280-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-43
1:535
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Chapin Court
[Added
7-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
18-05]
All 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
Entire length
Church Street North 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to the entrance to
the parking area
Church Street North 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8 p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to entrance to
municipal parking lot
Church Street North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Commander
Black Drive
[Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
Entire length
Cooper Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Cordes Court
[Added
4-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 980]
All 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./school days
Entire length
Deerfield Court East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
Entire length
Demarest
Avenue
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
Entire length
Ellen Place North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
Entire length
§ 280-43 ORADELL CODE § 280-43
1:536
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Elm Street
[Amended
2-2-1999 by
Ord. No.
1090]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From a point 50 feet
south of Oradell Avenue
to Demarest Avenue
First Street North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
Grant Avenue
Genther
Avenue
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Center Street to
Brookside Avenue
Grove Street East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
North from a point 50
feet north of Oradell
Avenue to the end
Grove Street East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
Elm Street
Hasbrouck
Boulevard
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Elm Street to
Grant Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
2-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-1;
10-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-9]
East 15 minutes 3 designated 15-minute
parking spaces
between Brookside
Avenue and Cooper
Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road
East 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Church Street to
Brookside Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
2-22-2000 by
Ord. No.
1105]
East/West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Lake Street to the
south Borough line
Kinderkamack
Road
East/West 30 minutes; 6:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From a point 130 feet
south of Oradell Avenue
to a point 25 feet north
of Church Street
§ 280-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-43
1:537
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Kinderkamack
Road
West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Church Street to
Lake Avenue
Lakeview Drive East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
North from Oradell
Avenue to end
Lotus Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Mackay Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to Pyle Street
Maple Avenue East 3 hours; 8:00 a.m
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
Center Street
Maple Avenue East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Center Street to
Brookside Avenue
Maple Avenue West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
Center Street
Meyerhoff
Place
West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Mackay Avenue
to Winne Avenue
Meyerhoff
Place [Added
5-5-1992 by
Ord. No. 958]
East 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.
except Sundays
unless the vehicle
bears a valid
resident permit or
nonresident
employee permit
as defined in
Chapter 165
Entire length
§ 280-43 ORADELL CODE § 280-43
1:538
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Midland Road
[Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
for its entire length
Mildred Place
[Added
2-2-1999 by
Ord. No.
1090]
Both 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length
Oradell Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From New Jersey and
New York Railroad
Company right-of-way
to Grant Avenue
Oradell Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to a point 350 feet west
of Kinderkamack Road
Oradell Avenue
[Amended
12-3-1991 by
Ord. No. 949]
South 1 hour; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From a point 110 feet
east of Kinderkamack
Road to a point 25 feet
west of Maple Avenue
Oradell Avenue
[Added
2-19-1991 by
Ord. No. 949]
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.,
school days
From a point 50 feet
east of Deerfield Court
to a point 200 feet west
of Summit Avenue
Orchard Street North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Prospect
Avenue [Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From 200 feet north of
Oradell Avenue to
Soldier Hill Road
§ 280-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-43
1:539
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Prospect
Avenue [Added
10-3-1995 by
Ord. No.
1041;
amended
10-1-1996 by
Ord. No.
1052]
East 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./school days
From 25 feet north of
Park Avenue to 50 feet
south of Church Street
Prospect
Avenue [Added
10-3-1995 by
Ord. No.
1041]
West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./school days
From 150 feet south of
Church Street to
Center Street
Ridgewood
Avenue
North 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Maple Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Ridgewood
Avenue
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Genther Avenue
to Maple Avenue
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Kinderkamack Road
Second Street East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
First Street
Seminole
Street [Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From a point 50 feet
north of Oradell Avenue
to Soldier Hill
Summit Avenue
[Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From 150 feet north of
Oradell Avenue to
Soldier Hill Road
Summit Avenue
[Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From 150 feet south of
Oradell Avenue to 50
feet north of Battel
Place
§ 280-43 ORADELL CODE § 280-43
1:540
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Third Street East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
First Street
Third Street
[Added
12-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
02-020]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
Hasbrouck Boulevard
Waite Place North 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m/except
Sundays
From Kinderkamack
Road to Beverly Road
Waite Place
[Added
10-16-1990 by
Ord. No.
1019]
South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
East from a point 50
feet west of the dead
end to the dead end
Wannamaker
Avenue [Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
East/West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p/
m./except Sundays
From Oradell Avenue to
southern end
Windsor Road North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Borough of River
Edge to Argyle Street
Woodland
Avenue [Added
10-16-1990 by
Ord. No. 906;
repealed
10-1-1996 by
Ord. No.
1052]
Woodland
Avenue [Added
4-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 980;
repealed
10-1-1996 by
Ord. No.
1052]
§ 280-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-43
1:541
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Location
Woodland
Avenue [Added
10-1-1996 by
Ord. No.
1052]
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./school days
From Forest Avenue to
Summit Avenue
Woodland
Avenue [Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
1019]
North/South 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./except
Sundays
From Prospect Avenue
to Summit Avenue
§ 280-44. Schedule XVIII: Midblock Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-23, the following described
locations are hereby designated as crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Kinderkamack Road Between Argyle Street and Berkshire
Street commencing at a point 160 feet
north of Berkshire Street.
§ 280-45. Schedule XIX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 280-46. Schedule XX: Handicapped Parking on Roadways.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking only:
Name of
Street Side Location
Church Street North 90 feet west of the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Kinderkamack Road on
the northerly side of Church Street and
continuing 50.5 feet west
Oradell Avenue South 82 feet west of the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Kinderkamack Road on
southerly side of Oradell Avenue Street and
continuing 23 feet west
§ 280-43 ORADELL CODE § 280-46
1:542
Name of
Street Side Location
Prospect Street West 384 feet south of the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Oradell Avenue on the
westerly side of Prospect Avenue and
continuing 49 feet south
§ 280-47. Schedule XXI: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Elm Street East South from Harrison Street for 120 feet
Elm Street West North from Demarest Avenue for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from Argyle Street for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from Berkshire Street for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from Brookside Avenue for 90 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from a point 120 feet south of Burns
and Roe Office Complex south driveway for
90 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from Center Street for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from north curbline of East Drive for
120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from south curbline of Ellen Place
for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from Garden Place for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from north curbline of Homestead
Place for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from southerly curbline of Lotus
Avenue for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from New Milford Avenue for 120
feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from a point 25 feet north of Oradell
Avenue for 90 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from south curbline of Park Avenue
for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from north curbline of Park Place for
120 feet
§ 280-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-47
1:543
Name of Street Side Location
Kinderkamack
Road
East North from a point 55 feet north of
Ridgewood Avenue east leg for 90 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
East South from south curbline of Soldier Hill
Road for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West South from a point 100 feet south of Burns
and Roe Office Complex south driveway for
90 feet
Kinderkamack
Road [Repealed
10-30-2002 by
Ord. No.
02-014]
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Cooper Avenue for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
4-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
02-004]
West South from the southerly curbline of
Church Street and extending 133 feet
southerly therefrom
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Ellen Place for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from High Street for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Homestead Place for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road [Amended
11-1-1999 by
Ord. No. 1101]
West 108 feet south of Lake Avenue extending
south 135 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Lotus Avenue for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Mackay Avenue for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from a point 25 feet north of East
Drive for 95 feet
Kinderkamack
Road [Repealed
4-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
02-004]
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Park Avenue for 120 feet
§ 280-47 ORADELL CODE § 280-47
1:544
Name of Street Side Location
Kinderkamack
Road
West North from Park Place for 120 feet
Kinderkamack
Road
West South from a point 60 feet south of
Ridgewood Avenue for 110 feet
Kinderkamack
Road [Amended
9-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 1077A]
West North from Soldier Hill Road for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 1071]
North West from the west curbline of Commander
Black Drive for 105 feet
Oradell Avenue North East from a point 50 feet east of Forest
Avenue for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue North West from Grove Street for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 1071]
North West from a point of 110 feet west of
Kinderkamack Road for 135 feet
Oradell Avenue North East from a point 75 feet east of New
Jersey and New York Railroad for 160 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
12-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1058]
North West from the west curbline of Prospect
Avenue for 60 feet
Oradell Avenue North West from a point 50 feet west of Prospect
Avenue for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
12-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1058]
North West from the west curbline of Summit
Avenue for 60 feet
Oradell Avenue North West from a point 50 feet west of Summit
Avenue for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
9-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 1071]
South West from the west curbline of Commander
Black Drive for 105 feet
Oradell Avenue South West from Elm Street for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue South East from a point 50 feet east of Forest
Avenue for 120 feet
§ 280-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-47
1:545
Name of Street Side Location
Oradell Avenue
[Added
1-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1089]
South West from a point 310 feet west of the
westerly curb of Kinderkamack Road
extending 135 feet west
Oradell Avenue South West from Grove Street for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue South East from a point 50 feet east of New
Jersey and New York Railroad for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue South East from a point 50 feet east of Prospect
Avenue for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
12-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1058]
South West from a point 25 feet west of Prospect
Avenue for 60 feet
Oradell Avenue South East from a point 50 feet east of Summit
Avenue for 120 feet
Oradell Avenue
[Added
12-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1058]
South West from a point 50 feet west of Summit
Avenue for 60 feet
Prospect Avenue
[Added
9-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-21]
East South from a point 56 feet from the
intersection of Prospect Avenue and
Church Street; 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
§ 280-47 ORADELL CODE § 280-47
1:546
ARTICLE V
Fire Lanes and Fire Zones
[Adopted 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 974]
§ 280-48. Designation.
The Fire Official, with the approval of the Chief Executive Officer of the Fire
Department and the Chief of Police, may designate fire lanes or fire zones
on private property to which the public is invited or which is devoted to
public use if it is necessary to provide safety for the public or to provide
proper access for Fire Department operations in the event of an emergency.
§ 280-49. Notification.
Whenever a determination has been made for fire lane or fire zone
designation pursuant to § 280-48, the Fire Official shall notify the owner of
the property in writing. by registered or certified mail or by hand delivering
such notice, specifically describing the area designated and the reason for
making the designation. Any signs designating the fire lanes or fire zones
shall be as directed by the Fire Official, and same shall be erected at the
sole cost of the property owner.
§ 280-50. Obstructions.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to park a motor vehicle
in or otherwise to obstruct a fire lane or fire zone.
§ 280-51. Enforcement. [Amended 6-26-2002 by Ord. No. 02-007]
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Fire Official
or any Deputy Fire Official or the Chief Executive Officer of the Fire
Department, and any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be liable to the penalty of $25 for a first offense, $50 for the
second offense and $100 for third or subsequent offenses. In addition to
the penalty provided, any vehicle parked in violation of the regulations
provided under this article may, at the direction of the Police Department,
be summarily towed away at the sole cost and expense of the owner of said
vehicle. Any fines imposed will be collected by the Violations Clerk.
§ 280-52. Disclaimer.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed as the acceptance for public use of
any of the premises in any such parking area or in any way create any public
easement therein.
§ 280-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-52
1:547

ARTICLE VI
Emergency Parking Prohibition
[Added 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 999]
§ 280-53. Prohibitions.
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct
the posting of said "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather
conditions, road construction, utility work, accidents, fires or public
celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that the
"EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are being or will be posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior
to the posting of signs.
§ 280-54. Violators deemed nuisance.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 280-55. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 280-56. Penalty. [Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-019]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of § 280-53 or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50.
§ 280-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-56
1:549
Chapter 285
VEHICLES, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Violations and penalties — See Ch. 1, § 1-10.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 285-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUSINESS OF SELLING, TRADING OR EXCHANGING MOTOR VEHICLES
— Includes the offering of motor vehicles for sale, trade or exchange by
exhibiting, storing, parking, locating or keeping such motor vehicles upon
an open lot with the intent to sell or exchange such motor vehicles.
OPEN LOT — Any lot, tract or parcel of land not enclosed in a substantial,
permanent building.[Amended 10-2-1967 by Ord. No. 514]
§ 285-2. License required. [Amended 10-2-1967 by Ord. No. 514]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to engage
in storing any motor vehicle or to engage in the business of selling, trading
or exchanging any motor vehicle upon any open lot in the Borough of
Oradell without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 285-3. Application for license.
Any person desiring to obtain a license as required in § 285-2 shall make a
separate application, in writing, to the Mayor and Council for the granting
of a license for each separate and distinct location where such business is to
be maintained or operated. Such applications shall set forth the full name of
the person making the application and his residence and business address
and shall describe, either by metes and bounds or by lot and block number
according to the Tax Map, the premises upon which such business is to be
conducted, giving the number of square feet to be devoted to such business
and such other matters as may be required by the Borough Council.
§ 285-4. Fees to accompany application.
Applications, as provided for in § 285-3, shall be accompanied by the license
fees set out in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 285-5. Fees. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 837]
The annual fee for a license to be issued under this chapter shall be as
indicated in Chapter 115, Fees.
§ 280-56 ORADELL CODE § 285-6
1:550
§ 285-6. License to show date of issuance; expiration.
A license issued under this chapter shall bear the date of the day of its issue
and shall expire one year thereafter.
§ 285-7. Construal.
A license issued under this chapter shall not be construed to permit the
owner of the business licensed thereby to operate or maintain such business
upon any location and other than that set forth and described in the
application and license. This requirement shall not be construed to include
the sidewalk or street upon which such premises abut.
§ 285-8. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 10-2-1967 by Ord.
No. 514]
No person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to obtain such a license
shall be permitted to apply for and obtain more than two such licenses.
§ 285-9. Assignment of license; approval.
No license issued under this chapter shall be assigned unless application
therefor is made to the Borough Council and its approval obtained.
§ 285-10. Transferal of license.
No licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferred to a different
location than that for which issued and which is specified therein, unless
application therefor is made to the Borough Council and its approval
obtained.
§ 285-11. Revocation of license.
The Borough Council may suspend or revoke at any time any license issued
under this chapter, after five days' notice to the licensee in writing and upon
a hearing showing that the licensee has used or permitted the premises
licensed to be used for any improper, immoral or illegal business or purpose
or that the licensee has failed to keep the licensed premises in a clean, safe,
sanitary and proper condition.
§ 285-12. Application required for increase in size of lot.
The holder of a license issued under this chapter shall not increase the size
of the open lot upon which the licensed business is conducted, after the
initial license has been issued to him without first making application to the
Mayor and Council setting forth the extent of the increase and the necessity
therefor.
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-12
1:551
Chapter 290
YARD AND AUTUMN LEAF WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
§ 290-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings and vegetative garden debris, including
leaves, sticks and small branches.
AUTUMN LEAF WASTE — Leaves from deciduous trees and needles from
coniferous species that fall to the ground during autumn.
AUTUMN LEAF COLLECTION SEASON — That period of time running
from approximately mid-October through mid-December as specified in the
Borough calendar and/or newsletter.
§ 290-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. Yard waste. Any person, whether the owner or occupant of any
property, or any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant,
engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep,
rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless the yard waste is
containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not containerized is
placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of yard waste
must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
§ 285-12 ORADELL CODE § 290-2
1:552
§ 290-3. Schedule.
The autumn leaf collection pickup schedule shall be as designated in the
Borough calendar and/or newsletter on an annual basis for the period mid-
October through mid-December.
§ 290-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Property
Maintenance Official and/or his designee.
§ 290-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine as follows:
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 296
B. Autumn leaf waste.
(1) Any person, whether the owner or occupant of any property, or any
employee or contractor of such owner or occupant, engaged to
provide lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake,
blow or otherwise place autumn leaf waste in the street during
periods other than the autumn leaf collection season unless the
autumn leaf waste is containerized.
(2) Placement of such autumn leaf waste at the curb or along the street
at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this
chapter. If such placement of autumn leaf waste occurs, the party
responsible for placement of the autumn leaf waste must remove
the autumn leaf waste from the street or said party shall be deemed
in violation of this chapter. Autumn leaf waste that falls naturally
into the street or blows into the street without human intervention
is exempted.
(3) Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing autumn leaf waste
that is not containerized at the curb or along the street is only
allowed during autumn leaf collection season and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet.
A. First offense: written warning.
B. Second offense: $50.
C. Third offense: $100.
D. Fourth offense: $250.
E. For the fifth and each subsequent offense, there shall be a fine of $500.
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:553
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 290-5 ORADELL CODE § 290-5
1:554
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[An ordinance adopting Part III of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell and making certain substantive changes to existing
ordinances of the borough is presently proposed before the Board
of Health. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as Article I
of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:555
Chapter 298
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 298-1. Findings and purpose; scope.
§ 298-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment within a permitted
establishment located within the Borough of Oradell by an operator
providing permanent cosmetics only. Body art permitted within the Borough
shall not encompass other forms of tattooing or body piercing.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises located within the
Borough of Oradell, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in
nature or location, where the practice of body art, whether or not for profit,
is performed.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person
using pre-sterilized single-use needles and the insertion of pre-sterilized or
disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Borough of
Oradell.
ESTABLISHMENT — A physical place of business, permanent in nature;
includes all areas used by a body art technician and clients, including, but
not limited to, treatment areas and waiting/reception area.
OPERATOR — Includes the owner or the owner's designee having
ownership, control or custody of any place of business or employment and
who manages the day-to-day operations of the body art establishment.
A. The Department of Health of the Borough of Oradell finds that the
regulation of body art establishments within the Borough of Oradell is
required in order to protect the public health, welfare and safety. The
purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the proper review
and approval of plans for body art establishments and to require the
inspections and licensing of body art establishments by the Department
of Health of the Borough of Oradell in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:27 et
seq.
B. Scope. This chapter shall govern any business that offers permanent
cosmetics to the public within the Borough of Oradell with the
exception of a physician who is authorized by the State Board of
Medical Examiners to practice medicine, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:9-6 et
seq. All provisions related to the practice of permanent cosmetics in
N.J.A.C. 8:27 et seq. are incorporated by reference.
§ 290-5 ORADELL CODE § 298-2
1:556
PERMANENT COSMETICS — The implanting of inert pigments, colors, and/
or dyes intradermally which results in permanent alteration of tissue to gain
a cosmetic effect.
PERMIT — Written approval by the Department of Health of the Borough of
Oradell to operate a body art establishment.
PRACTITIONER — Any person who performs the practice of permanent
cosmetics within the Borough of Oradell. Such practitioner will be certified
in accordance with § 298-5C and have submitted an application for a New
Jersey State permit in "Other & Permanent Cosmetics" only.
§ 298-3. Terms not defined.
Wherever a term is not defined in this chapter, it is intended to have the
meaning set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.3. In the event of conflict between
the definition in this chapter and that contained in said regulations, the
definition in said regulations shall apply.
§ 298-4. Approval to operate.
§ 298-5. Application procedure.
A. No body art establishment shall be permitted to open or, in the event
such establishment is open at the time of adoption of this chapter,
continue to be open for operation until the Department of Health has
given formal approval by issuance of an appropriate license. This
license shall be renewed annually. The license period shall be from
January 1 to December 31 of each year. In the event that a license is
issued to become effective after July 1 of any calendar year, said license
shall expire on December 31 of that year.
(1) The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises where it may readily be observed by all clients.
(2) No person shall operate a body art establishment whose license has
been suspended.
(3) Proof of professional malpractice liability insurance for each
practitioner shall be provided to the Department of Health as part
of the initial and renewal license.
(4) Proof of receipt by the operator, and by any other person engaging
in body art, of the Hepatitis B vaccine series shall be provided to
the Department of Health as part of the initial and renewal license.
B. Establishments in operation at the time of adoption of this chapter shall
be required to obtain a license within 30 days of the effective date of
this chapter. There shall be a late charge as hereinafter set forth in the
event that this subsection is violated or in the event that a renewal
license is not applied for within the month of January.
C. Licenses are not transferable.
§ 298-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-5
1:557
§ 298-6. Facility layout and review of plans.
The Department of Health shall review the application for compliance with
all the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-3.1 through 3.5 to include the final plans,
specifications, and reports, and shall either approve or disapprove of the
application, in writing, within 30 business days from the date of submission
to the Department of Health.
A. Any person desiring to construct, expand, alter, or operate a permanent
cosmetic establishment shall apply in writing on the forms prescribed
by the Department of Health for review and approval before such
construction, expansion, alteration or operation is begun. Such
application shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's legal name, home address and telephone number,
full business name, business address, post office address and
telephone number. The application shall also include whether the
applicant is an individual, partnership, firm or corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners
shall be included on the application. If the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers shall
be included on the application.
(2) Plans and specifications shall illustrate the location of the proposed
establishment and a floor plan of the establishment as it is
proposed to be operated. An exact inventory of any equipment to be
used shall be included. Plans shall indicate the layout of the
reception area, the procedure areas, the cleaning and sterilization
area, the storage area and the toilet facilities.
(3) A statement of approval from the municipal agency responsible for
the administration of planning and zoning ordinances if the
application includes either construction or expansion of the
proposed body art establishment.
(4) A complete description of all services to be provided, the proposed
hours of operation, the name of the operator and the names of all
practitioners and their exact duties, a copy of the informed consent
for each procedure.
B. A licensed establishment shall only permit those persons who have
successfully completed the forty-hour training program approved by
the Society of Permanent Cosmetics Professionals or the International
Micropigmentation Association to practice in the licensed
establishment.
C. Body art establishments within the Borough of Oradell shall operate on
a single-use/disposable basis only.
§ 298-5 ORADELL CODE § 298-7
1:558
§ 298-7. Denial of approval.
Persons denied approval shall be notified, in writing, by the Department
of Health. Such notice shall specify the reason(s) for the action, and shall
give the person(s) denied approval the opportunity for a hearing before the
Board of Health of the Borough of Oradell within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 15 business days from the date the health authority denied approval
of the application.
§ 298-8. Fees.
The fee for a license required pursuant to § 298-4 above shall be $150 per
annum. The late charge for applying for any license more than 30 days after
the renewal date shall be $50.
§ 298-9. Change of information notification requirements.
Facility license holders shall notify the Department of Health by mail within
five calendar days of a change in the following information:
§ 298-10. Prohibitions.
A. The business name or ownership;
B. The area code and telephone number;
C. An address change resulting from city or postal service action;
D. License status, whether from active to inactive practice or from inactive
to active practice;
E. Closure or sale of a facility; or
F. A change in procedures or personnel.
A. A person who violates a prohibition under this section shall be subject
to enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 8 of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code, civil penalties as provided by N.J.S.A.
26:1A-10 and all other applicable laws and/or injunctive action as
provided by law.
(1) Implants under the skin shall not be performed in a body art
establishment.
(2) Scarification such as branding and cutting shall not be performed
in a body art establishment.
(3) No person shall perform any body piercing.
(4) No permanent cosmetics shall be applied to any person under 18
years of age, regardless of parental consent.
(5) No person shall practice or attempt to practice body art in an
unlicensed facility.
§ 298-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-10
1:559
§ 298-11. Insurance requirements.
Each practitioner shall maintain current professional malpractice liability
insurance.
§ 298-12. Inspection.
The Department of Health shall inspect every body art establishment as
often as the Department of Health deems necessary using an inspection
report form approved by the New Jersey Department of Health.
§ 298-13. Criteria for closure.
(6) No person shall operate a facility unless it is at all times under the
direct supervision of an operator.
(7) No person shall display a sign or in any way advertise or purport to
be a body art practitioner or to be engaged in the business of body
art in the Borough of Oradell without first obtaining a license for
the facility from the Department of Health.
A. A representative of the Department of Health shall provide proper
identification.
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment, and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the Department of Health representative for review.
C. An inspection report shall identify in a narrative form any violations of
N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq. and shall be cross-referenced to the section of the
regulations being violated.
D. Results of the inspection shall be made available to the public upon
request.
A. The approval or license of any person to operate a body art
establishment may be suspended at any time, when in the opinion of the
Department of Health such action is necessary to abate a present or
threatened menace to the public health.
B. The following shall be reason(s) for closure:
(1) Unsanitary or unsafe conditions, as determined by a County
Sanitarian or designee, which may adversely impact the health of
the public;
(2) The Department of Health has reasonable cause to suspect that a
communicable disease is, or may be, transmitted by an operator/
practitioner.
(3) The practitioner(s) has demonstrated gross incompetence in
performing micropigmentation;
§ 298-10 ORADELL CODE § 298-13
1:560
§ 298-14. Administration and enforcement.
The Department of Health is authorized to administer the provisions of this
chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department
of Health or any other individual designated by the Department of Health.
§ 298-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
refuse to comply with a lawful order or directive of the Department of
Health shall be liable for penalties as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 and all
other applicable laws and/or injunctive action as provided by law.
(4) The owner obtained or attempted to obtain a license by means of
fraud, misrepresentation or concealment;
(5) The owner or practitioner(s) has been convicted in this or any other
state of a crime directly related to the practice of tattooing or
micropigmentation.
(6) The owner or practitioner(s) has permitted a piercing within the
Borough.
(7) The establishment repeatedly has critical violations, such as, but
not limited to, untrained personnel, unsanitary conditions, use of
unauthorized equipment, or employing improper procedures which
could result in transmitting of infection or disease.
(8) Personnel performing such body art procedures do not possess the
required training in accord with N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.
(9) Failure by the practitioner to report to the Oradell Health
Department any known, suspected or consumer-reported infections
and/or injuries within three days.
C. The following shall be cause for a suspension of a minimum of seven
days:
(1) Failure to report to the Department of Health within 24 hours any
infection or injury requiring medical referral;
(2) Performing body art procedures on any person under the age of 18
years of age.
(3) Performing body art outside the scope of this chapter, i.e., other
forms of tattooing and/or piercing.
§ 298-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-15
1:561
Chapter 300
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 34.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 300.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 300-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purpose of this chapter:
CAT — Any tomcat, queen or spayed queen.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a cat or permitting a cat to
remain on premises under his control.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property in such cat and every person who has such
a cat in his keeping.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of cats seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
§ 300-2. Types of cats requiring license.
Licenses shall be required for the following cats of licensing age:
§ 300-3. Information to accompany license application; registration
numbers; inoculations.
A. A cat owned or kept within the Borough by a Borough resident on
January 1 of a calendar year.
B. A cat acquired during the course of a calendar year and kept within the
Borough for more than 10 days after acquisition.
C. A cat attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
D. An unlicensed cat brought into and kept within the Borough for more
than 10 days.
E. A cat licensed by another state brought into and kept within the
Borough for more than 90 days.
A. Each application for a license under this chapter shall give the
following information:
§ 298-15 ORADELL CODE § 300-3
1:562
§ 300-4. When application to be made.
Applications for licenses for cats which are required to be licensed by the
provisions of § 300-2A shall be made before February 1 of each calendar
year. In all other cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10
days of the day upon which the car in question first becomes subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 300-5. Records to be kept.
The information on all applications under this chapter and the registration
number issued to each licensed cat shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the Board of Health. In addition, similar information shall
be forwarded to the State Department of Health each month on forms
furnished by the Department, if so required.
§ 300-6. Fees. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1]
The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $10 for each spayed
or neutered cat and $15 for each cat that is not spayed or not neutered.
The same fees shall be charged for the annual renewal of each license and
registration tag. In the event that any person who shall own, keep or harbor
a cat of licensing age shall fail to obtain an original or renewal cat license
or licenses on or before January 31, said person shall be liable to a penalty
of $5 for each month thereafter.
§ 300-7. Expiration of license.
Each cat license and registration tag shall expire on January 31 of the
calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
(1) A general description of the cat sought to be licensed, including
breed, sex, age, color and markings, and whether the cat is of a
long- or short-haired variety.
(2) The name, street and post office address of the owner and of the
person who shall keep or harbor the cat.
B. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which applications
are received.
C. No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the governing body
or Board of Health of any municipality to license cats therein shall grant
any such license and official metal registration tag for any cat, unless
the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Health, Education and Welfare or has been certified
exempt as provided by regulations of the State Department of Health.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8
1:563
§ 300-8. Annual canvass; report.
Any person appointed for the purpose by the governing body or Board
of Health of the municipality shall annually cause a canvass to be made
of all cats owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the municipality
and shall report, on or before September 1 of each year, to the Clerk or
other person designated to license cats in the municipality and to the local
Board of Health and to the State Department of Health, if so required, the
results thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and addresses
of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats and the number of
unlicensed cats owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together
with a complete description of each of said unlicensed cats.
§ 300-9. Disposition of fees.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this chapter, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Borough
Treasurer within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a
special account separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough. The
moneys shall be used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping
and disposing of cats liable to seizure under this chapter; local prevention
and control of rabies; antirabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known to have been or suspected of having
been exposed to rabies; and the administration of the provisions of this
chapter. Any unexpended balance remaining in the special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the third
fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall
be transferred from the special account to the general funds of the Borough
any amount then in the account which is in excess of the total amount paid
in during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 300-10. Impoundment.
The Animal Warden shall take into custody and impound or cause to be
taken into custody and impounded any of the following cats:
A. An unlicensed cat running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. A cat of the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat, which the Animal Warden or his agent has reason to
believe is a stray cat.
C. A cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat without a current registration tag on its collar.
D. A female cat in season off the premises of the owner or of the persons
keeping or harboring the cat.
§ 300-8 ORADELL CODE § 300-11
1:564
§ 300-11. Access to premises.
An officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding a cat which he may lawfully seize and impound when he is in
immediate pursuit of the cat, except upon the premises of the owner of the
cat if the owner is present and forbids it.
§ 300-12. Notice of seizure.
§ 300-13. Disposition of unclaimed cats.
The Animal Warden is authorized and empowered to cause the destruction
of any unclaimed cat in as humane a manner as possible under any of the
following contingencies:
A. If a cat so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar or
harness inscribed with the name and address of any person of if the
owner or the person keeping or harboring the cat is known, the Animal
Warden shall immediately serve on the person whose address is given
on the collar or on the person owning, keeping or harboring the cat a
notice, in writing, stating that the cat has been seized and will be liable
to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
service of the notice.
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by mail, in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
A. When any cat so seized has not been claimed by the person owning,
keeping or harboring it within seven days after notice or within seven
days of the cat's detention when notice has not been or cannot be given,
as set forth in the previous section.
B. If the person owning, keeping or harboring a cat so seized has not
claimed the cat and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance.
C. If the seized cat is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the person
owning, keeping or harboring it has not produced a license and
registration tag as provided in this chapter.
D. No cat or other animal so caught and detained or procured, obtained,
sent or brought to a pound or shelter shall be sold or otherwise made
available for the purpose of experimentation. Any person who sells or
otherwise makes available any such cat or other animal for the purpose
of experimentation shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
§ 300-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:565
§ 300-14. Compliance with regulations.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a cat in the Borough except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the following
regulations:
§ 300-15. Cat bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a cat, that person, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of a cat is notified
by the police that the cat has bitten an individual, the owner or keeper of
the cat shall comply with the following procedures:
§ 300-16. Quarantine.
The Borough Council or Board of Health may, by proclamation, require
all cats to be quarantined during any period in each year that may seem
advisable to the Council or Board of Health.
§ 300-17. Powers of Borough Council and Board of Health.
The Borough Council or Board of Health shall have the power to appoint
an Animal Warden who shall be in charge of the pound and whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Borough Council shall
have the power to appoint one or more cat catchers, who may impound
unlicensed cats running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and who shall make a monthly report to the Borough Council.
A. Wearing of registration. Cats for which licenses are required by the
provisions of this chapter shall wear collars or harnesses with the
registration tags securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of a cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a cat for which the tag was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this chapter.
A. Have the cat examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
B. Have the cat kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for a
period of 10 days.
C. At the end of 10 days, have the cat reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the cat's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
§ 300-14 ORADELL CODE § 300-18
1:566
§ 300-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations of this
chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for
each offense, to be recovered by the Borough of Oradell.
Chapter 301
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 300.
§ 300-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18
1:567

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Other Regulations
§ 301-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this article:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — The keeping of five or more dogs or any establishment wherein
or whereon the business of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for
sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such a dog in his keeping, or any person operating a kennel containing five
or more dogs over the age of six months.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
§ 301-2. License required.
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
§ 301-3. Information required for application.
Each application for a license under this chapter shall give the following
information:
A. A dog owned or kept within the Borough by a Borough resident on
January 1 of a calendar year.
B. A dog acquired during the course of a calendar year and kept within the
Borough for more than 10 days after acquisition.
C. A dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
D. An unlicensed dog brought into and kept within the Borough for more
than 10 days.
E. A dog licensed by another state brought into and kept within the
Borough for more than 90 days.
§ 301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:569
§ 301-4. Issuance of registration numbers.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which applications are
received.
§ 301-5. Rabies vaccination or exemption required.
No municipal clerk or other official designated by the governing body or
Board of Health of any municipality to license dogs therein shall grant
any such license and official metal registration tag for any dog unless the
owner thereof provides evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered
has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United States
Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of Health,
Education and Welfare or has been certified exempt as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health.
§ 301-6. License application dates.
Applications for licenses for dogs which are required to be licensed by the
provisions of § 301-2A shall be made before February 1 of each calendar
year. In all other cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10
days of the day upon which the dog in question first becomes subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 301-7. Duration of license.
The information on all applications under this chapter and the registration
number issued to each licensed dog shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the Board of Health. In addition, similar information shall
be forwarded to the State Department of Health each month on forms
furnished by the Department.
§ 301-8. Fees.
The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $10 for each spayed or
neutered dog and $15 for each dog that is not spayed or not neutered.
§ 301-9. Expiration of license.
Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on January 31 of the
calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
A. A general description of the dog sought to be licensed, including breed,
sex, age, color and markings and whether the dog is of a long- or shorthaired
variety.
B. The name, street and post office address of the owner and of the person
who shall keep or harbor the dog.
§ 301-3 ORADELL CODE § 301-10
1:570
§ 301-10. Exception.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog licensed under
§ 301-6 of this chapter. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly
known as "Seeing Eye" dogs shall be licensed in the same manner as other
dogs, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required to pay any fee.
§ 301-11. Annual canvass of dogs.
Any person appointed for the purpose by the governing body or Board of
Health of the municipality shall annually cause a canvass to be made of
all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the municipality and
shall report, on or before May 1 of each year, to the Clerk or other person
designated to license dogs in the municipality and to the local Board of
Health and to the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting
forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs, the number of unlicensed dogs
owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together with a complete
description of each of said unlicensed dogs.
§ 301-12. License required for pet shops, kennels, shelters or
pounds.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Board of Health for a license
entitling him to keep or operate the establishment. Any person holding
the license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by the licensee and kept at the establishment. Licenses shalt not be
transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 301-13. Application for pet shop, kennel, shelter or pound license.
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 301-14. Statement of compliance.
No license shall be issued until the proposed licensee submits a written
statement from the Health Officer of the Board of Health that the
establishment or proposed establishment complies with local and state
rules governing the location of and sanitation at the establishment.
A. The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
B. The street address where the establishment is located or proposed to be
located, together with a general description of the premises.
C. The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
D. The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by the
establishment at any one time.
§ 301-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-15
1:571
§ 301-15. Term of license.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all licenses shall
expire on the last day of January of each year.
§ 301-16. Compliance required.
§ 301-17. List of licensees to be forwarded to state.
The Board of Health shall forward to the State Department of Health a list
of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after
the licenses are issued, which list shall include the name and address of
each licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 301-18. Control of dogs off premises.
A. All licenses for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject to
revocations by the Board of Health on recommendation of the State
Department of Health for failure to comply with the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health or the Board of Health
after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health.
B. Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Borough ordinances and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet
shops, shelters and pounds, the preservation of sanitation and the
prevention of the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and
from these establishments.
A. Dogs shall be controlled as follows:
(1) No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
permitted off the premises, except on leash, in a crate or under
other safe control.
(2) No person owning or in charge of any dog shall cause or allow such
dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, play area, park or
any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property.
(3) Any person owning or in charge of any dog which soils, defiles,
defecates on or commits any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk or upon any public property
whatsoever or upon any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property shall immediately remove all feces
§ 301-15 ORADELL CODE § 301-18
1:572
§ 301-19. Disposition of fees.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this chapter, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Borough
Treasurer within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a
special account separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough. The
moneys shall be used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping
and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this chapter; local prevention
and control of rabies; antirabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known to have been or suspected of having
been exposed to rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of
New Jersey governing the subject; and the administration of the provisions
of this chapter. Any unexpended balance remaining in the special account
shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and
may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from the special account to the general funds of
the Borough any amount then in the account which is in excess of the total
amount paid in during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 301-20. Impoundment of dogs.
The Dog Warden shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded any of the following dogs:
deposited by any such dog in a sanitary manner approved by the
Board of Health.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
C. Any person who violates any provision of the foregoing Subsection A(2),
A(3) or B of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each
day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. An unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. A dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Dog Warden or his agent has reason to
believe is a stray dog.
C. A dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
D. A female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring the dog.
§ 301-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-21
1:573
§ 301-21. Access to premises.
An officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding a dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when he is in
immediate pursuit of the dog, except upon the premises of the owner of the
dog if the owner is present and forbids it.
§ 301-22. Notice of seizure.
§ 301-23. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
The Dog Warden is authorized and empowered to cause the destruction of
any unclaimed dog in as humane a manner as possible under any of the
following contingencies:
A. If a dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar or
harness inscribed with the name and address of any person or if the
owner or the person keeping or harboring the dog is known, the Dog
Warden shall immediately serve on the person whose address is given
on the collar or on the person owning, keeping or harboring the dog a
notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable
to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
service of notice.
B. A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served or by having it at the person's
usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar,
or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to that person
at his usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the
collar.
A. When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person owning,
keeping or harboring it within seven days after notice or within seven
days of the dog's detention when notice has not been or cannot be
given, as set forth in the previous section.
B. If the person owning, keeping or harboring a dog so seized has not
claimed the dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance, not to exceed $5 for the first day and
$1 for each additional day.
C. If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the person
owning, keeping or harboring it has not produced a license and
registration tag as provided in this chapter.
D. No dog so caught and detained or procured, obtained, sent or brought
to a pound or shelter shall be sold or otherwise made available for the
purpose of experimentation. Any person who sells or otherwise makes
available any such dog for the purpose of experimentation shall be
guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
§ 301-21 ORADELL CODE § 301-24
1:574
§ 301-24. Additional regulations for owning, keeping or harboring
of dogs.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Borough except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the following
regulations:
§ 301-25. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, that person, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of a dog is notified
by the police that the dog has bitten an individual, the owner or keeper of
the dog shall comply with the following procedures. The owner shall:
A. Wearing of registration tags. Dogs for which licenses are required by
the provisions of this chapter shall wear collars or harnesses with the
registration tags securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of a dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which the tag was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this chapter.
D. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit it to run at large on the public streets or in a public park, public
building or other public place within the Borough. A dog not on the
premises of the owner must be accompanied by a person over the age of
12 years and be securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash
not more than six feet long.
E. Vicious dogs. No person shall own, keep, or harbor a vicious dog,
whether registered or not, within the Borough of Oradell. As used
herein, a vicious dog is any dog which has been declared by the
Municipal Judge or the Animal Control Officer to be a vicious dog, or
which has habitually attacked persons, other dogs, or domestic animals.
A. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
B. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
C. At the end of 10 days, have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
§ 301-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-26
1:575
§ 301-26. Quarantine of dogs or cats.
The Borough Council or Board of Health may, by proclamation, require all
dogs and cats to be quarantined during any period in each year that may
seem advisable to the Council or the Board of Health.
§ 301-27. Enforcement.
The Borough Council or Board of Health shall have the power to appoint a
Dog Warden who shall be in charge of the pound and whose duty it shall be
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Borough Council shall have the
power to appoint one or more dog catchers, who may impound unlicensed
dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter and who
shall make a monthly and annual report to the Borough Council.
§ 301-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations of this
chapter shall be liable to a penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each offense, to
be recovered by the Borough of Oradell.
§ 301-26 ORADELL CODE § 301-28
1:576
ARTICLE II
Pet Solid Waste Disposal
§ 301-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Oradell ("Oradell") so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 301-30. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 301-31. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 301-32. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 301-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-33
1:577
§ 301-33. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Oradell Police
Department and the Oradell Board of Health of the Borough of Oradell.
§ 301-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine as follows:
A. First offense: warning.
B. Second offense: $100.
C. Third offense: $250.
D. Fourth offense: $500.
E. For the fifth and each subsequent offense, there shall be a fine of
$1,000.
§ 301-33 ORADELL CODE § 301-34
1:578
Chapter 302
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 302-1. Authority.
A code regulating retail food-handling establishments, providing for the
inspection of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations, is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of said
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ 302-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this Chapter 302 is described and
commonly known as Title 8, Chapter 24 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines (N.J.A.C. 8:24).
§ 302-3. State code on file.
Three copies of said New Jersey Administrative Code Title 8, Chapter 24,
have been placed on file in the office of the Registrar of the Oradell Health
Department upon introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
until final action is taken on this chapter, for the use and examination by the
public.
§ 302-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — The operator, person in charge, person having supervisory
or management duties, person on the payroll, family member, volunteer,
person performing work under contractual agreement, or other person
working in a retail food establishment.
FOOD HANDLER'S COURSE — A food handler's course or comparable
nationally recognized food handler's course that promotes good public
health practices in serving safe food to the public. A passing score for this
typically three-hour course certifies the attendee for two years. Courses
must be attended in person; online courses are not acceptable.
FOOD MANAGER'S CERTIFICATION PROGRAM — A program offering a
food safety certificate by passing food safety certification examination
administered by an accredited certifying program recognized by the
§ 301-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-4
1:579
Conference for Food Protection. This typically eighteen-hour course
certifies the successful attendee for five years. Courses must be attended in
person; online courses are not acceptable.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD —
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption:
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Includes:
A food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature
control because it is in a form capable of supporting:
The rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms;
(1)
(2) The growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum; or
(3) In raw shell eggs, the growth of Salmonella enteritidis.
A.
Includes an animal food (a food of animal origin) that is raw or heattreated;
a food of plant origin that is heat-treated or consists of raw
seed sprouts; cut melons; and garlic and oil mixtures that are not
acidified or otherwise modified at a food processing plant in a way that
results in mixtures that do not support growth as specified under the
first subsection of this definition.
B.
Such as a restaurant; satellite or catered feeding location; catering
operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or
to a conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location;
conveyance used to transport people; institution; or food bank; and
A.
That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery
orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided
by common carriers.
B.
An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a
central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite
feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by
the health authority; or
A.
An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or
permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off the
premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
B.
All individuals and entities such as, but not limited to, the following:
CATERER — A business based in Oradell that prepares and serves
food at locations other than where said business is based.
(1)
C.
§ 302-4 ORADELL CODE § 302-4
1:580
RISK TYPE 1 ESTABLISHMENT, RISK TYPE 2 ESTABLISHMENT, and RISK
TYPE 3 ESTABLISHMENT — Risk classifications of food establishments as
defined by N.J.A.C. 8:24.
§ 302-5. License required.
All retail food establishments must obtain a retail food establishment
license from the Board of Health prior to opening. All retail food
establishments shall submit a completed Health License Application and
meet all requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:24 and any Board of Health
ordinance of the Borough of Oradell prior to issuance of such license.
Both the license and the current rating (i.e., "Satisfactory," "Conditional
Satisfactory" or "Unsatisfactory") shall be prominently displayed in
accordance with the requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:24.
§ 302-5.1. Food manager's certification course; food handler's
course required.
FROZEN FOOD MOBILE VENDORS — Includes all vehicles and
other means of conveyance that are peddling frozen foods,
including ice cream, from their vehicles or trucks to the public.
(2)
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — A food vendor and includes all trucks
and vehicles peddling coffee, hot and cold foods, beverages to the
public.
(3)
PACKAGED FOOD STORE — Shall include a pharmacy, liquor store,
video store, candy store, as well as any facilities located within
public places where beverages are sold or consumed on the
premises by the public.
(4)
SCHOOLS — Includes all public and private facilities, as well as
those with cafeterias managed by another company, including
nursery schools, private and public schools and day-care centers,
which serve food on the premises to those children who are
enrolled at the facilities.
(5)
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT — Includes all businesses within the
Borough of Oradell where food and beverages are consumed on
the premises, including sit-down restaurants, sit-down and take-out
restaurants, cafes and industrial cafeterias.
(6)
SNACK BAR — A business serving food located within another
business for the convenience of the patrons and providing food and
beverages on the premises for consumption.
(7)
TAKE-OUT FACILITY — Includes the operation of any business
within the Borough of Oradell where food is primarily carried off
the premises.
(8)
§ 302-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-5.1
1:581
§ 302-5.2. Unsatisfactory and conditional ratings.
A. No retail food establishments shall be granted a Board of Health license
unless the owner/manager and employee food handlers have been
certified in food safety in the following manner:
(1) The owner or manager on site of a Risk Type 3 establishment shall
be a certified food manager having successfully completed a Food
Manager's Certification Program described in § 302-4.
(2) The owner or manager on site of a Risk Type 2 establishment shall
be a certified food handler having successfully completed a Food
Handler's Course described in § 302-4.
(3) Employees in charge of other employees or directly involved in food
preparation must be certified food handlers.
(4) A sufficient number of employees and managers must be certified
to ensure that a certified food handler is present on each shift at all
times.
(5) Each nonprofit organization that prepares and serves potentially
hazardous food shall have at least one person from its organization
complete the food handler's course. The certified food handler must
be present when food is being prepared and/or served.
B. Each new owner of a retail food establishment is required to attend the
first certification course available and send a sufficient number of
employees for certification to comply with Subsection A(4) above. The
Oradell Board of Health shall issue a temporary retail food license,
which shall remain in effect for 90 days from the date of its issuance or
until the food manager's or food handler's course has been successfully
completed. For the issuance of a temporary retail food license, the retail
food establishment shall pay the normal license fee for its annual
license with an additional fee for the temporary license. Fee amounts
are as per schedule in § 302-5.3, Fees.
C. If there is no certified food handler or food manager present on any
particular shift, the retail food establishment shall be issued a court
summons for the violation of this section.
A. Any retail food establishment which receives an "Unsatisfactory" rating
from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall immediately
cease from serving any food or similar products until the licensee has
received a "Satisfactory" rating from the inspector conducting such
inspections.
B. Any retail food establishment which receives two "Conditional
Satisfactory" ratings within any twelve-month period shall have its
owner or manager appear at the next meeting of the Oradell Board of
Health to show cause why its license shall not be suspended for failing
to operate its premises in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:24 and this
§ 302-5.1 ORADELL CODE § 302-5.2
1:582
§ 302-5.3. Fees.
Each licensee shall pay a license fee for the issuance of a license to operate
a retail food establishment or other business in the Borough of Oradell as
set forth in § 115-17 of the Oradell Borough Code.
§ 302-5.4. Expiration.
A retail food establishment license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire annually on December 31 of each year and application
for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with the required fee, prior
to February 1 of each year. Failure to obtain a license for the new calendar
year by January 31 will result in a surcharge (late fee) of $500.
§ 302-5.5. License nontransferable.
A retail food establishment license issued by another Board of Health is not
transferable as to another license.
§ 302-5.6. Temporary license.
Chapter 302 of the Borough of Oradell. Failure of the establishment to
adhere to this rule will result in a surcharge of $500 on the new license.
C. In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting the
inspections shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for the
violation of N.J.A.C. 8:24, this Chapter 302 of the Borough of Oradell,
and any other applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey.
D. Retail food establishments requiring more than one reinspection as a
result of being issued a "Conditional" or "Unsatisfactory" rating will be
assessed a reinspection fee for each reinspection required after the first
reinspection until the establishment achieves a "Satisfactory" rating.
Payment of reinspection fee shall be made prior to the next
reinspection. For fee, see § 305-5.3, Fees.
A. Temporary thirty-day license.
(1) Temporary thirty-day license issued at license renewal. For fees,
see § 302-5.3, Fees. This license is issued to establishments not in
compliance with food course requirements at time of license
renewal and is issued in addition to annual license. Annual license
is held until the establishment is in compliance with N.J.A.C. 8:24
and this Chapter 302 of the Borough of Oradell. If compliance is not
met by March 1 of the licensing year, the establishment will be
closed until it is in compliance, at which time annual license will be
issued.
(2) Temporary thirty-day license issued to new establishments. For
fees, see § 302-5.3, Fees. This license is issued to new food
establishments that are not in compliance with N.J.A.C. 8:24 and
this Chapter 302 of the Borough of Oradell when the
§ 302-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-5.6
1:583
establishment's thirty-day temporary license has expired. This
license is issued to enable the establishment to operate until the
owner or manager appears at the next Board of Health meeting to
provide just cause as to why the establishment should be allowed
to remain open.
(3) Temporary thirty-day license issued for establishments in violation
of chapter. For fees, see § 302-5.3, Fees. Any retail food
establishment found to be in violation of N.J.A.C. 8:24 or this
Chapter 302 of the Borough of Oradell may, at the Board of Health's
discretion, be issued a temporary thirty-day license to operate.
Renewal of said license may also be renewed at the Board of
Health's discretion.
B. Temporary sixty-day license. For fees, see § 302-5.3, Fees. This license
is issued to new food establishments that do not meet food course
requirements at time of opening. If food courses are available and
course requirements have not been met within the sixty-day period, the
owner must appear at the next Board of Health meeting to provide just
cause as to why the establishment should remain open.
C. Temporary event retail food establishment licenses. Temporary event
retail food establishment licenses may be issued by the Board of Health.
The licenses shall designate the location where food will be served and
shall not be transferable. Licenses must be obtained from the Board of
Health two weeks prior to the event and fees paid. Nonprofit
organizations are exempt from fees under this section. In order to
obtain such license, the following information must be provided: date
and length of function; type of food being prepared; establishment
name and address where all food supplies are being purchased; and
approximate number of people being served.
(1) One-to-three-day temporary event retail food establishment
license. A one-to-three-day temporary event retail food
establishment license may be issued by the Board of Health, which
shall be effective for the one-to-three-day period designated on the
license application. For fee, see § 302-5.3, Fees.
(2) Four-to-seven-day temporary event retail food establishment
license. A four-to-seven-day temporary event retail food
establishment license may be issued by the Board of Health, which
shall be effective for the four-to-seven-day period designated on the
license application. For fee, see § 302-5.3, Fees.
D. Investigation required prior to issuance of temporary event retail food
establishment licenses. Upon receipt of an application for a special
event in which food will be served to the public, the Health Department
shall conduct an investigation into the plans for preparation and food
service, including qualifications of food handlers and the type of
equipment to be used. Upon preliminary satisfactory evidence of
compliance with this article and N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., the Health
§ 302-5.6 ORADELL CODE § 302-5.6
1:584
§ 302-5.7. Nursery schools.
Nursery schools preparing food or representatives of the nursery schools
preparing food must take the food handler's course.
§ 302-5.8. Suspension or revocation.
A license or approval of license may be suspended or revoked for any
violation of any provision of this chapter or code after an opportunity for a
hearing by the Board of Health or its authorized representative.
§ 302-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 302-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on March 9, 2015.
Department shall approve the application for the temporary food
establishment license. Upon on-site inspection the day of the temporary
event, the temporary food establishment license will be issued to the
applicant. Based on the Registered Environmental Health Specialist's
investigation, a food handler's certificate may be necessary in order
to obtain a temporary food establishment license. All applications for
special event temporary food establishment licenses must be completed
and submitted to the Health Department at least 10 calendar days prior
to the event.
E. Farmer's market temporary event food establishment license. A
farmer's market temporary event retail food establishment license may
be issued by the Board of Health to Oradell Borough-approved vendors
for their participation in the farmer's market for each Oradell Boroughdesignated
farmer's market season. The license shall not be
transferable. Licenses must be obtained from the Board of Health two
weeks prior to the vendor's participation and fees paid. Nonprofit
organizations are exempt from fees under this section. In order to apply
for such license, the following information must be provided: type of
food being offered for sale at the farmer's market; and the
establishment name and address from which all food items are being
obtained or originate. For fee, see § 302-5.3, Fees.
§ 302-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-7
1:585
Chapter 304
POULTRY, PIGEONS AND OTHER FOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 300. Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 301.
§ 304-1. Keeping of live poultry, pigeons or other fowl prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain any live poultry, pigeons or other fowl,
whether for commercial or noncommercial purposes, within the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 304-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Oradell Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The health officer employed or contracted by the
Borough of Oradell consistent with N.J.A.C. § 8:52-4.1 or his/her authorized
representative or designee.
PERSON — For purposes of this chapter, an individual, partnership,
cooperative, association, corporation, personal representative, receiver,
trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
POULTRY, PIGEONS or OTHER FOWL — Includes all live chickens,
roosters, ducks, pigeons, geese or other poultry or fowl. Domestic birds
such as canaries, parakeets and parrots are not included.
§ 304-3. Enforcement.
A. The enforcement authority for this chapter shall be the Health Officer
or his/her designee.
B. The Health Officer may, after giving proper identification, inspect any
matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident, or
event as necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer in the enforcement of
this chapter, and the Health Officer may request the assistance of the
Oradell Police Department or other police agency or peace officer when
necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner prescribed by
law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter.
§ 302-7 ORADELL CODE § 304-4
1:586
§ 304-4. Grace period.
Any person already keeping or maintaining any live poultry, pigeons or
other fowl, whether for commercial or noncommercial purposes, within the
Borough of Oradell as of the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt
from penalty under this chapter for a period of one year. After this oneyear
grace period, this chapter shall apply to all persons in the Borough of
Oradell.
§ 304-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 304-6. Severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter be adjudged invalid,
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole or any other section or provision hereof.
Chapter 305
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
§ 305-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a health nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyance or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
Enforcing Official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Department of Health
in removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby adopted.
A. A person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than
$350 for the second violation, and not less than $500 for the third and
each subsequent violation. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal
Court of Oradell or before such other judicial officer having authority
under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Each live chicken, rooster, duck, pigeon, goose or other poultry or fowl
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 304-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-2
1:587
§ 305-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of Chapter 305, Public Health Nuisances, have been placed on
file in the Office of the Borough Clerk upon the introduction of this chapter
and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 305-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable for a penalty of not less than $100, and
not more than $1,000 per day for each violation.
§ 305-4. Definitions.
Definitions as used in this chapter.
ENFORCING OFFICIALS — Includes the Health Officer or other Official
authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this chapter.
PERSON — Includes as individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership and their agents or employees.
§ 305-5. Nuisances declared.
The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
A. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become detrimental
or a menace in the health of the inhabitants of this municipality.
B. (Reserved)
C. Pollution or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution of any waters in this municipality in such manner as
to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this municipality,
either in their health, comfort or property.
D. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as to
cause injury detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
municipality or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
E. The growth, existence, or presence of ragweed on any plot of land, lot,
highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place.
F. The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within 20 feet of any
property line.
G. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
§ 305-2 ORADELL CODE § 305-5
1:588
§ 305-6. Nuisances unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or allow
any nuisance, as declared and described in this chapter.
§ 305-7. Proper heating of apartments.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat
to any building designed to be occupied or occupied as a residence by more
than two families to fail to supply heat from the first day of October in each
year to the first day of May of the succeeding year in such manner that the
temperature of said building where one or more persons reside shall always
be kept at 68° F. or above, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 305-8. Prohibition of certain noises or sounds.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or suffer or permit to be
made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
it or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in this municipality any
unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human voice or by any other
means or methods which are physically annoying to persons or which are so
harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place
as to occasion physical discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health,
peace and comfort of the inhabitants of this municipality or any number
thereof.
§ 305-9. Prohibited lease or rental of certain buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or otherwise permit the
occupancy of any building as a residence or for any person to reside in any
building as its owner which:
H. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and to
which flies may have access or in which fly larvae or pupae breed or
exist.
I. Depositing, accumulating or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have access
or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects
or rodents in or on any land, premises, building or other place.
A. Is not adequately and properly ventilated.
B. Fails to provide potable water at sufficient pressure and quantity for
each family unit from a public supply approved by the State Department
of Health or a private supply approved by the Enforcing Official.
C. Does not have plumbing fixtures, consisting or a kitchen sink, bathtub
or shower, lavatory and flush toilet, connected to the potable water
supply.
§ 305-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-9
1:589
§ 305-10. Spitting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or
upon any part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public
conveyance.
§ 305-11. Inspection of premises.
All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to inspection by
the Board of Health or the Enforcing Official if the Board or that official has
reason to believe that any section of this chapter is being violated.
§ 305-12. Hindering of officials prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Board of Health or the Enforcing Official from having full access
to any place or premises upon which a violation of this chapter is believed
to exist.
§ 305-13. Abatement of nuisances.
Whenever a nuisance, as declared by § 305-5 of this chapter, is found on
any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate
the same within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than
five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be
left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place.
If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily, such
notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or occupant
thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered
proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
§ 305-14. Notice for nuisances on public property or highway.
Whenever a nuisance, as declared by § 305-5 of this chapter, is found on any
public property or on any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice, in writing, shall be given to the person in charge thereof to remove
or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If such
person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified therein,
the Board of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in the manner
as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing on private
premises or place.
D. Does not have facilities for the discharge of all household liquid wastes
into a public sewerage system approved by the State Department of
Health or into a private sewerage system approved by the Enforcing
Officer.
§ 305-9 ORADELL CODE § 305-15
1:590
§ 305-15. Abatement of nuisance by Board of Health.
If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
section, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified therein
and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health shall
proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a
summary by such means as said Board shall deem proper.
§ 305-16. Recovery of costs by Board of Health.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance, as declared by § 305-5
of this chapter, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such
nuisance to exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who,
after notice and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and
abate the same within the time specified in such notice.
§ 305-17. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Health or
its Enforcing Official.
Chapter 311
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 34.
Fees — See Ch. 115.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 170.
§ 305-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-17
1:591

ARTICLE I
Parks and Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-311]
§ 311-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated herein below:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Oradell, New Jersey.
PARK — Any area in the Borough devoted to activities or passive recreation
and includes, but is not limited to, those areas set forth in Schedule B.69
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PLAYGROUND — Any area in the Borough devoted to active or passive
recreation and includes, but is not limited to, tennis courts, skating ponds,
basketball courts and baseball, football and soccer fields, as noted in
Schedule C.70
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn,
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any
size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles
in service of the Borough.
§ 311-2. References.
§ 311-3. Prohibition; posting of signs; enforcement; violations and
penalties.
A. New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq., April 15,
2006.
B. Chapter 170, Parks and Playgrounds, of the Borough of Oradell Code.
C. Section 240-6.5K, CR Conservation/Recreation Zone (recreation,
watershed, open space), of the Borough of Oradell Code.
D. Section 115-16 of Chapter 115, Fees, of the Borough of Oradell Code.
A. As used in this section, "smoke" or "smoking" shall mean the use of a
lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or substance which
contains tobacco and/or other similar products.
B. No person shall smoke within 10 feet of or on any park, playground or
recreational facility that is owned, operated or leased by the Borough of
Oradell. Such areas include:
(1) Grant Field;
69.Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Borough offices.
70.Editor's Note: Schedule C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 311-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-3
1:593
(2) Hoffman Field;
(3) Memorial Field;
(4) Doug Parcells Athletic Complex;
(5) Oradell Swim Club;
(6) Hague Park;
(7) Lotus Woods;
(8) Ridgewood Avenue Woods;
(9) Van Buskirk Island; and
(10) Elizabeth Street Park.
C. A "no smoking" sign shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously
posted at every entrance to every such park, playground and/or
recreational facility where smoking is prohibited by this article. The
sign(s) shall have the words "no smoking within 10 feet of this facility"
in lettering that is not less than two inches in height, and shall contain
the international no smoking sign or symbol.
D. The provisions of this section may be enforced by any member of the
Borough Police Department or any inspector of the Borough of Oradell.
E. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
summonsed and may be subject, at the discretion of the court, to the
following penalties:
(1) A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation.
(2) A fine not exceeding $200, but no less than $100, for the second
violation.
(3) A fine not exceeding $500, but no less than $200, for the third
violation.
§ 311-3 ORADELL CODE § 311-3
1:594
ARTICLE II
Sale of Tobacco and Nicotine Delivery Products
[Adopted 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01 (BOH)]
§ 311-4. Sale and distribution of tobacco products.
§ 311-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Oradell Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The health officer employed or contracted by the
Borough of Oradell consistent with N.J.A.C. 8:52-4.1 or his/her authorized
representative or designee.
A. No person shall sell tobacco or nicotine delivery products in the
Borough of Oradell unless the sale of such products is controlled by an
employee of the establishment. A person may only sell tobacco or
nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange between
the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays or self-service
devices of tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall be prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products to any person under the age of 21 years.
C. Tobacco retailers shall conspicuously post and reasonably maintain
signs having a minimum size of six inches by eight inches where
tobacco or nicotine delivery products are displayed and at all checkout
counters notifying customers that proof of age is required to purchase
tobacco or nicotine delivery products.
D. Any person selling tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall verify by
means of government-issued photographic identification containing the
bearer's date of birth that no person purchasing or receiving the
tobacco or nicotine containing products is younger than 21 years of
age. Further, no clerk shall sell tobacco or nicotine delivery products to
a person less than 21 years of age presenting a note or any form of
communication from any person, including an adult.
E. No person or tobacco retailer selling tobacco or nicotine delivery
products shall allow an employee to sell or distribute such products
until the employee has read the Borough ordinances and state laws
pertaining to the sale or distribution of tobacco and nicotine delivery
products and has signed a statement that the employee has read such
ordinances and state laws. Such form statement will be supplied by the
Health Department and the signed original statement will be filed with
the Health Department and a copy shall be kept on file by the tobacco
retailer and made available for review.
§ 311-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-5
1:595
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS — Products which are designed to
deliver nicotine or vapor, including, but not limited to, what are commonly
known as "e-cigarettes" or other types of electronic smoking devices, usable
as a substitute for cigarettes or other forms of tobacco but excluding
nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.
PERSON — For purposes of this article, shall mean an individual,
partnership, cooperative, association, corporation, personal representative,
receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession, or place at which sales of tobacco or nicotine delivery
products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.
§ 311-6. Enforcement.
§ 311-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The enforcement authority for this article shall be the Health Officer or
his/her designee.
B. The Health Officer may, after giving proper identification, inspect any
matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident, or
event as necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer in the enforcement of
this article, and the Health Officer may request the assistance of the
Oradell Police Department or other police agency or peace officer when
necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner prescribed by
law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
A. A person who violates the provisions of this article, including any
person who actually sells or otherwise distributes tobacco or nicotine
delivery product(s), shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than
$250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation,
and not less than $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.
Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of Oradell or before
such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
B. Each sale of tobacco and or nicotine delivery product to any person
under the age of 21 shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 311-5 ORADELL CODE § 311-7
1:596
Appendix
Chapter A316
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235, Part 1. Trees — See Ch. 270.
§ A316-1. Grant of consent.
The Borough hereby grants to the company its consent to place in, upon,
along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the Borough poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors
and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Borough of
a cable television system and cable communications system. The Borough
reserves the right to adopt now or in the future similar ordinances granting
consent to one or more companies according to law.
§ A316-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meanings or
definitions of terms are supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.5) and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.) and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey 1972, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The written application of the company to the Borough, all
amendments thereto and all oral testimony of the company at the hearings,
insofar as same does not conflict with applicable federal and state
regulations.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Oradell, County of Bergen, in the State of
New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance, known as
"Cablevision Systems Corporation," doing business as "Cablevision of New
Jersey."
FRANCHISE — A nonexclusive franchise or consent.
§ A316-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the franchise herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
§ 311-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A316-3
1:597
the Act. Said hearing having been held as above stated, and said hearing
having been fully open to the public and the Borough having received at
said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to
receive this franchise, the Borough hereby finds that the company possesses
the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications
and that the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ A316-4. Duration; amendments.
§ A316-5. Expiration; renewal.
§ A316-6. Fee.
A. The consent herein granted shall expire eight years from the effective
date of this ordinance.
B. Upon written notice to the company, the Borough may, if consistent with
state and federal law, elect to adopt terms and conditions relating to
programming or the rates for such programming which it deems to be
more favorable than the programming or rates contained in its
agreement with the company, provided that such programming or rates
are included in a franchise, ordinance or agreement held as of May 9,
1988, by the company with another municipality within Bergen County,
New Jersey, or any renewal or extension thereof, and the Borough also
adopts other terms and conditions contained in such other ordinance or
agreement as are requested by the company. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the company from
implementing different periodic marketing promotions within the
municipalities in which it operates or otherwise shall require the
company to implement such plans with the Borough. As soon as
practicable after the giving of notice hereunder by the Borough, the
company and the Borough shall prepare such amendments to the
ordinance as may be necessary to incorporate any provisions
contemplated above in the company's ordinance in the Borough.
A. The consent granted herein shall be subject to renewal for a period of
five years only after review of the performance of the company and the
adequacy of the terms of the consent herein granted in a full public
proceeding.
B. The company shall be required to petition the Board for a certificate of
approval authorizing continued operation during the period following
expiration of the consent granted herein until such a time that a
decision is made by the Borough governing body relative to the renewal
of said consent. Such petition shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of the consent granted herein.
A. The company shall pay to the Borough an annual fee of 2% per annum
of its gross subscriber revenues, as provided in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-20a.
§ A316-3 ORADELL CODE § A316-6
1:598
§ A316-7. Applicability.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Borough and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A316-8. Completion of construction.
The company shall complete significant construction within six months of
the date upon which it receives a certificate of compliance from the Federal
Communications Commission. The company shall be required to complete
construction within the service area described herein within six months
thereafter. The timetable as presented in the application incorporated
herein has been determined to be reasonable by the Borough of Oradell.
§ A316-9. Operation; extension; emergency broadcasts.
The company shall commence operations upon completion of the
construction and installation of the system as hereinabove provided.
§ A316-10. Construction and maintenance requirements.
B. Said fee shall become operative upon the effective date hereof and shall
remain in effect during the term herein specified, unless amended as
herein provided.
C. The Borough reserves the right to charge such increased annual fee as
may at any time hereafter be authorized by statute or to petition for an
increase in such franchise fee as provided in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30c.
A. The company shall be required to proffer service to any person whose
residence or business is located in the franchise area described herein,
in accordance with the proposal for the provision of services as
described in the application. Any additional extension of the system
which is necessary in the future but not contemplated in the application
shall be made in accordance with the office's live television policy now
or hereafter promulgated.
B. The company shall be required to have the capability to override at the
head end the audio portion of the system in order to permit the
broadcasting of emergency messages by the Borough Council.71
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surface, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in
the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding "Smart Growth" rules, added 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-01, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-13.
§ A316-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A316-10
1:599
§ A316-11. Local office; studio.
§ A316-12. Complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough of Oradell pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints
shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the Borough
shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place,
the company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove,
relay and relocate its equipment; subject, however, to the prior
approval of the Board.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon the request of
the Borough, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances, subject to the prior approval
of the Borough. In addition, the company shall, upon prior written
notice of at least 72 hours given by any person or entity holding an
appropriate building permit, temporarily raise or lower its cables to
permit such authorized construction, subject to the prior approval of
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners. The expense thereof shall be
borne by the company.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Borough so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's wires and cables.
E. Relocation of alarms. The company shall be obligated to pay for the cost
of the removal and relocation of the Borough's fire alarm system or any
private alarm system as may be required by the company's installation,
if such rearrangement of municipal facilities was neither contemplated
nor necessary in the absence of such installation by the cable company.
A. During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the
quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such
local business office shall be open during normal business hours and in
no event less than 9:00 am. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
B. The company shall maintain a studio within the area to be serviced, the
location of which shall be discussed with the Borough prior to the time
the same is established, for color and black-and-white television, that
shall be open and staffed not less than four hours each day, seven days a
week.
§ A316-10 ORADELL CODE § A316-13
1:600
§ A316-13. Performance bond.
Upon acceptance of the consent and prior to the commencement of
construction, the company shall give a bond to the Borough of Oradell,
which bond shall be in the penal amount of $25,000, which is equal to the
estimated cost of construction of the cable television system as submitted
by the company in its application. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A316-14. Rates.
§ A316-15. Liability insurance.
Prior to the commencement of construction or the acceptance of any
subscriptions, the company shall provide the Borough with certificates
evidencing insurance naming the Borough as an insured and insuring
against liability for any death, personal injury or property damage or other
liability arising out of the company's construction and operation of its CATV
system. The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect,
at its sole expense, during the term of this franchise minimum insurance
of $500,000 for bodily injury or death as to any one person, $1,000,000 for
bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident and $100,000 for
property damage.
§ A316-16. Incorporation of application; copies on file; conflicts
with application; interpretation.
A. The Borough, having determined the rates proposed in the application
for cable television reception service are reasonable, approves them as
presented.
B. In the event that future governmental regulations so permit, a
discounted rate shall be offered to senior citizens, handicapped persons
and shut-ins.
A. The company's application, as hereinabove defined, is hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this ordinance by reference and
shall be binding upon the company.
B. A copy of said application is on file and may be examined in the office of
the Clerk of the Borough of Oradell.
C. In the event of an inconsistency between the provisions of this
ordinance and the company's application, the ordinance shall prevail,
and such inconsistency shall not invalidate this ordinance. However,
nothing contained in this ordinance shall be interpreted in such a
manner as to release the company from any of its representations
contained in its application and testimony, insofar as the same does not
conflict with applicable federal and state statutes and regulations.
§ A316-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A316-17
1:601
§ A316-17. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A316-18. Incorporation of future provisions.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent, consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A316-19. When effective.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality receives written notification that the company accepts the
terms and conditions herein.
Chapter A317
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
§ A317-1. Permission granted.
Subject to the provisions of § A317-4, permission and consent are hereby
granted to New Jersey Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns,
to erect, construct, reconstruct, remove, inspect, maintain and operate
its communications facilities, including underground conduits, subways,
cables and related appurtenances, aerial and buried cables, wires and
related appurtenances, poles, posts, guys, pedestals, manholes and all other
related appurtenances in, through, upon, along, over, under and across all
of the various streets, roads, avenues, highways, bridges and waterways
and parts thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect necessary
street openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and
other facilities in this Borough for its local and through lines and
communications facilities in connection with the transaction of its business.
All of the various streets, roads, avenues, highways, bridges and waterways
and parts thereof, throughout their entire length in this Borough, are
hereby designated and prescribed for the uses and purposes of said
company as aforementioned.
§ A317-2. Location of poles, posts and pedestals.
All poles, posts or pedestals hereafter to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, maintained and operated shall be located and placed back of
and adjacent to the curblines where shown by official maps of this Borough
§ A316-17 ORADELL CODE § A317-2
1:602
and within 18 inches thereof or as may be mutually agreed to by both
parties, and at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts or
pedestals of said company, its successors and assigns, and, where there are
no curblines, at other convenient points or places upon the streets, road,
avenues and highways as may be mutually agreed to by both parties.
§ A317-3. Placement of underground conduits; manholes; cable
burial.
§ A317-4. Map or plan to be submitted; permit required.
A. Underground conduits shall be placed below the surface of said streets,
roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof and, with the exception
of lateral branches to curb poles and property lines and other facilities,
said conduits generally shall not be constructed more than 10 feet from
the curbline, unless obstructions make it necessary to deviate from
such course or unless the parties mutually agreed to another location.
All underground conduits shall be placed at least 18 inches below the
surface.
B. All manholes shall be located at such points along the line of the
subways or underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient
for placing, maintaining and operating the cables and other conductors
and appurtenances which said company may, from time to time place in
said subways or underground conduits and shall be so constructed as to
conform to the cross-sectional and longitudinal grade of the surface so
as not to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
C. Said company may bury its cables and associated equipment, fixtures
and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various streets, roads,
avenues and highways and parts thereof and at such locations as shall
be mutually agreed upon by the parties in this Borough for its local and
through lines and communications facilities.
A. Before proceeding with any of the work under this ordinance, said
company shall file with the Mayor and Council of this Borough a map or
plan showing the location and size of any such facilities, which map or
plan shall be first approved by said Mayor and Council or its authorized
representatives.
B. Prior to the opening or excavating of any streets, roads, avenues and
highways and parts thereof for the purpose of laying, maintaining and
operating its underground systems after the approval of the map and
plan as aforementioned, the said company shall first obtain a permit for
such opening or excavation upon payment of such reasonable fee
therefor as may be required to cover the costs of administration and
inspection and as provided by any ordinance regulating openings and
excavations of streets.
§ A317-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A317-5
1:603
§ A317-5. Restoration of disturbed soil or plantings.
The surface of the streets, roads, avenues and highways and any pavement
or flagging taken up or soil and/or planting disturbed by said company in
building its lines shall be restored to as good a condition as it was before
the commencement of work thereon; provided, however, that if the road
opening or similar permit fee shall include a charge for highway restoration
by the municipality and/or county, the company shall not be required to
do the restoration. No highways shall be encumbered for a longer period
than shall be necessary to execute the work. Such restoration shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough after an inspection by its authorized
representative upon completion of the work.
§ A317-6. Change in location of poles, pedestals and
appurtenances.
Wherever the curbline shall be established on streets where one does not
now exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in other to
widen an existing street or highway, said company shall change the location
of its poles, pedestals and related appurtenances at its own expense so that
the same shall be back of and adjacent to the new curbline so established,
upon receipt of notice from the municipal officials that the curbline has been
so established, so long as the Borough has acted with reasonable care in
establishing the new curbline and providing notice thereof.
§ A317-7. Companies to jointly use poles, posts and pedestals.
New Jersey Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, and any
other companies or corporations having legal authority to erect and
maintain poles, posts or pedestals may jointly use the same poles, posts or
pedestals, provided that they can agree to do so, upon any of the streets,
roads, avenues and highways in this Borough.
§ A317-8. Space to be provided on poles for Borough use.
Said telephone company shall provide, free of charge to this Borough, as
long as this ordinance continues in effect, space on its poles, so long as
said poles are occupied by said company, and space in its main subways
(not exceeding one clear duct of standard size) to accommodate the wires
or electrical conductors required for signal control in connection with its
police patrol, fire alarm telegraph signal systems and traffic signal control
systems, but not to include circuits for the supply of electrical energy for the
traffic or other signals; provided, however, that such use by the municipality
shall not interfere with the equipment or operation of said company and
said Borough shall indemnify and save harmless said telephone company
from all claims or suits for damages arising from the attachment to its
poles or the location in its main subways of any such crossarms, wires
or electrical conductors used by this Borough. Before proceeding with
the attachment of its wires to the poles or the placing of its electrical
conductors in the main subways or manholes of said company, either by
§ A317-5 ORADELL CODE § A317-8
1:604
itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work,
this Borough shall give said company 30 days' notice, in writing. All such
work shall be performed under the supervision of said company. If any
or all of said street or highways are later taken over by the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the County of Bergen or the State of New Jersey
Department of Transportation, then such Board of Chosen Freeholders or
the Department of Transportation may use the same clear duct of standard
size referred to for their respective police patrol, fire alarm telegraph and
traffic signal control systems in conjunction with the Borough's use thereof
for similar purposes, but only after making satisfactory arrangements as
may be necessary with the Borough and the telephone company for the full
protection of each other's interests.
§ A317-9. Duration of franchise.
Following final passage of this ordinance and acceptance thereof by said
company, the permission and consent granted herein shall continue and be
in force for a period of 50 years from the date of its approval by the New
Jersey Board of Public Utilities Commission as required by law. Throughout
the full term of this ordinance, said company, its successors and assigns,
shall furnish safe, adequate and proper service within this Borough and
keep and maintain its property and equipment in such condition as to enable
it to do so.
§ A317-10. Construal.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant unto said New Jersey
Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, an exclusive right or to
prevent the granting of permission and consent to other companies for like
purposes on any of the streets, roads, avenues or highways of this Borough.
§ A317-11. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — Shall be held to apply to and include any form of municipality
or government into which this Borough or any part thereof, may at any time
hereafter be changed, annexed or merged, and the term "Borough" or any
other term herein used in referring to the governing body of this Borough
shall be held to apply to and include the governing body of such other form
of municipality.
§ A317-12. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
existing communications facilities and related appurtenances heretofore
erected, constructed, reconstructed, maintained and operated by New
Jersey Bell Telephone Company or its predecessors.
§ A317-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A317-13
1:605
§ A317-13. Supersession.
Upon adoption, this ordinance will cancel and supersede an ordinance
enacted April 2, 1928, by the Borough of Oradell.
§ A317-14. Expenses to be paid by company.
Said company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising done in
connection with the passage of this ordinance within 30 days after the date
of its going into effect.
§ A317-15. Notice to be provided; acceptance to be filed.
Upon passage of this ordinance in accordance with law, the Borough Clerk
shall provide said company with written notice thereof by certified mail.
Said company shall file with the Borough Clerk its written acceptance of
said ordinance within 30 days of the receipt of said notice.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-01 2-22-2005 Court amendment Ch. 16
05-02 2-22-2005 Public and private property:
parking amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
05-03 4-26-2005 Parks and playgrounds:
Recreation Committee
Ch. 170, Art. II
05-04 4-26-2005 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 165 (footnote
only)
05-05 3-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
05-06 4-26-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-07 4-26-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 115
05-08 Budget appropriations NCM
05-09 Bond NCM
05-10 6-7-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-11 6-28-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
§ A317-13 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:606
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-12 6-28-2005 Parks and playgrounds:
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
05-13 7-26-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-14 8-9-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-15 7-26-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-16 9-27-2005 Criminal history record
checks
Ch. 102
05-17 7-26-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
05-18 7-26-2005 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
05-19 Bond NCM
05-20 8-9-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
05-21 7-26-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-22 Salaries NCM
05-23 Salaries NCM
05-24 Not approved
05-25 10-25-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 234A
05-26 Bond NCM
05-27 10-25-2005 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 130
05-28 Not approved
05-29 Not approved
05-30 12-6-2005 Salaries NCM
06-01 3-28-2006 Cable television franchise
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 06-13
06-02 2-28-2006 Board of Health amendment Ch. 34
06-03 Not approved
06-04 3-28-2006 Yard and autumn leaf waste Ch. 290
06-05 3-28-2006 Parks and playgrounds:
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:607
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-06 5-23-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
06-07 4-25-2006 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 234A
06-08 6-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM (temporary
measure)
06-09 Adoption pending
06-10 Financial NCM
06-11 5-23-2006 Pet solid waste disposal Ch. 107 Art. II
06-12 Bond NCM
06-13 6-27-2006 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A316
06-14 6-27-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
06-15 Not adopted
06-16 Not adopted
06-17 12-19-2006 Committees Ch. 92
06-18 12-19-2006 Committees amendment Ch. 92
06-19 7-25-2006 Purchase of computer
hardware and software
NCM
06-20 Financial NCM
06-21 9-26-2006 Contracts and agreements
amendment
Ch. 14
06-22 9-26-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
06-23 10-24-2006 Construction fees
amendment
Ch. 115
06-24 10-24-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
06-25 Bond NCM
06-26 10-24-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
06-27 10-24-2006 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 47, Art. V
06-28 Not adopted
06-29 12-19-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
06-30 12-19-2006 Bingo and raffle fees
amendment
Ch. 115
§ DL-1 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:608
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-31 12-19-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
07-01 2-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
07-02 Financial NCM
07-03 Financial NCM
07-04 Financial NCM
07-05 Financial NCM
07-06 5-29-2007 Repeal of Shade Tree
Commission
Ch. 270
(reference only)
07-07 5-29-2007 Committees amendment
(Shade Tree Committee)
Ch. 92
07-08 4-24-2007 Committees amendment
(Senior Citizens Advisory
Committee)
Ch. 92
07-09 Financial NCM
07-10 Budget appropriations NCM
07-11 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not adopted
07-12
Bond NCM
07-13 8-28-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
07-14 8-21-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240
07-15 Salaries NCM
07-16 8-21-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
07-17 Bond NCM
07-18 Bond NCM
07-19 Bond NCM
07-20 8-21-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
07-21 9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
07-22 9-25-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
07-23 11-27-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 115
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:609
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-24 12-18-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
07-25 11-27-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
07-26 12-18-2007 Security alarms amendment Ch. 210
07-27 Bond NCM
08-01 2-26-2008 Committees amendment
(Senior Citizens Advisory
Committee)
Ch. 92
08-02 2-26-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 115
08-03 3-25-2008 Outdoor cafes amendment Ch. 80
08-04 Financial NCM
08-05 5-27-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 240, footnote
only
08-06 Financial NCM
08-07 Financial NCM
08-08 Financial NCM
08-09 7-22-2008 Trees Ch. 270
08-10 7-22-2008 Shade Tree Committee
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. VI
08-11 7-22-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
08-12 8-26-2008 Environmental Committee
amendment
Ch. 22
08-13 Salaries NCM
08-14 Salaries NCM
08-15 12-23-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
08-16 Bond NCM
08-17 12-23-2008 Establishing position of
Coordinator of OEM and
setting stipend
NCM
08-18 12-23-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 54, Art. I
09-311
(BOH)
4-13-2009 Smoking and tobacco
products: parks and
recreational facilities
Ch. 311, Art. I
09-01 Financial NCM
§ DL-1 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:610
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-02 4-28-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 240
09-03 4-28-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 198
09-04 Financial NCM
09-05 7-28-2009 Public Advocate for Zoning
Board of Adjustment
Ch. 105
09-06 7-28-2009 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 165
09-07 Financial NCM
09-08 Financial NCM
09-09 Noise Not adopted
09-10 Financial NCM
10-1 (BOH) 12-20-2010 Cats amendment; dogs and
other animals
Chs. 107
(reference only);
300; 301
10-1
10-2
10-3 3-23-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 115
10-4 NCM
10-5 9-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
10-6 NCM
10-7 7-13-2010 Street vacation NCM
10-8
10-9 Financial NCM
10-10 Land use amendment Not adopted
10-11 9-28-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 230, Part 1
10-12 Sewers amendment Not adopted
10-13 same as 10-5
10-14 Financial NCM
10-15 12-28-2010 Fees amendment; vehicles
and traffic amendment
Chs. 115; 280
11-1 (BOH) 7-11-2011 Public health nuisances Ch. 305
11-1 Financial NCM
11-2 Cell towers Postponed
11-3 Financial NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:611
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-4 5-24-2011 Sewers amendment Ch. 214
11-5 9-27-2011 Fire prevention amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 13-12
11-6 9-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
11-7 9-27-2011 Video Committee
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. II
11-8 9-27-2011 Recreation Program
Guidelines
Superseded by
Ord. No. 14-5
11-9 Land use and development Ch. 240
11-10 Cell towers Postponed
11-11 Financial NCM
12-1 2-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
12-2 Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee
Not adopted
12-3 Financial NCM
12-4 5-23-2012 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
12-5 5-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
12-6 Financial NCM
12-7 Financial NCM
12-8 7-24-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 115
12-9 7-24-2012 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 207
12-10 7-24-2012 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 165
12-11 9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
12-12 11-27-2012 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
12-13 11-27-2012 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
12-14 11-27-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 214
12-15 Not adopted
12-16 Financial NCM
§ DL-1 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:612
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-17 12-11-2012 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
12-18 Financial NCM
13-1 1-29-2013 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
13-2
13-3 2-26-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 115
13-4 Administrative Code Ch. 2
13-5 5-14-2013 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
13-6 Financial NCM
13-7 Financial NCM
13-8 Number not used
13-9 6-11-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 115
13-12 1-2-2014 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 121
14-2 4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
14-3 5-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 115
14-5 7-22-2014 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. II
14-6 7-22-2014 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 235
14-7 7-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
14-8 9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
14-9 10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
14-10 11-10-2014 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 2
14-11 11-10-2014 Personnel practices
amendment
Ch. 47A
14-12 11-10-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
14-13 12-16-2014 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. II
15-1 (BOH) 3-9-2015 Retail food establishments Ch. 302
15-2 3-10-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:613
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-3 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
15-4 5-26-2015 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 121
15-5 5-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 115
15-6 5-26-2015 Lease renewals NCM
15-7 5-26-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
15-8 7-28-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
15-9 8-11-2015 Bond NCM
15-10 10-27-2015 Towing and storage services
amendment
Ch. 266
15-11 10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
15-12 11-24-2015 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 95
15-13 11-24-2015 Personnel practices
amendment
Ch. 47A
15-14 11-24-2015 Tax map update fee NCM
15-15 11-24-2015 DPW parking spaces Ch. 166
15-16 12-15-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 115
16-01
(BOH)
5-9-2016 Smoking and tobacco: sale
of tobacco and nicotine
delivery products
Ch. 311, Art. II
16-02 4-26-2016 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 2
16-03 4-26-2016 Sewers amendment Ch. 214
16-04 4-26-2016 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
16-05 7-26-2016 Contracts and agreements
amendment
Ch. 14
16-06 7-26-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
16-07 8-16-2016 Bond NCM
16-08 8-16-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-09 9-27-2016 Refunding bond NCM
16-10 11-29-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
§ DL-1 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:614
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-11 11-29-2016 Bond NCM
16-12 11-29-2016 Fees amendment; peddling,
soliciting and canvassing
amendment
Ch. 115; Ch. 180
17-01
(BOH)
4-10-2017 Poultry, pigeons or other
fowl
Ch. 304
17-02 4-25-2017 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
17-03 5-23-2017 Towing and storage services
amendment
Ch. 266
17-04 5-23-2017 Retail businesses
amendment
Ch. 200
17-05 5-23-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
17-06 7-25-2017 Bond NCM
17-07 9-12-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
17-08 10-24-2017 Bond NCM
17-09 12-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
17-10 12-19-2017 Peddling, Soliciting and
Canvassing amendment
Ch. 180
17-11 12-19-2017 Bamboo Ch. 73
18-01
(BOH)
2-12-2018 Body Art Establishments Ch. 298
18-02 3-27-2018 Appropriation NCM
18-03 4-24-2018 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
18-04 6-26-2018 Bond NCM
18-05 7-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 280
18-06 7-17-2018 Retail Businesses
Amendment
Ch. 200
18-07 8-14-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
18-08 8-14-2018 Moving of Soil Amendment See Ch. 230
18-09 9-25-2018 Fees Amendment; Parking
Lots, Municipal Amendment
Ch. 115; Ch. 165
18-10 9-25-2018 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:615
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-11 10-9-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
18-12 10-23-2018 Stormwater Management:
Sump Pump Discharge
Ch. 234A, Art. II
18-13 10-9-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
18-14 11-27-2018 Licenses and Permits:
Recreation Participation
Permit
Ch. 104, Art. I
18-15 Pending Adoption
18-16 Pending Adoption
18-17 Pending Adoption
18-18 Pending Adoption
18-19 Pending Adoption
18-20 Pending Adoption
18-21 Pending Adoption
18-22 1-6-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 115
§ DL-1 ORADELL CODE § DL-1
1:616

BOROUGH OF ORADELL
BERGEN COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
ORDINANCE #19-03
This ordinance published herewith was introduced and passed upon first reading at a
meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, in the County of Bergen and State of New
Jersey, held on January 22, 2019. It will be further considered for final passage after public hearing
thereon, at a Public Meeting of said Borough Council to be held in the Town Hall, in said Borough,
on March 12 at 7:30 PM, and during the week prior to and up to and including the date of such
meeting, copies of said ordinance will be made available at the Clerk's Office in said Borough Hall to
the members of the general public who shall request the same.
 _________________________________________________
 LAURA J. LYONS, CPM, RMC, RPPO
 ADMINISTRATOR/MUNICIPAL CLERK
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE
# 19-03
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND CHAPTER 240 OF THE ORADELL BOROUGH CODE,
ENTITLED “LAND DEVELOPMENT,” AND THE ORADELL BOROUGH ZONING
MAP TO CREATE THE “AFFORDABLE HOUSING 1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE” AND
“AFFORDABLE HOUSING 2 RESIDENTIAL ZONE” AND THE STANDARDS
ASSOCIATED WITH THEM IN THE BOROUGH OF ORADELL
WHEREAS, the Governing Body of the Borough of Oradell seeks to create a realistic
opportunity for the development of affordable housing along New Milford Avenue;
WHEREAS, in furtherance of this goal, the Borough proposes to rezone Block 118 Lot 2,
Block 119 Lots 1, 9.01, 9.02, 9.03, 9.04, 9.05, 9.06, 10, 11, 12, and 13, and the adjoining Fey Place
right-of-way, in order to encourage inclusionary multi-family residential development.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Oradell, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, that Chapter 240, “Land Development” of the
Borough Code of the Borough of Oradell is hereby amended or supplemented as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 240, Article VI, Section 240-6.2.A. of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell entitled “Zones Designated: boundaries established” is hereby amended to add the
following new zone districts to the list of zone districts:
AH-1 Affordable Housing 1 Residential Zone
AH-2 Affordable Housing 2 Residential Zone
Section 2. Chapter 240, Article VI, Section 240-6.2.B. of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell “Zoning Map of the Borough of Oradell, New Jersey,” shall be amended to rezone Block
119 Lots, 9.01, 9.02, 9.03, 9.04, 9.05, 9.06, and the adjoining Fey Place right-of-way from the R4 Residential District to the AH-1 Affordable Housing 1 Residential Zone, and to rezone Block
118 Lot 2 and Block 119 Lots 1, 10, 11, 12, and 13 from the R-4 Residential District to the AH-2
Affordable Housing 2 Residential Zone, as shown on the accompanying Map.
Section 3. Chapter 240, Article VI, Section 240-6.5 of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell entitled “Use and Bulk Regulations” is hereby amended to include a new subsection N. as
follows:
N. AH-1 Affordable Housing 1 Residential Zone.
(1) Purpose. 
The purpose of the AH-1 Affordable Housing 1 Residential Zone is to create an
opportunity for the construction of low- and moderate-income housing in the Borough
of Oradell and thereby address the fair share housing obligation of the Borough of
Oradell under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act. This AH-1 Zone shall be additionally
regulated by the Borough of Oradell Affordable Housing Ordinance.
(2) Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the AH-1 Residential Zone are as
follows:
(a) Multi-family development.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include accessory uses that
are customary and incidental to the permitted uses in the AH-1 Residential Zone,
including but not limited to:
(a) Off-street parking in accordance with Chapter 240, Article VI.
(b) Decks, balconies and porches.
(c) Fences and walls, in accordance with the Oradell Fence Ordinance, Chapter
240, Article X.
(d) Ancillary recreation elements, such as a swimming pool, tennis courts and other
similar uses to only serve the residents of the complex and in accordance with
the Oradell General Requirements and Special Regulations Ordinance, Chapter
240, Article VII.
(e) Trash enclosures.
(f) Signs, in accordance with the Oradell Sign Ordinance, Chapter 240, Article XI.
(g) Outdoor lighting, in accordance with the Oradell General Requirements and
Special Regulations Ordinance, Chapter 240, Article VII.
(4) Affordable Housing.
(a) All multifamily residential developments constructed in the AH-1 Residential Zone
District shall be required to set aside a minimum percentage of units for affordable
housing. The minimum set aside shall be fifteen percent (15%) which shall be
provided as rental affordable units. When calculating the required number of
affordable units, any computation resulting in a fraction of a unit shall be rounded
upwards to the next whole number.
(b) All affordable units to be produced pursuant to this section shall comply with the
Borough’s Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 61 of the Borough Code, as
may be amended and supplemented, the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(“UHAC”)(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), or any successor regulation, and the
Borough’s Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, as may be amended from time to 
time. This includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements for all
affordable units:
[1] Low/Moderate Income Split: A maximum of 50% of the affordable units shall
be moderate-income units and a minimum of 50% of the affordable units shall
be low-income units. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very
low-income units, which shall be counted as part of the required number of
low-income units within the development.
[2] Bedroom Mix: If the development is not age-restricted, the following bedroom
mix shall apply:
[a] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units;
[b] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two bedroom
units;
[c] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be three
bedroom units; and
[d] The remaining units may be allocated among two and three bedroom units
at the discretion of the developer.
[3] Deed Restriction Period: All affordable units shall be deed restricted for a
period of 30 years from the date of the initial occupancy of each affordable
unit (the “Deed-Restriction Period”). The affordability controls shall expire
only after they are properly released by the Borough and/or the Borough’s
Administrative Agent at the Borough’s sole option in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 for rental units or N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5 for for-sale units..
[4] Administrative Agent: All affordable units shall be administered by a qualified
Administrative Agent paid for by the developer.
[5] Other Affordable Housing Unit Requirements: Developers shall also comply
with all the other requirements of the Borough’s Affordable Housing
Ordinance, including, but not limited to, (1) affirmative marketing
requirements, (2) candidate qualification and screening requirements, (3)
integrating the affordable units amongst the market rate units, and (4) unit
phasing requirements. Developers shall ensure that the affordable units are
dispersed between all of the buildings on its site, and shall identify the exact
location of each affordable unit at the time of site plan application.
(5) Area and Bulk Requirements. The area and bulk requirements for the uses allowed in
the AH-1 Residential Zone are set forth below.
(a) Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 1.5 acres.
(b) Lot Width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 75 feet.
(c) Density. There shall be a maximum gross density of 8 dwelling units per acre.
(d) Yards.
[1] Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet.
[2] Side Yard. No side yard shall be less than 25 feet.
[3] Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
(e) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 25 feet or two stories.
(f) Building Coverage. There shall be a maximum building coverage of 25%.
(g) Lot Coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 50%.
(6) Development Standards.
(a) Building Requirements.
[1] Building Design. In order to provide attractiveness, identity and individuality
to dwelling units, buildings and complexes of buildings within the entire zone
and to avoid the monotonous repetition of design elements and its undesirable
visual effects, the following design standards shall be utilized:
[a] Consistency among building materials and colors with the Borough’s
existing residential, historical and architectural characteristics.
[b] Harmonious relationship with other onsite features and buildings.
[c] Varying dwelling unit widths, staggering dwelling unit setbacks and
altering building heights and rooflines;
[d] No more than 30 feet of front or rear building wall permitted without
providing a break in the façade of an acceptable method of
articulation.
[e] Buildings with expansive blank walls on any facade are discouraged.
Side and rear elevations should receive architectural treatments
comparable to front facades.
[f] Varying architectural embellishments to roofs between dwelling units,
buildings or complexes of buildings including roof elements such as
dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys and similar elements,
provided that such are architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building;
[g] Varying decorative and architectural features at entrances, cornices,
windows and articulation between dwelling units, buildings or
complexes of buildings, provided that such are architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building.
[h] Complimentary building colors and materials to be consistent with the
general theme of the development.
[i] Strategically placed windows, doors, porches and columns with
consideration of “human scale”.
[j] Exterior-mounted mechanical and electrical equipment exposed to the
public view shall be architecturally screened. Roof-mounted
equipment and projections should be painted the same color as the roof
and, where possible, located to the rear of the building, away from the
public view.
[k] Building construction shall utilize green building or sustainable
building methods to the extent practicable to reduce the operating and
maintenance costs of low- and moderate-income households.
[2] Construction. The outside walls of a building shall be of fire resistant material,
such as brick, stone or masonry, as approved by the Planning Board. Interior
walls separating dwelling units shall also be constructed with fire resistant
material.
(b) Dwelling Unit Requirements.
[1] Minimum floor area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of
600 square feet.
[2] Each dwelling unit shall have at least two exterior exposures with at least one
window in each exposure.
[3] Floors and ceilings and partitions between dwelling units shall be constructed
so as to have a minimum airborne sound transmission loss classification of 50
decibels. The Planning Board shall ascertain that reasonable measures are
taken in floor and ceiling construction to avoid disturbing levels of sound
impact.
(c) Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be designed in accordance with
Section 240-7.6 of the Borough of Oradell Code.
(7) Off-street parking.
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for multifamily residential
housing shall be as set forth in the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(b) All parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Article VI of this Chapter.
(c) Adequate fire and emergency access must be provided subject to the Borough of
Oradell Fire Department.
(d) On-site parking shall not be provided for any use or to any party other than a
resident or visitor of the site, nor shall parking areas be used for any purpose other
than parking.
(e) Signage shall be provided where parking spaces are to be reserved for residents.
Visitor parking shall be signed and painted for each space designated for such a
purpose.
(f) Adequate parking facilities for accessibility to people with mobility impairments
shall be provided as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(8) Landscaping and open space.
(a) At least 20% of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space for passive or
active recreation, or conservation.
(b) There shall be a comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a New Jersey licensed
landscape architect which shall detail the location, type, size and any planting note
for the proposed landscape materials. This plan shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board.
(c) A landscape buffer shall be provided where a multifamily development abuts a
single-family residential zone. The buffer shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width,
as measured from the property line. The buffer shall provide a year-round visual
screen and minimize adverse impacts from the site on adjacent properties. Buffers
shall consist of natural vegetation to the greatest extent practical, and may consist
of fences, planting, berms, mounds, or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
(d) No use or structure, including parking or loading areas, shall be permitted within
the required buffer area, but the Planning Board may, upon a finding of reasons
thereof, permit a portion of a buffer area to be used for walkways, underground
linear utilities and site access drives, and the Board may also permit a portion of a
buffer area to be used for stormwater detention or retention basins, provided that
the basin is designed as a landscaping feature, and further provided that the
landscaping plan for the buffer area is determined by the Planning Board to meet
the objective of the buffer area.
(9) Lighting.
(a) Adequate lighting shall be provided for all common areas and pedestrian walkways.
(b) All outdoor lighting, including street lamps and accent lighting, should comply with
“dark sky” standards intended to reduce light pollution. Dark sky standards require
that lighting is downcast, illuminates only the intended areas, and does not cause
disabling glare that affects driver safety and reduces the visibility of starry night
skies.
(c) Lighting for the development must be contained on the property on which the
development is located.
(d) LED lighting shall be permitted in addition to all of the conditions of the land use
ordinance standards for lighting.
(10) Miscellaneous.
(a) Television connections shall be provided for each unit. Television antennas shall
be limited to one master antenna per building.
(b) Through-wall air-conditioning units that project beyond the building wall are not
permitted.
(c) All trash and garbage shall be stored at all times in airtight covered containers
which shall be kept in a centrally located, concealed area. They may be stored in
private garages or outside of buildings. If the materials are stored outside, they
must be kept in a permanent enclosure with a latching gate in a centrally located,
concealed area approved by the Planning Board.
(d) Amenities restricted to the use of the residents and their guests are permitted subject
to all applicable local and state requirements.
(e) Swimming pools, restricted to the use of tenants, are permitted subject to all
applicable local and state requirements.
(f) Internal walkways shall be provided to provide a pedestrian connection to any site
development amenities, such as a clubhouse, recreational facilities, pools, etc.
(g) Internal walkways shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and shall be designed
to comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(h) Fences shall be permitted at a maximum height of 8 feet and shall be situated and
designed in accordance with Article X.
Section 4. Chapter 240, Article VI, Section 240-6.5 of the Code of the Borough of
Oradell entitled “Use and Bulk Regulations” is hereby amended to include a new subsection O. as
follows:
O. AH-2 Affordable Housing 2 Residential Zone.
(1) Purpose.
The purpose of the AH-2 Affordable Housing 2 Residential Zone is to create an
opportunity for the construction of low- and moderate-income housing in the Borough
of Oradell and thereby address the fair share housing obligation of the Borough of
Oradell under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act. This AH-2 Zone shall be additionally
regulated by the Borough of Oradell Affordable Housing Ordinance.
(2) Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the AH-2 Residential Zone are as
follows:
(a) Multi-family development.
(b) Townhouse development.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include accessory uses that
are customary and incidental to the permitted uses in the AH-2 Residential Zone,
including but not limited to:
(a) Off-street parking in accordance with Chapter 240, Article VI.
(b) Decks, balconies and porches.
(c) Fences and walls, in accordance with the Oradell Fence Ordinance, Chapter
240, Article X.
(d) Ancillary recreation elements, such as a swimming pool, tennis courts and other
similar uses to only serve the residents of the complex and in accordance with
the Oradell General Requirements and Special Regulations Ordinance, Chapter
240, Article VII.
(e) Trash enclosures.
(f) Signs, in accordance with the Oradell Sign Ordinance, Chapter 240, Article XI.
(g) Outdoor lighting, in accordance with the Oradell General Requirements and
Special Regulations Ordinance, Chapter 240, Article VII.
(4) Affordable Housing.
(a) All multifamily residential developments (including townhouse developments)
constructed in the AH-2 Residential Zone District shall be required to set aside a
minimum percentage of units for affordable housing. Where units will be for sale,
the minimum set aside shall be twenty percent (20%). Where units will be for rent,
the minimum set aside shall be fifteen percent (15%). When calculating the
required number of affordable units, any computation resulting in a fraction of a
unit shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number.
(b) All affordable units to be produced pursuant to this section shall comply with the
Borough’s Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 61 of the Borough Code, as
may be amended and supplemented, the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(“UHAC”)(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), or any successor regulation, and the
Borough’s Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, as may be amended from time to
time. This includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements for all
affordable units:
[1] Low/Moderate Income Split: A maximum of 50% of the affordable units shall
be moderate-income units and a minimum of 50% of the affordable units shall
be low-income units. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very
low-income units, which shall be counted as part of the required number of
low-income units within the development.
[2] Bedroom Mix: If the development is not age-restricted, the following bedroom
mix shall apply:
[a] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units;
[b] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two bedroom
units;
[c] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be three
bedroom units; and
[d] The remaining units may be allocated among two and three bedroom units
at the discretion of the developer.
[6] Deed Restriction Period: All affordable units shall be deed restricted for a
period of 30 years from the date of the initial occupancy of each affordable
unit (the “Deed-Restriction Period”). The affordability controls shall expire
only after they are properly released by the Borough and/or the Borough’s
Administrative Agent at the Borough’s sole option in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 for rental units or N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5 for for-sale units..
[3] Administrative Agent: All affordable units shall be administered by a qualified
Administrative Agent paid for by the developer.
[4] Other Affordable Housing Unit Requirements: Developers shall also comply
with all the other requirements of the Borough’s Affordable Housing
Ordinance, including, but not limited to, (1) affirmative marketing
requirements, (2) candidate qualification and screening requirements, (3) 
integrating the affordable units amongst the market rate units, and (4) unit
phasing requirements. Developers shall ensure that the affordable units are
dispersed between all of the buildings on its site, and shall identify the exact
location of each affordable unit at the time of site plan application.
(5) Area and Bulk Requirements. The area and bulk requirements for the uses allowed in
the AH-2 Residential Zone are set forth below.
(a) Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 0.5 acre.
(b) Lot Width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 75 feet.
(c) Density. There shall be a maximum gross density of 8 dwelling units per acre.
(d) Yards.
[1] Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.
[2] Side Yard. No side yard shall be less than 20 feet.
[3] Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 35 feet.
(e) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 25 feet or two stories.
(f) Building Coverage. There shall be a maximum building coverage of 25%.
(g) Lot Coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 50%.
(6) Development Standards.
(a) The development standards for the uses allowed in the AH-2 Residential Zone
shall be identical to those set forth for the AH-1 Residential Zone at Sections 240-
6.5.N.(6) through (10) of the Borough Code.
(b) In addition, the following development standards shall apply in the AH-2
Residential Zone.
[1] Location of Building. Dwelling units, buildings and their front facades shall
be oriented towards the public and/or private roadway. Primary dwelling unit
entrances shall be located on the front facade of any structure that is oriented
towards the public and/or private roadway. Where the dwelling unit or
building does not front a public and/or private roadway, they shall be oriented
towards interior open spaces. All units and buildings shall be oriented away
from parking lots.
[2] Distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet
between principal structures. If an access drive is located between principal
structures, the minimum distance between the structures shall be 35 feet.
Section 5. Chapter 240, Attachment 1, “Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements” of the
Code of the Borough of Oradell shall be amended to include a new AH-1 Zone category, which
shall state ‘See § 240-6.5.N.’ for area and bulk requirements, and shall be further amended to 
include a new AH-2 Zone category, which shall state ‘See § 240-6.5.O.’ for area and bulk
requirements.
Section 6. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this Ordinance and they shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 7. In the event of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this Ordinance
and any prior ordinance of the Borough of Oradell, the provisions hereof shall be determined to
govern. All other parts, portions and provisions of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough
of Oradell are hereby ratified and confirmed, except where inconsistent with the terms hereof.
Section 8. The Borough Clerk is directed to give notice at least ten (10) days prior to
a hearing on the adoption of this ordinance to the Bergen County Planning Board and to all other
persons entitled thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-63 (if required).
Section 9. After introduction, the Borough Clerk is hereby directed to submit a copy
of the within Ordinance to the Planning Board of the Borough of Oradell for its review in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-64. The Planning Board is directed to
make and transmit to the Board of Aldermen, within 35 days after referral, a report including
identification of any provisions in the proposed ordinance which are inconsistent with the master
plan and recommendations concerning any inconsistencies and any other matter as the Board
deems appropriate.
Section 10. This Ordinance shall be presented to the Mayor for his approval and
signature, which approval shall be granted or denied within ten (10) days of receipt of same,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7. If the Mayor fails to return this Ordinance with either his
approval or objection to same within ten (10) days after it has been presented to him, then this
Ordinance shall be deemed approved.
Section 11. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon (1) adoption; (2)
approval by the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7; (3) publication in accordance with the 
laws of the State of New Jersey; and (4) filing of the final form of adopted ordinance by the Clerk
with (a) the Bergen County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16, and (b) the Borough
Tax Assessor as required by N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1.
INTRODUCED the ______ day of ___________________, 2018.
ADOPTED the _______ day of ___________________, 2018.
______________________________
Dianne C. Didio, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
Laura J. Lyons, Borough Clerk
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE NO. 19-03
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND CHAPTER 240 OF THE ORADELL BOROUGH CODE,
ENTITLED “LAND DEVELOPMENT,” AND THE ORADELL BOROUGH ZONING
MAP TO CREATE THE “AFFORDABLE HOUSING 1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE” AND
“AFFORDABLE HOUSING 2 RESIDENTIAL ZONE” AND THE STANDARDS
ASSOCIATED WITH THEM IN THE BOROUGH OF ORADELL
Introduced: January 22, 2019
Passed 1st Reading: January 22, 2019
Public Hearing: March 12, 2019
Adopted: March 12, 2019
__________________________________________
 Dianne Camelo Didio, Mayor
ATTEST:
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk
This to certify that the foregoing ordinance was finally passed and adopted at the Regular
Meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, New Jersey at the Regular meeting
held on March 22, 2019 and the same was approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Oradell.
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk

BOROUGH OF ORADELL
BERGEN COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
ORDINANCE #19-05
This ordinance published herewith was introduced and passed upon first reading at
a meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, in the County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey, held on January 22, 2019. It will be further considered for final passage
after public hearing thereon, at a Public Meeting of said Borough Council to be held in the
Town Hall, in said Borough, on February 26, 2019 at 7:30 PM, and during the week prior to
and up to and including the date of such meeting, copies of said ordinance will be made
available at the Clerk's Office in said Borough Hall to the members of the general public who
shall request the same.
 _________________________________________________
 LAURA J. LYONS, CPM, RMC, RPPO
 ADMINISTRATOR/MUNICIPAL CLERK
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE
# 19-05
AN ORDINANCE ADDING A NEW ARTICLE IX-A, TO BE ENTITLED
“AFFORDABLE HOUSING MANDATORY SET-ASIDE”, TO CHAPTER
240, “LAND DEVELOPMENT”, OF THE ORADELL BOROUGH CODE
INTERPRETIVE STATEMENT
This Ordinance amends the Borough land use ordinances by establishing new regulations to ensure that any site that
benefits from a subdivision or site plan approval, rezoning, use variance, redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan
approved by the Borough or a Borough land use board that results in multi-family residential development of five (5)
dwelling units or more produces affordable housing at a set-aside rate of 20% for for-sale units and 15% for rental
units; which regulations will be set forth in the Borough Code in connection with the Borough’s Third Round Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan consistent with the terms of the Settlement Agreement reached with Fair Share Housing
Center regarding compliance with the Borough’s affordable housing obligations.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Oradell, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 240, Article IX-A, of the Code of the Borough of Oradell entitled
“Affordable Housing Mandatory Set-Aside” is hereby created and established to read as follows:
Article IX-A: Affordable Housing Mandatory Set-Aside
§240-9.13 Affordable housing mandatory set-aside.
A. Purpose. This article is intended to ensure that any site that benefits from a subdivision or
site plan approval, rezoning, use variance, redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan
approved by the Borough or a Borough Land Use Board that results in multi-family
residential development of five (5) dwelling units or more produces affordable housing at
a set-aside rate of twenty percent (20%) for affordable for-sale units and at a set-aside rate
of fifteen percent (15%) for affordable rental units. This article shall apply except where
inconsistent with applicable law.
B. Mandatory Set-Aside Requirement.
(1) Any multi-family or single-family attached residential development, including the
residential portion of a mixed-use project, that is approved to contain five (5) or more
new dwelling units as a result of a subdivision or site plan approval, rezoning, use
variance, redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan approved by the Borough or a
Borough land use board shall be required to set aside a minimum percentage of units
for affordable housing.
(2) For inclusionary projects in which the low and moderate units are to be offered for sale,
the minimum set-aside percentage shall be twenty percent (20%); for projects in which
the low and moderate income units are to be offered for rent, the minimum set-aside 
percentage shall be fifteen percent (15%). Where the set-aside percentage results in a
fractional unit, the total set-aside requirement shall be rounded upwards to the next
whole number.
(3) Nothing in this article precludes the Borough or a Borough land use board from
imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a development not required to have a setaside pursuant to this article consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other
applicable law.
(4) This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner or applicant for
subdivision or site plan approval, a zoning amendment, use variance, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular proposed project.
(5) This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones for which higher setaside standards have been or will be established, either by zoning, subdivision or site
plan approval, or an adopted redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan.
(6) Furthermore, this requirement shall not apply to developments containing four (4) or
less new dwelling units.
(7) If the Borough’s Settlement Agreement with Fair Share Housing Center (“FSHC”)
dated June 18, 2018, or the Borough’s 2018 Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
establishes set-aside standards for any specific sites or zones which are different from
the set-aside standards set forth in this article, the set-asides established for those sites
or zones in the Settlement Agreement or Housing Element and Fair Share Plan shall
govern.
(8) Where a developer demolishes existing dwelling units and builds new dwelling units
on the same site, the provisions of this section shall apply only if the net number of
dwelling units is five (5) or more.
(9) All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential developments shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
(10) All affordable units to be produced pursuant to this article shall comply with the
Borough’s Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 61 of the Borough Code and the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), as may be
amended from time to time.
Section 2. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this Ordinance and they shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. In the event of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this Ordinance
and any prior ordinance of the Borough of Oradell, the provisions hereof shall be determined to
govern. All other parts, portions and provisions of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough
of Oradell are hereby ratified and confirmed, except where inconsistent with the terms hereof.
Section 4. The Borough Clerk is directed to give notice at least ten (10) days prior to
a hearing on the adoption of this ordinance to the Bergen County Planning Board and to all other
persons entitled thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-63 (if required).
Section 5. After introduction, the Borough Clerk is hereby directed to submit a copy
of the within Ordinance to the Planning Board of the Borough of Oradell for its review in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-64. The Planning Board is directed to
make and transmit to the Borough Council, within 35 days after referral, a report including
identification of any provisions in the proposed ordinance which are inconsistent with the master
plan and recommendations concerning any inconsistencies and any other matter as the Board
deems appropriate.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be presented to the Mayor for her approval and
signature, which approval shall be granted or denied within ten (10) days of receipt of same,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7. If the Mayor fails to return this Ordinance with either her
approval or objection to same within ten (10) days after it has been presented to her, then this
Ordinance shall be deemed approved.
Section 7. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon (1) adoption; (2)
approval by the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7; (3) publication in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey; and (4) filing of the final form of adopted ordinance by the Clerk
with (a) the Bergen County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16, and (b) the Borough
Tax Assessor as required by N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1.
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE NO. 19-05
AN ORDINANCE ADDING A NEW ARTICLE IX-A TO BE ENTITLED
“AFFORDABLE HOUSING MANDATORY SET ASIDE” TO CHAPTER 240 “LAND
DEVELOPMENT” OF THE ORADELL BOROUGH CODE
Introduced: January 22, 2019
Passed 1st Reading: January 22, 2019
Public Hearing: February 26, 2019
Adopted: February 26, 2019
Approved: February 26, 2019
__________________________________________
 Dianne Camelo Didio, Mayor
ATTEST:
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk
This to certify that the foregoing ordinance was finally passed and adopted at the Regular
Meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, New Jersey February26, 2019.
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk

BOROUGH OF ORADELL
BERGEN COUNTY, NEW JERSEY
ORDINANCE #19-06
This ordinance published herewith was introduced and passed upon first reading at
a meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, in the County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey, held on January 22, 2019. It will be further considered for final passage
after public hearing thereon, at a Public Meeting of said Borough Council to be held in the
Town Hall, in said Borough, on February 26, 2019 at 7:30 PM, and during the week prior to
and up to and including the date of such meeting, copies of said ordinance will be made
available at the Clerk's Office in said Borough Hall to the members of the general public who
shall request the same.
 _________________________________________________
 LAURA J. LYONS, CPM, RMC, RPPO
 ADMINISTRATOR/MUNICIPAL CLERK
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE
# 19-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE BOROUGH OF ORADELL’S
DEVELOPMENT FEE ORDINANCE AT CHAPTER 240, ARTICLE IX,
OF THE BOROUGH CODE
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Governing Body of the Borough of
Oradell, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 240, Article IX, “Affordable Housing Zone”, of the Code of the
Borough of Oradell shall be amended to read as follows:
Article IX: Affordable Housing Development Fees
§240-9.1 Purpose.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the New
Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees are authorized by the
Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject
to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide NonResidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is
authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of
the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved spending plan
may retain fees collected from nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of
development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46,
§§ 8 and 32 through 38. Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. § 5:93-
8.
D. This article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to N.J.A.C. § 5:93-
8.8(a).
§240-9.2 Basic requirements.
The Borough of Oradell shall not spend development fees until COAH has approved a plan for
spending such fees and Oradell has received third-round substantive certification from COAH or
a judgment of compliance.
§240-9.3 Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
A development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-percent-affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL
The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing. established under the Fair Housing Act
which previously had primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the state. Pursuant to the opinion
and order of the New Jersey Supreme Court dated March 10, 2015, in the matter of "In re
Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by N.J. Council on Affordable Housing (M-392-14)
067126," any reference to COAH or the Council shall be understood to refer to the Superior
Court of New Jersey, Law Division-Bergen County.
DEVELOPMENT FEES
Funds paid by a developer for the improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-
8.
DEVELOPER
Any person, partnership, association, company or corporation that is the legal or beneficial
owner or owners of a lot or any land proposed to be included in a proposed development
including the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE
The assessed value of a property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true
value for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance
with §§ 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES
Those strategies that minimize the impact of development on the environment, and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and
community services.
§240-9.4 Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zone districts, residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided no increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) (known as
a "d" variance) has been permitted, developers may be required to pay a development
fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the
two-year period preceding the filing of the variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential development.
(1) Affordable housing developments shall be exempt from development fees. All other
forms of new construction shall be subject to development fees unless exempted below.
(2) Developers of low- and moderate-income units shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
(3) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the effective
date of the Borough’s amended development fee ordinance shall be subject to the law
in effect at the time of such approval, unless the developer seeks a substantial change
in the approval.
(4) All single-family residential additions, renovations and accessory structures shall be
exempt; however, all new residential dwelling units shall be subject to a development
fee.
(5) All multi-family additions, renovations and accessory structures not requiring site plan
approval shall be exempt; however, all new residential dwelling units shall be subject
to a development fee.
§240-9.5 Nonresidential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction
on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used for
nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is
demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the
difference between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land and
improvement and the equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e.,
land and improvement at the time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the
calculation required under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate development
shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value resulting from
alterations, change in use within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to developers of any not-for-profit use; federal, state and
municipal government uses; churches and other places of worship; and public schools.
(4) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of nonresidential
development fees in accordance with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, as specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a developer
shall be substantiated by that developer.
(5) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the nonresidential
development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be subject to it at such time the basis
for the exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance
of the final certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development, whichever is
later.
(6) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential development
fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the owner of the property
shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination
of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential development fees under these
circumstances may be enforceable by the Borough of Oradell as a lien against the real
property of the owner.
§240-9.6 Collection of fees.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval for a development,
the applicable approving authority shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official
responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a copy of
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption," to be completed as per the instructions provided. The Developer
of a nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information submitted by the
nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax
Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building permit shall notify the
local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a development which is
subject to a development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor, based on the plans
filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy
notifies the local Assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection
on property which is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the Municipal
Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the
improvements of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify the
developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Borough of Oradell fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount of
the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the
developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent (50%) of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of the
building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at the time of issuance of the building permit and that determined at issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a challenge
with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Oradell. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees imposed by filing a
challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review and
determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by
Borough of Oradell. Appeals from a determination of the Director may be made to the
tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law,
N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
§240-9.7 Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest bearing housing trust fund in Valley National
Bank for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
All development fees paid by developers pursuant to this article shall be deposited in this
fund.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Housing Trust Fund and shall at
all times be identifiable by source and amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in a townhouse
or other multistory attached development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Oradell’s affordable
housing program.
C. No funds shall be expended from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund unless the
expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH. All interest accrued in the
housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by
COAH.
§240-9.8 Use of funds.
A. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH
to address the Borough’s low and moderate income housing obligation and may be set up
as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities may include, but are not limited to:
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing 
affordability controls; housing rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs; ECHO housing; conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create
new affordable units; green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance
with accepted national or state standards; the purchase of land for low and moderate income
housing; improvement of land to be used for affordable housing; purchase of housing;
extensions and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to low and moderate income
housing sites; financial assistance designed to increase affordability or administration
necessary for the implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other
activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. § 5:93-8. The expenditure of all funds shall
conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
B. Development fee revenues shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Oradell for
past housing activities.
C. After subtracting development fees collected to finance a rehabilitation program or a new
construction project that are necessary to address the Borough of Oradell affordable
housing obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining of all development fees collected
and interest earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderateincome households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third
of the affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of median income
by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance, security
deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental assistance., assistance with homeowners'
association or condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of median income may
include buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income units in the third-round
Municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30% or less
of median income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
D. The Borough of Oradell may contract with a private or public entity to administer any part
of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the requirement for affordability
assistance.
E. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended on
administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees
or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the
turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH’s monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to
the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the Housing Trust Fund.
Development fee administrative costs are calculated and may be expended at the end of
each year or upon receipt of the fees.
§240-9.9 Monitoring.
The Borough of Oradell shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms included in
monitoring requirements related to the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from
affordable housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with Borough of
Oradell’s housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the
plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
§240-9.10 Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Borough of Oradell to impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire
with its substantive certification or judgment of compliance unless the Borough of Oradell has
filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification or judgment of compliance, and has received COAH's approval of its development
fee ordinance. If the Borough of Oradell fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of the substantive certification or judgment of compliance,
it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any
funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Borough of Oradell
shall not impose a development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final approval
after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the
Borough of Oradell retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough
of Oradell will not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
Section 2. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this Ordinance and they shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. In the event of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this Ordinance
and any prior ordinance of the Borough of Oradell, the provisions hereof shall be determined to
govern. All other parts, portions and provisions of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough
of Oradell are hereby ratified and confirmed, except where inconsistent with the terms hereof.
Section 4. The Borough Clerk is directed to give notice at least ten (10) days prior to
a hearing on the adoption of this ordinance to the Bergen County Planning Board and to all other
persons entitled thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15, and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-63 (if required).
Section 5. After introduction, the Borough Clerk is hereby directed to submit a copy
of the within Ordinance to the Planning Board of the Borough of Oradell for its review in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-64. The Planning Board is directed to
make and transmit to the Governing Body, within 35 days after referral, a report including
identification of any provisions in the proposed ordinance which are inconsistent with the master
plan and recommendations concerning any inconsistencies and any other matter as the Board
deems appropriate.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be presented to the Mayor for her approval and
signature, which approval shall be granted or denied within ten (10) days of receipt of same,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7. If the Mayor fails to return this Ordinance with either her
approval or objection to same within ten (10) days after it has been presented to her, then this
Ordinance shall be deemed approved.
Section 7. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon (1) adoption; (2)
approval by the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.7; (3) publication in accordance with the 
laws of the State of New Jersey; and (4) filing of the final form of adopted ordinance by the Clerk
with (a) the Bergen County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16, and (b) the Borough
Tax Assessor as required by N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1.
INTRODUCED the ______ day of ___________________, 2018.
ADOPTED the _______ day of ___________________, 2018.
______________________________
 Diane C. Didio, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
Laura J. Lyons, Borough Clerk
BOROUGH OF ORADELL
ORDINANCE NO. 19-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE BOROUGH OF ORADELL’S DEVELOPMENT
FEE ORDINANCE AT CHAPTER 240 ARTICLE IX OF THE BOROUGH CODE
Introduced: January 22, 2019
Passed 1st Reading: January 22, 2019
Public Hearing: February 26, 2019
Adopted: February 26, 2019
Approved: February 26, 2019
__________________________________________
 Dianne Camelo Didio, Mayor
ATTEST:
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk
This to certify that the foregoing ordinance was finally passed and adopted at the Regular
Meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Oradell, New Jersey February26, 2019.
__________________________________
Laura J. Lyons, CPM, RMC, RPPO
Administrator/Borough Clerk

